Mr. Ileka (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): Allow me, Mr. President, once
again to express our delegation's pleasure at seeing
you preside over this meeting on the situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, particulary on the
final report of the Group of Experts on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (S/2012/843, annex).

First, on behalf of the Congolese Government and
our people, I wish to thank the Group of Experts, which,
in a spirit of complete independence, resisted external
pressure and produced an objective final report,
following its interim report of 21 June (S/2012/348, annex) and its addendum of 27 June (S/2012/348/Add.l,
annex), both of which exposed the almost exclusive role
of external players in the destabilization of the eastern
part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

On that subject, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo recalls that the violations documented in the
June 27 addendum to the Group of Experts' interim
report and in its final report before the Council
today, were not brought to light by an anonymous
organization, lacking any mandate, for the sole
purpose of drawing the international community's
attention to the crimes currently being perpetrated on
Congolese soil. Those serious violations of the relevant
provisions of the Security Council are attested to by
a team of trustworthy people who were appointed
by the Council itself. My Government is therefore
grateful to the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic
Republic of the Congo for having carefully studied the
final report of the Group of Experts, pursuant to its
mission to monitor compliance with the sanctions.

Like the interim report and its addendum, the final
report clearly and conclusively establishes that the
Rwandan Government continues to violate the arms
embargo. It provides direct military assistance to the
self-proclaimed rebels of the Mouvement du 23 mars
(M23), facilitates recruitment of combatants for that
group, incites and facilitates desertion by Congolese
soldiers, and furnishes the M23 with arms, ammunition,
intelligence and political advice. The de facto chain
of command includes General Bosco Ntaganda and
is headed by General James Kabarebe, the Rwandan
Minister of Defence. According to the report, following
the publication of the addendum to the interim report,
the Group spoke with the Rwandan Government and
considered its written response, but in the Group's
judgement none of the fundamental conclusions it had
come to earlier merited rethinking.

I recall that an annex to the interim report
established the fact that Rwandan figures, highly placed
in the Rwandan Government, army or intelligence
services, are supporting the so-called M23 rebels and
providing them with arms, military supplies and new
recruits. However, contrary to the interim report, to
which skeptics could give a benefit of the doubt, since
Rwanda claimed that its arguments had been ignored,
the final report clearly reflects the tenor of Rwanda's
written responses. Unfortunately for Rwanda, such
observations did not persuade the Group of Experts to
revise its initial findings of Rwanda's destabilizing role
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and its pursuit
of criminal activities and other serious violations of
human rights and international humantarian law. In
the View of the Group of Experts, the grounds cited by
the Rwandan authorities in their own defence are not
substantive.

The involvement of high-ranking officials of
a foreign army in supporting a rebellion is an act of
aggression that the Security Council must recognize
pursuant to Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter.
It is appropriate to indicate that Rwanda's activities
constitute a crime of State, given the type of people
involved. Indeed, Rwanda has employed people
who are in a position to control or direct military
and political State action to create instability in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, violating
the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of my country.

Rwanda's attitude, underscored by a United
Nations Group of Experts mandated under a binding
resolution, is an illegal use of force against the territory
and political independence of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. That flagrant violation of the United
Nations Charter, undertaken counter to the principles
of peaceful coexistence, the rules of international
humanitarian law, human rights and the imperative
norms of international law, undeniably meets the
definition of aggression pursuant to General Assembly
resolution 3314 (XXIX) of 14 December 1974, which
defines aggression as

"the use of armed force by a State against the

sovereignty, territorial integrity or political

independence of another State, or in any other

manner inconsistent with the Charter of the United

Nations".

Rwanda's proven support for the M23 after the
Congolese authorities had said that they were ready
to arrest former General Bosco Ntaganda, sought by
the International Criminal Court, is a clear obstacle
to the execution of the arrest warrant issued by the
Court. It is now evident that Rwanda has acted to
deflect attention in order to shield Bosco Ntaganda
from international justice. The precedents of
Mr. Jules Mutebutsi, who retreated to Rwanda after
being defeated in 2004, and of Mr. Laurent Nkunda,
who has been living in Rwanda since 2009, are further
examples of Rwanda's provision of safe haven to major
war criminals.

The accelerating deterioration of the situation in
the province of North Kivu began on 15 November
following the attacks launched on positions of the
Forces arme'es de la Republique de'mocratique du
Congo (FARDC) by troops of the regular Rwandan
army. These included three battalions of the Rwandan
Defence Forces (RDF), commanded by General
Ruvusha, and two RDF special forces units, including
a heavy artillery unit commanded by Rwandan General
Gatama Kashumba.

In the View of many observers on the ground,
the so-called military success of the M23 in Goma
was rather suprising. Unlike the debacle suffered
by the attackers since 15 November in the areas of
Kibumba and Kazizi along the border with Rwanda,
the operations that led to the fall of Goma benefited
from remarkable planning, abundant resupply, and in
particular night-vision equipment. This is materiel that,
unlike Rwanda, neither the FARDC nor the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) have
in their arsenals. Even air defence equipment was used
against combat helicopters of the Forces armees de la
Republique democratique du Congo and MONUSCO.
Rwandan territory has been used systematically as a
theatre for manoeuvres to circumvent the FARDC in
order to conquer new territory on the road to Goma.

There is no need for us at this juncture to go into
detail about other evidence of Rwanda's involvement
in the war around Goma. There is a great deal of such
evidence, and it is well documented. In that respect,
how can we describe this humanitarian tragedy without
concluding that the situation has only exacerbated
human suffering, the loss of human life, massive
violations of human rights, the rape of women, the
forced recruitment of children, widespread population
displacements, extortion of property, the breakdown of
economic and trade activity, and the growing number
of Congolese refugees. In brief, the situation is one of
widespread insecurity and a major humanitarian crisis.
In turning to the issue of sanctions arising from
embargo violations, I congratulate the States and
institutions that have announced sanctions against
Rwanda, including those already adopted by the United
Nations against certain M23 leaders. The Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo welcomes
such decisions, which send a very telling message of
the new readiness of the international community
regarding the security problems that have unfairly tried
the Democratic Republic of the Congo for more than a
decade.

Sanctions will mean nothing, however, unless they
have a direct impact. In other words, they have to hit
their intended target. The sanctions announced by the
United States Treasury Department and the United
Nations are far from commensurate with the conclusions
drawn by the United Nations Group of Experts, which,
in addition to the so-called M23 rebels, clearly refer by
name to highly placed Rwandan officials who are well
known to all.

With respect to the provisions of
resolution 2021 (2011), the Congolese land forces
commander, General Gabriel Amisi, who is accused
in the report of selling weapons to armed groups, has
been suspended from his functions since 22 November,
pending an inquiry. Contrarily, and in the face of the
overwhelming evidence gathered by MONUSCO and
the Group of Experts, Rwanda denies the accusations
against it without being able credibly to refute any
evidence of its involvement in the destabilization of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo by the M23.
Its attempts to deny its involvement are in no way
convincing.

I therefore thank the entire international community
for having clearly condemned, through the Group of
Experts, Rwanda's involvement in destabilizing the
eastern part of my country. I would ask the Council
to draw all the appropriate conclusions from the
violation of its own resolutions concerning the arms
embargo and the sanctions regime it has established.
Such violations seriously threaten the peace and stability
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Great
Lakes region and beyond. The States of southern Africa
are also threatened by such destabilizing activities, as
confirmed by the final communique issued by the most
recent conference of Heads of State and Government
of the Southern African Development Community, held
on 17 August in Maputo.

The material and human evidence and the written
testimony of Rwandan aggression are all familiar
to the Council. Moreover, the violations of the
sanctions regime committed by that neighbour of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in support of the
M23 have created a humanitarian crisis that has only
aggravated the human suffering. In the face of this
tragedy, the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, along with the entire Congolese people
and the international community, expects the Council
to adopt a firm an unequivocal position concerning
the application of sanctions. The Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo believes that
sanctions implemented pursuant to the Charter of the
United Nations serve as a vital tool for maintaining or
re-establishing international peace and security. That
was unambiguously acknowledged at the 2005 World
Summit.

If they are to be credible and effective, sanctions
must be carefully targeted and firmly imposed. In the
opinion of the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the measures that the Security Council
should now take must put an end to all support for
the M23, particularly through the adoption of firm
sanctions against officials who are foreign to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, as mentioned in the
annex to the interim report of the Group of Experts and
in their final report.

In the same vein, the Council should ensure that the
Committee has included on the same list all the M23
military commanders cited by Ms. Navanethem Pillay,
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights:
Bosco Ntaganda, Sultani Makenga, Baudouin Ngaruye,
Innocent Zimurinda and Innocent Kaina. Moreover, the
Council would be well-advised to ratify the decision of
the Committee to freeze the assets of all these people
and to implement a travel ban against them.

Lastly, the Council should ensure that the Committee
names the so-called M23 as a negative force and new
terrorist group, as was done at the meeting of the Heads
of State and Government in Addis Ababa, the special
summit of the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region, and the regular summit of the African
Union with respect to the Lord's Resistance Army and
the Forces democratiques de liberation du Rwanda.
Those measures will create conditions conducive to the
restoration of peace in that region of our country and
prevent the ongoing illegal exploitation of the natural
resources and other wealth of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo by rebellions supported by foreign Powers.

To conclude, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo reiterates that it is open to dialogue with the
true protagonist, Rwanda. However, it will no longer
be content with facile arrangements that always end up
having the same effects and consequences three years
later. It demands an open and frank debate capable
of ensuring lasting peace in the interests of all of the
countries of the region. We also call on the good offices
of the United Nations to facilitate such a dialogue.
Moreover, we should like to see the greater involvement
of MONUSCO in terms of resources, personnel and
logistics in order to enable it to respond more effectively
to the demands of peacekeeping in the eastern part of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

