The President (interpretation from Chinese): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Georgia and Germany to the United
Nations in which they request to be invited to participate in
the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Volski
(Georgia) took a seat at the Council table; Mr. Henze
(Germany) took the seat reserved for him at the side
of the Council Chamber.

The President (interpretation from Chinese): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General concerning the situation in
Abkhazia, Georgia, document S/ 1997/827.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has considered the report
of the Secretary-General concerning the situation in
Abkhazia, Georgia, of 28 October 1997 (S/ 1997/827).

"The Security Council regrets that, despite
strenuous efforts to reactivate the peace process, there
has been no visible progress on the key issues of the
settlement - the future political status of Abkhazia
and the permanent return of refugees and displaced
persons.

"The Security Council attaches particular
importance to the more active role for the United
Nations in the peace process, and encourages the
Secretary-General to continue his efforts to that end,
with the assistance of the Russian Federation as
facilitator, and with the support of the group of
Friends of the Secretary-General on Georgia and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE). The Council calls upon the parties to
cooperate fully with these efforts.

"In this context, the Security Council regrets
that the adjourned high-level meeting on the conflict
in Geneva under the aegis of the United Nations did
not resume in October as initially planned. It
welcomes the intention of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General to resume this meeting on
17 November to map out the areas where concrete
political progress could be made, to take forward
discussion of social and economic issues in support
of a comprehensive settlement of the conflict, and to
address the issue of return of refugees. The Council
calls upon all concerned to do their utmost for the
resumption of this meeting with the constructive
engagement in particular of the Abkhaz side.

"The Security Council commends the efforts of
the Secretary-General and his Special Representative
aimed at achieving a comprehensive settlement of
the conflict, including on the political status of
Abkhazia within the State of Georgia, respecting
fully the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Georgia, and the efforts undertaken by the Russian
Federation as facilitator, in particular the initiative
put forward by the President of the Russian
Federation on 1 August 1997 and the Georgian-
Abkhaz negotiations held in Sukhumi on 9 and
10 September with the participation of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. The
Council welcomes the meeting of the President of
Georgia and Mr. Ardzinba in Tbilisi on 14 August
1997 facilitated by the Foreign Minister of the
Russian Federation and the continuation of direct
dialogue between the parties, and calls upon them to
intensify the search for a peaceful solution by further
expanding their contacts.

"The Security Council further encourages the
Secretary-General to take such steps as are
necessary, in cooperation with the parties, to ensure
a prompt and safe return of the refugees and

 

displaced persons to their homes, with the assistance
of all relevant international organizations.
"The Security Council welcomes the decision of
the Council of Heads of State of the Commonwealth
of Independent States mentioned in the report to
extend the mandate of the Collective Peacekeeping
Forces of the Commonwealth of Independent States
(CIS peacekeeping force) until 31 January 1998.

"The Security Council welcomes the good
cooperation between the United Nations Observer
Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG) and the CIS
peacekeeping force and their efforts to promote
stabilization of the situation in the zone of conflict.
The Council calls upon the parties to cooperate fully
with UNOMIG and the CIS peacekeeping force.

"The Security Council expresses concern at the
continuing violations of the Moscow Agreement of 14
May 1994 on a Ceasefire and Separation of Forces
(5/1994/583, annex I) and calls upon the parties to
ensure the full implementation of this agreement.

"The Security Council remains deeply concerned
at the continuing unstable and tense security
conditions in the Gali and Zugdidi sectors and in the
Kodori valley. The Council strongly condemns the
kidnapping of personnel of UNOMIG and the CIS
peacekeeping force.

"The Security Council also condemns the
continued laying of mines, including more
sophisticated types of mines, which has already caused
several deaths and injuries among the civilian
population and the peacekeepers and observers of the
international community. It calls upon the parties to
take all measures in their power to prevent mine-
laying and intensified activities by armed groups and
to cooperate fully with UNOMIG and the CIS
peacekeeping force in order to honour their
commitments to ensure the safety and the freedom
of movement of all personnel of the United Nations,
the CIS peacekeeping force and international
humanitarian organizations.

"The Security Council supports the additional
measures envisaged by the Secretary-General in the
report to improve the safety of UN OMIG personnel
and to create conditions for the effective
performance of its mandate.

"The Security Council welcomes the continued
efforts by the United Nations agencies and
humanitarian organizations to address the urgent
needs of those suffering most from the consequences
of the conflict in Abkhazia, Georgia, in particular
of

internally displaced persons, encourages further
contributions to that end, and reiterates its
encouragement to States to contribute to the
voluntary fund in support of the implementation of
the Moscow Agreement and/or for humanitarian
aspects including demining, as specified by donors.

"The Security Council reminds the parties that
the ability of the international community to assist
them depends on their political will to resolve the
conflict through dialogue and mutual
accommodation."

This statement will be issued as an official document
the Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/1997/50.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present

stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.45 pm.

