Ms. Ziade (Lebanon) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I wish to thank you, Madam President, for your
presence here to preside over this important debate. I
also thank Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, and the other speakers, Mr. Khare
and Ms. Johnson, for their briefings. We underscore the
courage of Ms. Manju Gurung and thank her for her
testimony, which puts a human face on the violations
and crimes we are discussing today.

Children's right to life, security, health care and
education continues to be violated by armed conflict.
The lost childhood of such children is a threat to the
peace and security of the societies to which they
belong and prevents them from building prosperous
nations that respect international law.

In our region, a just and lasting peace cannot be
established while ongoing and constant threats to the
physical security of our children persist. These threats
include the cluster bombs that Israel has placed in
Lebanon and Gaza, which continue to maim our
children. The Gaza embargo also continues to have
devastating consequences for our children, who
comprise 45 per cent of the population there.

Resolution 1882 (2009) represents critical
progress in the protection of children because it
introduces two new criteria - sexual violence and
killing and maiming - for listing parties to armed
conflict in the annexes of the Secretary-General's
annual reports. Even so, Lebanon believes that the six
serious violations enumerated in resolution 1612
(2005) are all of equal gravity and should be accorded
the same attention by the Working Group. We hope that
one day the criteria for listing in the annexes of the
Secretary-General's reports will be extended to those
six violations; failure to do so would be tantamount to
silence concerning the heinous crimes perpetrated
against thousands of children. No measure to address
grave Violations should be limited to post-conflict
symptoms; any such measure must be part of a strategy
to prevent conflict and address the underlying causes
of emergent conflicts.

The protection of children should also be
reflected in the Security Council's resolutions
concerning specific countries. In this case, we welcome
the adoption by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations of the guidelines on the protection of
children. Like the Secretary-General, we reaffirm the
importance of deploying child protection advisers in
missions. We encourage the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to design a
predictable and stable financing structure that would
ensure the resources necessary to implementing the
action plans. We also urge donors to provide the
necessary funding to national Governments, the United
Nations and its partners in order to ensure the
rehabilitation and reintegration of children who have
been associated with armed forces or groups.

Twelve years ago, the Security Council
considered the topic of children and armed conflict for
the first time. We have come a long way since then and
achieved some progress. However, much remains to be
done. First, we believe it imperative that the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict respond swiftly
to urgent or sudden situations in which children are
affected on a large scale. Secondly, we underscore the
importance of appeals for a more effective follow-up to
the implementation of the recommendations of the
Working Group. In his report (S/2010/181), the
Secretary-General notes that impunity remains
prevalent and that the prosecution of parties to
conflicts listed in the annexes of his reports is still rare.
That is why the various United Nations bodies must
facilitate coordinated support to help national
authorities to establish and maintain the rule of law at
the national level. That would allow perpetrators to be
held accountable for their actions - a decisive factor
in protecting children.
The harmful psychosocial consequences of
conflicts on the mental health of children and on
stability and lasting peace in post-conflict societies
cannot be ignored. Despite the efforts of the United
Nations and relevant actors, gaps remain in the
reintegration phase, especially in the psychosocial area.
We therefore encourage the United Nations agencies
and non-governmental organizations, alongside
national authorities, to jointly improve psychosocial
support services to demobilized children and all
children affected by armed conflict.

We have the ethical and moral responsibility to
protect future generations from the scourge of armed
conflict. We must focus our efforts on attenuating the
emotional, physical and psychological impact on
children who, with their well-being and often with their
lives, daily pay the price of wars they have not chosen.

