Mr. Gasso Matoses (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
We would like to thank the Nigerian presidency of
the Security Council for organizing this informative
briefing. This is a timely debate, which certainly
suitably complements the debates we have held in
the past few weeks. An effective security sector
is undoubtedly a guarantee of stability, peace and
economic development.

We noted that a year ago resolution 2151 (2014),
adopted under Nigeria's presidency, demonstrated that
it was important to have such a reform at this time. We
are now in an even more opportune time to assess the
developments that have taken place in the past year.
In the past year, we have seen more United Nations
peacekeeping operations and special political missions
receiving a mandate from the Council to deepen work
in this area. For the countries immersed in conflict
or in post-conflict situations, security sector reform
is extraordinarily difficult. Nonetheless, there is no
alternative. Without it, we would see a deepening of, or
relapse into, the same conflict-charged situations.

As a result, security sector reform serves, at the
same time, a healthy and preventive dimension. On
the basis of the accumulated experiences and lessons
learned, a question would be: How are we carrying out
the mission, and are we being effective when it comes
to reforming the security sector? We could talk about
the issue by coordinating three principal concepts:
cooperation, trust and continuity of the process.

First, allow me to begin with the first of those
elements, the necessary international cooperation
in this area. The main element of the security sector
reform makes it one of the most sensitive structures
within the State apparatus. As a result, reform must
necessarily at all times be carried out under national
ownership and leadership that is perfectly compatible
with international support as well as the support of
regional or subregional organizations. In that regard,
we must highlight the importance of continuing to
develop, for instance, partnerships between them and
the United Nations and the African Union or with
subregional organizations on the African continent,
bearing in mind that it is on this continent that most
countries find themselves immersed in security sector
reform.

We would also like to reiterate that Spain is
contributing significantly, within the framework of the
European Union, to training and providing advice for
security sector reform in countries such as Somalia, the
Niger, Mali and the Central African Republic, as well
as outside the continent, in Afghanistan. However, all
these efforts would be futile without the participation
of civil society in this process where the building of
trust is an important element.

Secondly, an aspect I would like to comment on is
that security sector reform has an important technical
component. But we should not fool ourselves; it is
essentially a political process, the ultimate objective of
which is to enhance the trust of society in their own
States, thereby strengthening State institutions. As a
result, security sector reform empowered to build the
necessary trust and confidence must be a process that
is inclusive in the sense that the entire nation should
feel that it is a part of the change taking place. When I
talk about inclusiveness I also want to refer to this as a
process that is sensitive to gender issues. As we heard
from the speakers, women's participation in all phases
of security sector reform is crucial. We trust that will
be made clear in the month of October when we will
discuss the reform of resolution 1325 (2000) on women
and peace and security. Only in that way can we really
talk about local ownership where security and peace
are considered essential public goods.

Likewise, building trust means that we must bear
in mind the economic and budgetary aspects of those
reforms. Rational allocation of human, economic and
material resources to the security sector is crucial.
Lastly in that regard, it is necessary to ensure that
State protection mechanisms for its citizens involve
the necessary democratic control on the part of
society. Security sector reform implies a high degree
of political responsibility and accountability, including
mechanisms that make it possible to fight against
corruption. The very close relationship that exists
between security sector reform and the reform of the
justice sector, due to their nature, are interconnected.

Thirdly, security sector reform is an ongoing
process, a medium- and long-term process, which due
to its very nature has a longer life than that of United
Nations peacekeeping missions. I said earlier that
there are more and more peacekeeping missions with
mandates related to strengthening the security sector.
However, the exit strategies planned by Department
of Peacekeeping Operations must be gradual and
progressive. They must be drawn up according to
objective, clear and verifiable parameters within the
framework of a road map that defines the strategies
clearly. They must be drawn up jointly with the host
State, whose ownership must be encouraged to ensure
that there is a proper assumption of responsibility on
the part of the State on the matter of its own security
sector.

There is still another element that we must bear in
mind when a peacekeeping mission comes to an end.
The Peacebuilding Commission plays a prominent role
in this area through demonstrating the continuity of
robust and well-coordinated support on the part of the
international community for security sector reform.
With its focus on development, the Commission acts
as the third part of the peace, security and development
apparatus, which we in the Chamber have established,
especially through the country-specific configurations.
All such international efforts must be accompanied by a
sustained national effort, which would make it possible
for the State to offer its citizens suitable functions and
mechanisms when it comes to police and armed forces,
border control, the protection of civilians and justice.

Finally, it is no wonder that the sustainable
development goals that will be adopted at the next
major meeting of the General Assembly in September
will includes peacebuilding objectives. That gives
us an idea of the importance of the sector as well as
the interrelationship between peace, security and
sustainable human development.

