Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, my delegation would like to thank Mr. Ould
Abdallah, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, for his briefing, and Mr. Mohamed Abdullahi
Omaar, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Transitional
Federal Government of Somalia, and Ambassador
Lamamra, Commissioner for Peace and Security of the
African Union, for their presentations.

First of all, I would like briefly to comment on
the situation that has been described. As Minister
Omaar pointed out, it is now clear that the radical
groups cannot overthrow the Government militarily,
but that they are continuing their attacks nevertheless
and creating a very detrimental situation of insecurity
and violence.

My delegation notes with concern that, since the
attack of the rebel groups on 7 May, fighting is
continuing in the countryside and in Mogadishu. The
day before yesterday seven civilians were killed in the
capital, Al-Shabaab fired a mortar at a parliament
session, and foreign fighters continue to fight within
the ranks of the fundamentalists. Of course, every day
that the situation continues, the suffering of the
population increases. Over 3 million people now
depend on humanitarian aid, while the attacks launched
by Al-Shabaab on United Nations agencies, which we
strongly condemn, are hampering United Nations
activity. Moreover, more and more people who have
lost hope are trying to reach Yemen across the Gulf of
Aden aboard smugglers' boats. Since the beginning of
the year, 30,000 people have succeeded and,
unfortunately, 300 have died in that attempt.

In that context, as many speakers before me have
said, the international community has a very important
role to play in helping the Transitional Federal
Government to change the situation in its favour. The
promises made in April at the Brussels conference must
be kept. I recall that the European Commission is to
provide €60 million to the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) and €13 million to the Rule of
Law and Security Programme. We have taken careful
note of the information in the Secretary-General's
report (S/2009/373) on the logistic support package to
AMISOM. It is of course essential that we give the
soldiers our full support and remain mindful of their
needs.

More specifically, my delegation has identified
four tracks for action by the international community.
First, extending concrete support to the Somali
National Security Force is essential. This very
morning, France began to train Somali troops, chosen
by the Transitional Federal Government, in Djibouti.
Djibouti, for its part, is doing the same. The European
Union is considering the possibility of establishing a
security force. At the most recent meeting of their
General Affairs and External Relations Council, the
ministers for foreign affairs of the European Union
decided to send an exploratory mission to the region in
August.

Secondly, it is vital that we maintain and
strengthen our support to AMISOM, and my delegation
pays tribute to the action of Uganda and Burundi in
that regard. For its part, France contributed to
establishing four of the AMISOM. contingents that, in a
recent sortie, demonstrated their ability to help the
Transitional Federal Government not only to hold its
positions, but to push back the extremist fighters. We
welcome the prospect of the imminent deployment of a
sixth battalion, provided by Burundi.

Thirdly, my delegation encourages the United
Nations to continue, as it is bravely doing, its
assistance activities, in spite of the dangers. The
European Union has extended Operation Atalanta by a
year. Counter-piracy operations are crucial, particularly
to protect the World Food Programme convoys, and we
would not underestimate the risk that the attacks may
resume in strength once the weather is again favourable
to the pirates. I recall that, at the most recent meeting
of the General Affairs and External Relations Council,
the European Union reiterated its willingness to
develop a comprehensive approach towards Somalia in
which the fight against piracy is an important
component.

Lastly, I would like to underscore the importance
of the political dialogue. The Transitional Federal
Government signed a reconciliation agreement with the
Ahlu Sunna Wal Jama'a group a month ago. I am
delighted by the spirit of openness shown by Minister
Omaar in his statement, and France encourages the
Transitional Federal Government to continue in that
direction.

I would now like to turn briefly to the issue of
sanctions. France has begun to actively engage in the
discussions taking place within the Somali sanctions
committee. We are convinced that, under resolution
1844 (2008), the Security Council can provide a clear,
realistic and effective response to the situation in the
Horn of Africa. However, we must also take fully into
account the border dispute between Djibouti and
Eritrea.

In conclusion, I wish to reassure the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General that we fully
support his efforts and that, in this delicate situation,
his role as coordinator of the activities of the United
Nations and the international community is as
necessary as ever. Naturally, we support the action of
the African Union and welcome the involvement of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development.

