Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): I, too, would
like to thank Mr. Ould Abdallah for his briefing. I
welcome the participation in the Council's meeting
today of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Somalia
and the Commissioner for Peace and Security of the
African Union, and I thank them for their
presentations.

My delegation is pleased to note the political
progress achieved under the Djibouti agreement, as
reflected in the Secretary-General's latest report
(S/2009/373). We commend and support the continued
efforts undertaken by President Sheikh Sharif Sheikh
Ahmed to encourage the parties that are still outside
the Djibouti agreement to join the national
reconciliation process to rebuild their war-torn country.
We urge all groups that have yet to lay down their arms
andjoin the peace and reconciliation process to do so.

Despite those encouraging political developments,
the security situation in Somalia remains deeply
troubling. Attacks by insurgent groups, most notably
Al-Shabaab, against the Transitional Federal
Government and the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) in and around Mogadishu have intensified.

We strongly condemn the attempts by those groups to
overthrow the legally constituted and internationally
recognized Government by force and their recent
attacks against the United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations Department of Safety
and Security and the United Nations Political Office
for Somalia.

We are particularly concerned about the extremely
alarming humanitarian situation in Somalia, with over
1 million people internally displaced and more than
3 million on the verge of starvation.

As the continued fighting has worsened the
humanitarian crisis, there is an urgent need for
immediate and vigorous international support for the
TFG's endeavours to repel the onslaught of the
extremist forces that are intent on destroying the
Djibouti peace process and spoiling efforts to bring
peace and stability to Somalia through political
reconciliation.

My delegation supports the Secretary-General's
call for Member States and regional organizations to
expedite contributions to the United Nations trust funds
as well as the bilateral support pledged at the Brussels
donors conference, in order to provide the TFG with
sufficient assistance to rebuild Somalia's security
institutions and train its security forces.

We support the strengthening of AMISOM. to
enable it to withstand insurgent attacks. We greatly
appreciate the efforts made by the Governments of
Uganda and Burundi in contributing to the maintenance
of security in Mogadishu, and we note with pleasure
that some other African Union countries have pledged
to contribute troops to AMISOM.

Significant progress has been achieved by the
international community in addressing the problem of
piracy off the coast of Somalia. The cooperation and
coordination exhibited by Member States in the fight
against piracy in the region is proving effective.
However, we still believe that, in the long run, the
scourge of piracy and armed robbery at sea off the
coast of Somalia will be resolved thoroughly only
through an integrated approach that addresses the
conflict, the lack of governance and the absence of
sustainable livelihoods on land in Somalia.

Stabilizing Somalia and delivering a negotiated
peace settlement that addresses the root causes of the
conflict requires closer cooperation and a more
effective partnership among the United Nations
Political Office for Somalia, the Inter-Governmental
Authority on Development, the African Union and the
League of Arab States in addressing the challenges that
confront Somalia and bringing about lasting peace and
security in the region. We continue to support a strong
role for the United Nations in strengthening this
cooperation and partnership, with a view to assisting
the Government and the people of Somalia in bringing
peace, security and stability to their country. We could
not agree more with what has been said by the Minister
of Foreign Affairs of Somalia: that, ultimately, the
issues facing Somalia will have to be resolved by
Somalis.

