Mr. Zhang Dianbin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China would like to thank Mr. Kafando, Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Burundi, and Mr. Jiirg
Lauber, Permanent Representative of Switzerland to the
United Nations, in his capacity as Chair of the Burundi
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC),
for their briefings. We appreciate their efforts to
promote peace and stability in Burundi and the region.

The current situation in Burundi is generally
stable. The Government has worked actively to
preserve national peace and stability and promote
economic and social development. It has formulated an
national development plan, signed an agreement with
Tanzania and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees on the return of refugees
and worked with neighbouring countries to encourage
the voluntary return of Burundian refugees to their
homes. China welcomes those developments. Burundi
is an important country in the Great Lakes region,
and its stability and development contribute to wider
peace and stability in the region. The international
community should continue to provide it with
constructive assistance. China would like to emphasize
the following three points.

First, there must be proper respect for Burundi's
national ownership, sovereignty, unity and territorial
integrity. China notes that the Independent National
Electoral Commission recently announced the results of
the constitutional referendum, with broad participation
and nearly three quarters of the population voting in
its favour, in a full demonstration of the ability of
Burundi's Government and people to properly address
relevant issues. The international community should
consider the situation in Burundi comprehensively
and objectively, respect the country's ownership in
handling its affairs and provide constructive assistance
with a view to preserving peace and development in
the region.

Secondly, there must be continued support for
Burundi's political process. We appreciate the positive
efforts by regional and subregional organizations such
as the African Union, the East African Community
(EAC) and the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region in exercising their good offices with
regard to the issue of Burundi. We support the EAC in
taking the lead in that regard.

Thirdly, our priority should be increasing
humanitarian assistance to Burundi and supporting its
economic and social development. Burundi continues
to face humanitarian challenges, owing to a relatively
large gap in funding for humanitarian assistance. We
hope that international partners will honour their
commitments in a timely manner and provide assistance.
We call on the relevant international agencies and
organizations to resume their economic cooperation
and development assistance to the country as soon as
possible. The Secretary-General's Special Envoy and the
PBC are important bridges for communication between
Burundi and the international community. We hope
that they will make use of their respective advantages
and enhance their communication in cooperation with
the Burundian Government. China is ready to continue
to support their work.

China has consistently supported Burundi
in its peace process and assisted it in its national
reconstruction to the best of its ability. We are ready to
continue to play a constructive role in achieving peace,
stability and sustainable development in Burundi.

