Mr. Motoc (Romania): Romania voted in favour
of resolution 1564 (2004) for the following six reasons.

First, we find the text before us to be a follow-up
consistent with resolution 1556 (2004), which laid
down the policy course defined by the Council in its
treatment of the situation in western Sudan. That
resolution received wide support in the Council, and
we considered it the framework resolution for the
Council's consideration of the Sudan/Darfur question.

Secondly, the resolution fulfils the major test we
all imposed upon ourselves, namely to achieve a fair
balance between acknowledging progress where credit
is due and, on the other hand, continuing to provide
energetic and continuous encouragement to the
Government of Sudan to deliver in full on the
commitments and pledges it made to the international
community and to its people, and with the sense of
urgency imposed by the unfolding human drama in the
Darfur region. The resolution is equally balanced when
it recognizes the rebels' share of responsibility and
when it calls upon all parties concerned to
comprehensively address the full spectrum of political
and security challenges confronting Sudan at present.

Thirdly, the resolution contemplates sanctions. It
does not prescribe their automatic imposition, which
remains a matter of an adequate, gradual approach in
keeping with evolutions on the ground. This is
respectful of Romania's view that we should be able to
keep working with the Government of Sudan in
cooperatively implementing commitments jointly
entered into by that Government and the international
community. This was an important reason back in July
for the decision by Romania's foreign minister to visit
the country in the hours following the adoption of
resolution 1556 (2004).

Fourthly, the resolution recognizes regional
ownership at work in this crisis situation and
encourages and supports further contributions by the
African Union to address the crisis in the western part
of Sudan. This resolution also adequately reflects the
architecture of cooperation displayed in support of the
United Nations addressing the Darfur situation in
conjunction with the African Union, the European
Union and many individual nations from Sudan's
neighbourhood as well as from all over Europe, Asia
and America. That approach is essentially important
for Romania as a proponent of an updated and
consolidated reading and practice of Chapter VIII
provisions in our times. In this context, we look
forward to hearing from the current Chairman of the
African Union - the head of State of Nigeria - when
he addresses the Council next week.

Fifthly, a considerable amount of information and
evaluation on Sudan/Darfur has been gathered lately at
the level of European Union institutions as a result of
many ministerial, parliamentarian and non-
governmental visits and missions on the ground.
European policy formulations based on that extensive
feedback from the ground point in the same direction
as pronouncements from Washington and other capitals
and with the views of the Secretary-General of the
United Nations, and these are all consistent with the
philosophy behind resolution 1564 (2004), just
adopted.

Sixthly, in our twenty-first-century world, it
should not be possible for the international
community - for the Security Council in particular -
to confine themselves to only taking a political look at
events that involve tens of thousands of victims of
targeted violence, especially when we hear no denial of
such tragic reported facts. There should be no moral
hesitation in the Council in taking up its
responsibilities. While it may be true that it is not for
the Council to make legal findings, it is certainly
within its political, legal and moral obligation to ring
the alarm bell and foster - and, indeed, urge - proper
consideration of such acts in the appropriate venues.

Sudan is an important country for Romania, as it
is, I am persuaded, for all of us. We all do care for the
people whose lives are at risk there. In any future
consideration of the Darfur question, we should
therefore strive further to have the Council speak with
a unified voice. Romania undertakes to continue to
work in that direction.

To sum up, Romania supported resolution 1564
(2004) as an important act of the Security Council in
the discharge of its responsibilities under the United
Nations Charter, trusting that it will make a difference
on the ground for all people who are suffering or at risk
in the Darfur region of Sudan, which is the ultimate
credibility test for our work and our presence in the
Council. The ability of the Security Council to respond
to international crises is also the ability of the Security
Council to explain simple things to common people
asking straightforward questions such as: why are so
many people now dead or suffering in Sudan? What are
we doing about this? By adopting this resolution, we
are also trying to respond to those simple questions.

