Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to begin by expressing my personal pleasure
and that of Colombia in taking the floor for the first
time as a non-permanent member of this Council. We
do so in celebration of an historic event, which is the
outcome of a process emanating from a peace
agreement that will have great repercussions for the
people of the Sudan and the continent of Africa. I
endorse the thanks expressed to Mssrs. Menkerios and
Mkapa for their briefings, which clearly described the
evolution of recent events in the Sudan.

Indeed, with the conclusion of the polling process
in the Southern Sudan referendum, a major step was
taken towards achieving a peace that we hope will be
stable and durable and calls for the full implementation
of the provisions of the 2005 Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA). Although the process was not free
of incident, as many previous speakers have
recognized, it is to be noted that the polling took place
in a generally peaceful climate and with broad
participation. We trust that the ballot count and the
posting of final results will be undertaken smoothly
and without incidents that would jeopardize the
peaceful conclusion of the process.

We congratulate the people of the Sudan, the
Southern Sudan Referendum Commission, the
Secretary-General's Panel on the Referenda in the
Sudan, the United Nations Mission in the Sudan and
electoral observers for their work and the results
achieved so far. Independently of the outcome of the
referendum, and with the objective of achieving a
peaceful and mutually beneficial relationship between
the parties, it is essential to find lasting solutions to all
pending economic, political and social issues.

To that end, Colombia supports the work
undertaken by the African Union High-Level Panel on
the Sudan, successfully headed by President Mbeki.
We urge the parties to cooperate effectively in seeking
concrete outcomes that will make it possible to identify
the framework governing relations between North and
South upon the conclusion of the interim period
provided for in the Peace Agreement.

We should now reflect on the support to be
provided by the Security Council to the implementation
of post-CPA commitments. We would like to reiterate
and share the general opinion of members of the
Council regarding the worrisome situation in Abyei.
The potential for conflict will persist so long as
agreements are not reached on the status and
administration of the area. Similarly, we believe that, in
line with commitments contained in the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement, the popular consultations in Southern
Kordofan and Blue Nile states should be held in a free,
timely and transparent manner.

Finally, we restate our support for the peace
process in Darfur led by the African Union and the
United Nations and urge all rebel movements to join
this process immediately and unconditionally.

