Mr. Jiirgenson (Estonia) (spoke in French): I wish
at the outset to thank the French presidency for having
convened this debate.

(spoke in English)

The protection of civilians in armed conflict
remains a deep concern for Estonia, as do the particular
needs of women and children. As was expressed by my
delegation in this Chamber last week (see S/PV.7704),
sexual Violence in conflict is also a continuing concern.
Children are among the most vulnerable in armed
conflicts and pay a high price; they are recruited,
injured, deliberately killed, suffer sexual abuse and are
abducted and maimed. Their schools and homes are
destroyed, and they are denied food, water and health
care. We are outraged that such suffering continues.
As President of the UNICEF Executive Board this
year, Estonia is doing its utmost to draw attention to
the need for all of us to work together to put an end
to these violations and protect children from violence,
exploitation and abuse in all its forms.

Mr. President, while I align myself fully with the
statement delivered here today by the Deputy Head of
the European Union delegation, I should like now to
touch upon the areas presented in your concept note for
today's discussion (S/2016/503, annex).

It is clear that States themselves have the primary
responsibility to protect their citizens. At the same time,
it is also the main task of peacekeeping operations. We
believe that such operations, in order to be effective,
need to be equipped with a clear set of goals, strong
mandates and exit strategies.

For protection of civilians, relations with local
actors and non-governmental organizations as well
as cooperation with regional and international
organizations is crucial. Local governments and
civil-society organizations have an important role to
play in providing United Nations peacekeepers with
information that could help prevent and stop violations.
Furthermore, a strategy for engaging the local
community is important, since this will increase trust
in peacekeeping. However, closer cooperation should
be tied to an increase in transparency on the part of
local and regional actors.

We are greatly concerned that the protection of
civilians is challenged by disrespect for international
humanitarian law by some States and non-State armed
groups, as well as a sense of impunity for violations.
It is of the utmost importance that humanitarian aid
organizations such as the International Red Cross and
Red Crescent Movement and Medecins Sans Frontieres
be able to help people affected by conflict without
being targets themselves.

Estonia strongly supports the training of all troops
to improve peacekeeping missions' understanding
of the need to protect civilians, as well as the idea of
having gender advisers in all peacekeeping operations.
Better implementation of the relevant United Nations
standards and United Nations-certified training
materials on the protection of civilians is needed.
Pre-deployment and in-mission training should also
include issues such as sexual exploitation and abuse as
well as child protection.

In this context, let me once again express serious
concern over the significant increase in the number of
allegations of sexual exploitation by United Nations
peacekeepers. In this regard, Estonia fully supports the
Secretary-General's zero-tolerance policy.

In concluding, I would like to reiterate the
important role of the International Criminal Court
and the necessary cooperation between the Court and
peacekeeping missions. Estonia believes that when a
peace operation is to be deployed in an International
Criminal Court situation country, its mandate should
authorize it to facilitate or assist the Court.

