The President: I thank the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Japan for his important statement.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
President of the Philippines.

As the Secretary-General said in Madrid last
March, terrorism is a threat to all States, to all peoples,
which can strike anytime, anywhere. Like many
countries, the Philippines has been struck by the pain
of terror, but we have fought back. Since the
international war on terror started in 2001, almost
4,000 terrorists in the Philippines have been killed or
captured, mostly from the New People's Army, but also
including about 300 Abu Sayyaf group members and
about 40 international terrorist personalities. We have
fought back with the vigilance of ordinary citizens, a
strong bilateral and regional security network, our
strategic alliance with the United States, and the tools
of interfaith dialogue.

A few days after 11 September 2001, the
Philippines, Malaysia and Indonesia entered into an
operational agreement to protect our common seas
from terrorism. Other countries of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations subsequently joined us in that
agreement. We have been able to dissuade the rebels in
Mindanao from choosing terrorism as a tactic to
achieve their goals. We have isolated the insurgent
formations from the terrorist cells, negotiating with the
former and hunting down the latter without spawning
collateral conflict. Our peace process is perhaps the
only one in the world that formally incorporates an
anti-terrorism component. Alongside our ceasefire
agreement, we have an agreement to cooperate in the
interdiction of terrorist cells through the exchange of
intelligence, information and orders of battle.

To deny terrorists the means to carry out their
attacks, we have found it practical to recognize the
leadership of the United States in the war against
terror. We work closely with the United States on
intelligence and security matters and in intercepting
clandestine fund transfers through the anti-money
laundering law that we enacted after 11 September. To
develop our State capacity to prevent terrorism, the
Philippines has also found it practical to accept
American assistance for our ongoing defence reforms
and, soon, for Philippine law enforcement reforms.
Therefore, let me take this opportunity to declare
Philippine support for the United States Proliferation
Security Initiative. The United States is the natural
leader in this war on terror. America was the first and
remains the biggest victim of terrorism in this present
era. It is the most motivated and best equipped Member
State in the fight against terrorism.

Thus, it would be practical for the Security
Council's Counter-Terrorism Committee to undertake a
special intelligence coordinating project with the
United States to consolidate all overt and covert
international sources of information relevant to the war
against terrorism, including an immediate inventory of
private organizations that may be working as fronts for
terrorist activities and a watch-list of Governments
abetting or directly involved in terrorism and related
criminal acts. Those found culpable should face the full
force of United Nations sanctions.

The fight against terror and the prevention of
conflict must thrive on synergy, creativity, strategic
alliances for peace and sturdy parameters of collective
vigilance. May God bless our work in our own
countries and in this Chamber, and all of mankind,
which waits upon our courage and wisdom.

I wish to thank all participants for joining
together to make this meeting possible. My thanks go
to all the heads of State or Government and ministers
of foreign affairs, to representatives of Member States

and regional organizations, and to the Secretary» There are no further speakers inscribed on my
General. list. The Security Council has thus concluded its

. . business for this meetin .
I new resume my functions as President of the g

Security Council. The meeting rose at 1 p.m.
