Mr. Haraguchi (Japan): The present state of
affairs in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is one
of the most critical situations that the international
community has to address. Japan therefore welcomes
this opportunity for non-members of the Security
Council to express their opinions on this very
important subject.

The agreement forged as the result of long
negotiations among the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and other Congolese parties for
the formation of the new Transitional Government of
National Unity, followed by the announcement by
President Joseph Kabila on 30 June designating the
ministers of the new Government and yesterday's
swearing-in of four vice-presidents, is a very important
step in the peace process in that country. The
Government of Japan welcomes such progress and
commends the efforts made by the facilitators in that
regard. It is our fervent hope that all Congolese parties
concerned will cooperate fully in order to allow the
Government to begin functioning as soon as possible,
in accordance with the Transitional Constitution. The
Japanese Government, for its part, is prepared to
cooperate closely with the new Government and, in this
connection, is considering the possibility of extending
assistance in the area of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants.

My Government is convinced that it is a matter of
great urgency to take measures to stabilize the situation
and thereby avoid a humanitarian crisis in the eastern
part of the country. We very much appreciate the
activities undertaken by the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) and by the Interim Emergency
Multinational Force (IEMF) dispatched under the
leadership of the European Union under extremely
difficult conditions. As the situation following the
withdrawal of the IEMF this coming September is
difficult to predict, it is important for the Security
Council promptly to adopt a resolution authorizing the
deployment of troops with an appropriate mandate in
the Ituri region and thus ensure a smooth transition
from the IEMF to the MONUC contingent. That will
demonstrate to the parties concerned the strong resolve
of the Council to advance the peace process. I would
like to raise three issues that should be considered in
addressing this matter.

First, given the seriousness of the situation in the
area of Bunia and in order to advance the Ituri
pacification process, we recognize that the MONUC
contingent deployed in the region requires a
sufficiently robust enforcement mandate, and we
support the granting of such a mandate. At the same
time, we believe that it is necessary to exercise caution.
A strong enforcement mandate for activities such as
providing security under Chapter VII of the United
Nations Charter will, under circumstances in which
certain parties are not participating in the ceasefire
agreement or peace accord, risk changing the current
practices of peacekeeping operations and plunging the
troops into very complicated situations, in which they
may be required to engage in combat as if they were
parties to the conflict. Therefore, we should not easily
confer such robust powers on other peacekeeping
operations. Such a mandate should be given to
peacekeepers only in exceptional cases in which the
urgency of the situation makes it absolutely necessary
and in which there are countries willing to contribute
troops, as well as the clear prospect that the troops
dispatched with such a mandate will contribute to the
improvement of the situation. I would also like to
stress that it would be inappropriate to formulate such
an enforcement mandate in an ambiguous manner. It
should be clearly defined by a Council resolution to
show under what conditions and in which geographical
areas it will be exercised, and the rules of engagement
enabling the exercise of the mandate should be
established accordingly.

Secondly, with respect to the size of the Mission,
the Government of Japan recognizes the need for
strengthening MONUC in order to address adequately
the additional, urgent needs that have emerged in the
eastern part of the country and to prevent the spreading
of the crisis to other parts of the country. However, we
consider it unrealistic to take the same approach to the
entire territory as is being applied in the Ituri region.
Peace cannot be consolidated by force through the
foreign military presence of MONUC in a country as
vast as the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We
must stress that all parties concerned need to cooperate
of their own volition in promoting the peace process.

Thirdly, with respect to the arms embargo
proposed by the Secretary-General, Japan believes that
it is important to ensure its effectiveness once it is
imposed. From that point of view, we hope that the
Security Council will carefully consider the
introduction of the necessary measures, particularly the
issue of how to monitor its implementation. In relation
to the problem of small arms and light weapons, it was
indicated during the Biennial Meeting on Small Arms
last week that, based on the Programme of Action
initiated in 2001, national focal points for this issue
have been established in the Great Lakes region. Close
cooperation with those national contact points in the
implementation of an arms embargo is essential. I also
wish to take this opportunity to stress that the Council
should consider taking effective measures to deal with
the problem of the illicit exploitation of natural
resources as well.

Under the leadership of Ambassador Swing,
newly appointed Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Japan hopes that MONUC will
continue to function effectively. If we fail in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the credibility of
United Nations peacekeeping operations will be
seriously compromised. The international community
must remain committed to devoting its utmost efforts
to helping to solve the problem.

