The Philippines commends the French presidency of the Security Council for organizing today's timely debate on a very important agenda item. Indeed, resolution 1612 (2005) may be considered a true United Nations success story for bringing about important breakthroughs in child protection around the world. We also thank the briefers for their enlightening statements. Philippine law and Philippine society hold children in the highest regard. Even before they are born, the Philippine Constitution already protects them. Children take pride of place in the family. Their health, education, well-being and future are important concerns of their families and of the State. The Philippines maintains that a State without children is a State on the brink of extinction. Children do not belong on the battlefield. They have absolutely no role in conflict. They belong in school; they must be nurtured and reared to be future leaders. Children are "zones of peace", protected from all forms of abuse and violence, never to know first-hand the horrors of war. Since 2002, the Philippines has established procedures for the handling and treatment of children involved in armed conflict. The Juvenile Justice and Welfare Act of 2006 contains provisions to address the needs of children involved in armed conflict who have committed acts that will make them criminally liable under existing laws. In 2016, the Children's Emergency Relief and Protection Act was passed to ensure the protection of the fundamental rights of children before, during and after emergency situations. In January 2019, the Philippines passed Republic Act No. 11188 - the Special Protection of Children in Situations of Armed Conflict Act - as a way of implementing the protection guaranteed to children under the Convention on the Rights of the Child and its Optional Protocol on the involvement of children in armed conflict. This law takes into account Security Council resolutions related to children and armed conflict as well as resolution 1820 (2008), on women and peace and security. Republic Act No. 11188 considers as paramount the best interests of children and imposes criminal liability for grave violations of children's rights, including the killing or maiming of children, the recruitment or use of children in armed conflict, rape and other forms of sexual violence against children, the abduction of children, attacks against schools or hospitals, and the denial of humanitarian access to children. In June 2019, the Implementing Rules and Regulations for the Special Protection of Children in Situations of Armed Conflict Act were adopted. A process flow for rescued children was also set up. The Council for the Welfare of Children heads the interagency committee that monitors the implementation of the law and the Implementing Rules and Regulations. Other entities in the interagency committee include the Departments of Education, Social Welfare and Development, the Interior and Local Government, and National Defence. The Armed Forces of the Philippines, the National Commission on Indigenous Peoples, the Philippine Commission on Women, the National Commission on Muslim Filipinos and the Presidential Adviser on the Peace Process are also members of this committee. Having struggled for decades with armed rebel groups and _ separatist movements, the Philippines has had its fair share of conflict. During the siege of Marawi by elements of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham in 2017, thousands of families had to leave their homes and find shelter elsewhere. Children had to leave their schools. Some were even brainwashed and recruited by the rebels. As part of its reintegration programme, the Philippine Government established the Payapa at Masaganang Pamayanan programme - the Peaceful and Prosperous Community Programme - which provides sustainable livelihood and protective services to individuals and families, and psychosocial counselling, support and cash to former rebels, including children. The Philippines is also implementing a conditional cash-transfer programme, the Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Programme, better known as the 4Ps, for the purposes of alleviating poverty. One of the conditions for the disbursement of cash is that children stay in school. During the current coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, the Philippines partnered with financial institutions and the private sector to deliver much-needed cash assistance to families affected by the pandemic. Even with the challenges of responding to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Philippine Government, together with civil society actors, continues to strengthen protection mechanisms for children affected and displaced by armed conflict by raising awareness of Republic Act No. 11188, publicizing violations and updating, inter alia, the Protocol on the Monitoring, Reporting and Response System on the Grave Child Rights Violations in the Context of Armed Conflict to align it with Republic Act No. 11188. For many people, education is an important gateway out of poverty. The Philippine Government prioritizes the return of children displaced by the conflict in Marawi to their schools. While elementary and high-school education in public schools had always been free, university education in state colleges and universities has been tuition-free since 2017. It is a step towards removing every obstacle to the full realization of children's potential. To protect children in situations of armed conflict, it is imperative that child- protection measures be integrated into peace processes. It is also crucial that all efforts be exerted to end conflict. The Philippines supports the call of the Secretary- General for a global ceasefire during the COVID-19 pandemic. The Philippine Government also believes that there must be a global consensus to keep children out of conflict during this pandemic and beyond. The Philippines reiterates its commitment to meeting this goal.
