Ms. O'Donnell (Ireland): May I first thank
Mauritius, as President of the Security Council this
month, for arranging today's meeting on the situation
in Africa: thank you, Mr. Minister, for presiding over
our deliberations today. I warmly welcome the
Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity
(OAU), Mr. Amara Essy, to our meeting. In this debate,
the High Representative of the European Union,
Mr. Javier Solana, will also speak, and we look forward
to his statement.

The situation in Africa is a panorama of daunting
challenges. It is also one of real hope. Across Africa
new windows of opportunity are opening. No one can
fail to be inspired by the honesty and clarity of vision
of the New Partnership for Africa's Development as
outlined by Mr. Essy just now. The wider international
community, for its part, must fully meet its
commitments by helping African Governments and the
people of Africa to shape new horizons and grasp new
opportunities.

Over recent decades, wars have devastated much
of Africa. The Secretary-General rightly observed only
a few years ago that

"By not averting these colossal human
tragedies, African leaders have failed the peoples
of Africa; the international community has failed
them; the United Nations has failed them."
(S/l998/318, para. 5)

But today that sense of past failure is, fortunately,
being replaced by a new determination and a sense of
new beginnings. Democracy is spreading across the
continent of Africa, supported by the OAU, soon to
become the African Union, which is strongly
committed to addressing the causes of conflict and to
working actively for the prevention of conflict.

Today, in the Horn of Africa, in West Africa and
in the Great Lakes region, the United Nations is
involved, in ways large and small, in conflict
prevention, in peacekeeping and in peacemaking.
Every month, African issues strongly feature on the
agenda of the Security Council. Almost every month,
the complexity of each situation is considered in terms
of its own unique features. What we can say, and what
was not true even a few years ago, is that the United
Nations is now at work, actively and strongly, in
peacekeeping, peacemaking and peace-building across
virtually all regions of Africa. And that is as it should
be.

At the same time, Africa must lead the way and
play its part. Good governance must mean exactly that:
elections must be fully fair and transparent; the
resources of Africa must be used for the people of
Africa and not for the gain of a few.

The best way forward for Africa can be only by
two parallel paths. Both require the full support of the
international community. The first is the path of
conflict resolution and the prevention of new conflict
situations, and the second, crucially, is the path of
advancing economic and social development and
achieving greater integration of Africa into the world
economy. These are related objectives of peace and
development. Progress in each depends on the other.
On these interlocking paths rests the future well-being
of the peoples of Africa.

Allow me to offer some views, as Ireland sees it,
on conflict prevention and conflict resolution in Africa.
We have all grappled with these issues long and hard
over recent years. African leaders have also done so;
we in the United Nations have done so; the European
Union and our partners in Africa have done so. But
where are we now? Where do we now stand on this
issue of conflict resolution?

First, we have come a long way, but we need to
strengthen coordination and cooperation between the
United Nations and the OAU and African regional
organizations; between all United Nations institutions
active on the ground and the Security Council; between
civil society players in conflict or potential conflict
situations in Africa and all others involved in
mediation or support efforts.

Ireland attaches special importance to the role of
the OAU Mechanism for Conflict Prevention,
Management and Resolution in addressing conflicts in
Africa. Ireland would like to see greater and more
structured dialogue between the OAU and its structures
on the one hand, and the United Nations, especially the
Security Council, on the other. This should relate, in
the main, to practical issues so that we all share the
same information and have the opportunity to assess
together how best to proceed in tackling potential
conflict situations. Likewise, Ireland would like to see
an established, structured dialogue between the
Security Council and the Economic and Social Council.

The Security Council and the Economic and
Social Council have clear, separate but complementary
roles. We need to ensure that our actions are coherent
and that there is a bridge of a shared approach and
operational coordination in the Security Council's roles
in peace and security and in related development issues
that are the charter domain of the Economic and Social
Council.

The Secretary-General and the United Nations
family of institutions perform their roles with great
resolve and absolute commitment. A few years ago,
many of us complained of a lack of internal
coordination and of coordination among many United
Nations bodies, but much progress has since been made
in that area. However, the policy-making institutions of
the United Nations belonging to Member States have
yet to achieve coordination in the same way.

Secondly, we need to look in a fresh way at all
the instruments at our disposal in addressing potential
or actual conflict situations in Africa. Have the
contributions of United Nations special mediators or
special commissions been of help? In the View of
Ireland, the answer is an absolute "yes". United
Nations mediators and special representative have
played a role of exceptional value in recent years in the
Horn of Africa, in the Central African Republic, in the
Great Lakes region and across the continent. We in the
European Union take much pride in our own work in
this area and in our conflict resolution strategies in
Africa, including through the process of dialogue with
our partners in the Cotonou framework.

In his guidelines for this meeting, the President
asks whether subregional organizations in Africa are
useful and successful in building and maintaining
peace. Of course they are: the Lusaka and the Arusha
peace processes powerfully demonstrate what can be
achieved by regional peace initiatives. The
international community must continue, however, to
support such initiatives; the leadership must come from
Africa.

How can we in the wider international
community, including the United Nations, best support
subregional organizations and, of course, the work of
the OAU? We certainly need greater dialogue and
coordination, and how to best achieve that - for
example, through early warning actions to tackle
potential conflict situations - is something we need to
carefully assess. Ireland sees much value in African
regional and subregional organizations appointing
special envoys where appropriate, and facilitating the
establishment of councils of elders that could help
mediate disputes and promote practical solutions.

Can we in the international community help
strengthen Africa's peacemaking capacity? Clearly, we
have an explicit obligation to do so.

Are sanctions and embargoes an important
instrument for the United Nations, the OAU and
regional organizations? In Ireland's view, they have a
critical role to play and, as in Angola and Liberia, have
proved essential. They are, however, often a blunt
instrument, and we need to carefully weigh the
humanitarian consequences.

Equally, tackling the illicit flow of small arms is
of the utmost importance, just as demobilization,
repatriation and reintegration programmes are another
central dimension in resolving conflict situations.

As a third and final point on the issue of conflict
prevention and resolution, let me note that efforts to
prevent conflict in Africa must not only recognize the
question of resources - which is all too often the
source of intra-State conflict - but also promote a
broad range of human rights, including civil and
political rights as well as economic, social and cultural
rights and the right to development itself. Equally,
empowered women must be a core dimension of
meaningful conflict prevention strategies.

Looking at Africa today and at the role of African
leaders and of the United Nations, I think we here, all
of us, can take pride in having turned back - albeit
sometimes slowly - forces of violence or division; but
also in having supported forces of peace in many
African regions: in Sierra Leone, in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and in the wider Great Lakes
region. In Burundi, the formation of the new
transitional Government is powerful witness to the
positive engagement of neighbouring countries.

In Somalia, the establishment of the Transitional
National Government offers a path to a new beginning
for that tragic and tortured country. The United Nations
must soon decide on its own future role in supporting
the forces of peace in Somalia; that is something that
Ireland will strongly advocate. The countries of the
region must also work together to support peace in
Somalia. The people of Somalia deserve our active
support and engagement.

The peoples of Africa are entitled to look to the
international community for our fulsome involvement
in helping them to meet the myriad challenges of
development on their continent. Without economic and
social development in Africa, I believe, all other
policies will ultimately prove to have been built on
sand.

African leaders themselves have indicated the
way forward in the New Partnership for Africa's
Development - a vision of development that is wise,
generous and right. This vision requires the promotion
of democracy, good governance, sound macroeconomic
policies, transparent legal and regulatory frameworks
and the advancement of the role of women. It requires,
essentially, African-owned and African-led
development programmes.

In order for this type of development to be
achieved, the international community will be required
to fully fulfil its commitments to support capacity-
building in Africa, as agreed at the World Trade
Organization meeting in Doha. This means sustained
investment in education in Africa and in the building of
social capital as one of the keys to unlock the human
potential of Africans in all their diversity. It means a
new trade framework that addresses the present
exclusion - and that is the right word for it - of
Africa from the globalized economy. It means a
successful outcome to the International Conference on
Financing for Development, to be held in Monterrey a
few weeks from now. It means full international
support in helping to turn back the scourge of AIDS in
Africa.

In summary, what is required is decisive action by
the international community on development financing,
on trade opportunities, in encouraging inward
investment and in debt relief through the Heavily
Indebted Poor Countries Debt Initiative and other
initiatives. It means setting ourselves the unwavering
objective of fully achieving in Africa the 2015
international development goals. We know that these
things do not happen by chance. These things will not
happen without ethical political leadership from
developed countries. Ireland will play its part in
working to advance these objectives. The Irish
Government has committed itself to achieving the goal
of 0.7 per cent of gross national product (GNP) by the
end of 2007. This year, we will meet our interim target
of 0.45 per cent of GNP.

There is no single easy formula to meet all the
many challenges facing Africa. What we can say is that
these challenges have no chance whatever of being met
without cooperation and, above all, without the
absolute determination of all of us: African leaders,
African civil society, we in the Security Council and
the United Nations as a whole and the wider
international community. Today's meeting of the
Council is another important event in a journey
increasingly marked by real hope for Africa and its
wonderful people.

I am glad that the United Kingdom has indicated
that it will again focus on Africa during its presidency
of the Council.

