Miss Hassan (Djibouti): My delegationjoins other
delegations in congratulating the sisterly delegation of
the Arab Republic of Egypt on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
May and for the initiative taken to hold this important
debate on countering the narratives and ideologies of
terrorism.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement made
by the Ambassador of Kuwait, who spoke on behalf
of the member States of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation.

I am confident that this open debate will give
us yet another opportunity to better comprehend a
phenomenon that has led to emergence of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), Boko Haram,
Al-Qaida and Al-Shabaab, which poses a serious threat
to international peace and security, thus unravelling
decades of economic growth in many parts of the world.
It will offer us an opportunity notjust to understand how
ISIL has successfully attracted some 36,000 foreign
fighters from more than 100 countries, established an
effective terrorist network with the capacity to launch
deadly attacks in many parts of the world and created
an online apparatus aimed at spreading messages of
hatred and destruction and mobilizing impressionable
individuals. It will also help us identify additional steps
and measures to address the drivers and enablers of
violent extremism and terrorism.

(Spoke in French)

For many years, the peoples of the Horn of Africa
have resisted the seeping-in of extremist ideologies.
Unfortunately, as a result of unending attacks by
extremist groups, our region has today become part
of one of the epicentres of violent extremism on the
African continent. The theme at the heart of today's
debate focusing on the ways and means of countering
the narratives of terrorism and violent extremism as
well as the activities of terrorist groups demonstrates
that the challenges we face are of both an intellectual
and security-related nature.

The goal of radical extremists is to set up what some
writers have called a "panic civilization", where each
act of terrorism not only destroys the lives of innocent
civilians but also creates a vast number of living but
terrified hostages.

Their goal is well known; our determination must
therefore be limitless.
Alongside actions taken through such organizations
such the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation to prevent
and fight terrorism and violent extremism, the States of
the region have rapidly taken recognized the importance
of beginning consultations to develop a strategy to
counter the ideas and speech propagated by extremist
movements. In that perspective, we have decided by
mutual agreement to establish a regional centre for
the prevention of and fight against violent extremism,
which will be located in Djibouti.

In addition, under the leadership of President
Ismael Omar Guelleh, the second and third Regional
Forums of Ulemas of East Africa were held in 2014
an 2015. Their main objective was to pave the way
for reflections on the development of proactive and
preventive policies to address the rise of extremist
rhetoric, and on the most appropriate ways and means
to expose and thereby discredit people and groups that
bear such messages. I take this opportunity to highlight
the fact that the conclusions of these meetings clearly
stressed the importance of identifying methodological
tools to better deal with the phenomena of terrorism
and violent extremism.

Alongside this intellectual work to a better
understand religious precepts, it is also important to
strengthen the role of social institutions and educational
incubators in training young people, with a focus on the
role of media in education and in clarifying the aims
and objectives of religion. In brief, we must prioritize
integrated treatments that combine educational policies,
socioeconomic development policies, and the review
and drafting of legal texts.

The beginning of this year was bloody and
punctuated by a series of heinous terrorist attacks
around the world. This must serve to launch a decisive
new impetus and international mobilization against
the phenomenon of violent extremism. The adoption
of the Secretary-General's Plan of Action to Prevent
Violent Extremism, along with the impending review
of the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, will be
an unprecedented opportunity for the international
community. It is high time for Member States to agree
on the need and strategic value of sending a message
that fully incorporates alternative narrative countering
extremist and violent messages.

In this perspective, we believe it important for the
response strategy that we must formulate to loudly
resonate with the voices and testimonies of victims of
violent extremism and repentant extremist fighters.
Indeed, their contribution to the demobilization and
rehabilitation of recruits will be crucial and shed
special light on the psychological process that allowed
them to reject the deadly passion that animated them.
Finally, in terms of partner participation, it is essential
to have the full support of Internet service providers
and owners of social networks. Every individual's right
to freedom of expression must be weighed against the
need to protect vulnerable people from incitement to
hatred, discrimination and violence.

My delegation wishes to emphasize that violent
extremism and the resultant terrorist acts cannot be
associated with any religion, race, culture or society.
It is also important in the fight against the phenomena
of terrorism and violent extremism that we safeguard
the promotion and protection of human rights. In
that respect, the promotion of a culture of tolerance
and moderation in all societies will contribute to the
protection of minorities, including religious minorities.

My delegation deplores and rejects the rampant
and growing Islamophobia in many countries, which
is honed and amplified by opinion leaders and certain
media. This is counterproductive and undermines the
individual or collective efforts that are essential to the
promotion of collective action to promote the values and
ideals of respect and mutual understanding necessary
to the peaceful coexistence ofpeoples and civilizations.

