Mr. Quinlan (Australia): Thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this important briefing in the open
Chamber. I would also like to thank High Commissioner
Pillay and Special Adviser Dieng for their forthright
and very disturbing briefings. Their visit was an
essential one, and the Council itself must ensure that
their immediate report back to us is instrumental.

All of us have been appalled by the horrifying
events in Bentiu and Bor, where just weeks ago
hundreds of men, women and children were targeted
in ethnic killings while seeking refuge in a hospital,
a mosque, a church and a United Nations base - all
places that should be inviolate, as they are protected
under international law. The use of radio broadcasts
to incite ethnic killings and sexual violence against
women and girls is chilling and frighteningly resonant
of mass atrocities elsewhere. The image of slain child
soldiers, their lifeless bodies still clutching AK-47s as
they lay dead in the streets, is harrowing.

Australia's Foreign Minister Bishop, along with so
many other world leaders, has strongly condemned this
violence, whose scale and intensity represent a grim new

chapter of a brutal conflict that has already claimed the
lives of many thousands of civilians and displaced more
than a million. Until this cycle is broken, more atrocities
will occur, inevitably, and many more lives will be lost,
inevitably. Our message to all parties to this conflict is
simple. There can be no military solution.

President Salva Kiir and Mr. Rick Machar must
uphold their responsibility to protect civilians,
regardless of ethnicity or political affiliation. They
must immediately commit themselves and their forces
to a ceasefire and engage sincerely in the peace process
led by the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD). We commend IGAD and Ethiopia for their
leadership and for the invaluable role they continue to
play as partners for peace and stability in the region.

We welcome the imminent release of the report of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) on
human rights violations. No party to the conflict should
be under the illusion that there will be anything less
than full accountability for the crimes against humanity
and war crimes we expect it to detail. In accordance
with the principle of command responsibility, leaders
will be held to account for their subordinates' actions.
Impunity cannot persist, nor can blanket amnesties be
entertained. The legacy of a lack of accountability is
among the drivers perpetuating the conflict.

We welcome the African Union commission of
inquiry and express our continued support to President
Obasanjo and his team. It will remain open for the
Council to consider referring the situation in South
Sudan to the International Criminal Court once we
have had the opportunity to consider the Commission's
recommendations.

As a Council, our obligation now is to help pull the
country back from the brink, confronted as we are by
grave and persistent human rights violations, extreme
protection challenges and a worsening humanitarian
crisis. The situation clearly invokes the principle of
responsibility to protect. We commend the swift action
of UNMISS to establish protection sites in the early
stages of the conflict, saving countless lives. That is
why the United Nations exists. The commitment of
the United Nations and Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Johnson to the protection of civilians
is a statement of their concern and determination to
help the South Sudanese people. The Government of
South Sudan must now state unequivocally its support
for UNMISS and extend seriousfull cooperation to it.

We must move urgently to recast the UNMISS
mandate to give the Mission clearer, more focused
priorities, with the protection of civilians at its core.
The new mandate should reaffirm the neutrality
and impartiality of UNMISS, and freeze most
State-building tasks until the fighting stops and a
pathway to genuine peace is established. We must work
with the peacekeeping partnership - the Council,
the Secretariat and troop- and police-contributing
countries - to deploy the requisite peacekeepers much
faster, and we must equip them with the mandate, tools
and mobility they need to protect civilians adequately.

The crucial next step is to expand the security
footprint beyond the camps of internally displaced
persons to protect more civilians at grave risk. And
we support the proposed deployment of an IGAD
protection force to allow IGAD's monitors to perform
their task. With the spectre of famine looming, we
must spare no effort to facilitate humanitarian access
so that life-saving assistance can reach those people
in most need. Any action to deny, delay or otherwise
obstruct such access is unacceptable. My own country
has provided over $10 million in emergency aid to date
since the crisis began. We encourage Member States
to give generously to the South Sudan humanitarian
appeals.

As the fighting in oil-rich Upper Nile and Unity
states demonstrates, competition over natural resources
and their revenues is another important driver of that
conflict. The proliferation and ready availability of
small arms, light weapons and ammunition is further
fuelling the fighting.

The Council has instruments, in addition to
peacekeeping, that it can apply to mitigate the intensity
of the conflict and bring a measure of protection to
the people of South Sudan. We believe it is time for
the Council to consider applying an arms embargo.
Australia also supports the application of financial
and travel sanctions against instigators of violence and
perpetrators of human rights abuses in South Sudan.
Those who stand in the way of peace must pay a price
for their actions. Targeted sanctions are a lever to curb
the protagonists' behaviour and bring them back to
dialogue.

In conclusion, while South Sudan's leaders are
engaged in a bitter and bloody power struggle in the
pursuit of their own narrow self-interest, the suffering
of the South Sudanese people grows more and more
acute. That is an unforgivable betrayal to the world's
youngest nation. We must heed the crystal clear call to
action we have heard today and accelerate the Council's
response.

