The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council for the month of October, I should
like to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of
the Council, to His Excellency Mr. Moctar Ouane,
Permanent Representative of Mali to the United
Nations, for his service as President of the Security
Council for the month of September. I am sure I speak
for all members of the Council in expressing deep
appreciation to Ambassador Ouane for the great
diplomatic skill with which he conducted the Council's
business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian Question

Letter dated 2 October 2000 from the
Permanent Representative of Iraq to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2000/928)

Letter dated 2 October 2000 from the
Permanent Representative of Malaysia to the
United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/2000/929)

Identical letters dated 2 October 2000 from the
Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United
Nations addressed to the Secretary-General and
to the President of the Security Council
(S/2000/930)

Letter dated 2 October 2000 from the
Permanent Representative of South Africa to
the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2000/934)

Letter dated 2 October 2000 from the
Permanent Representative of Malaysia to the
United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/2000/935)

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Algeria, Bahrain, Cuba, Egypt,
India, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq, Israel, Jordan,
Kuwait, the Libyan Arab J amahiriya, Mauritania,
Pakistan, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, the Syrian
Arab Republic, Turkey and Yemen, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in
the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Lancry
(Israel) took a seat at the Council table; Mr. Baali
(Algeria), Mr. Buallay (Bahrain), Mr. Dausd
Ce'spedes (Cuba), Mr. Aboulgheit (Egypt), Mr.
Sharma (India), Mr. Nejad Hosseinian (Islamic Republic ofIran), Mr. Hasan (Iraq), Mr.
Al-Hussein (Jordan), Mr. Abulhasan (Kuwait),
Mr. Babaa (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya), Mr. Ly
(Mauritania), Mr. Ahmad (Pakistan), Mr.
Al-Nasser (Qatar), Mr. Shobokshi (Saudi Arabia),
Mr. Kumalo (South Africa), Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic), Mr. Pamir (Turkey) and

Mr. Al-Ashtal (Yemen) took the seats reservedfor
them at the side of the Council Chamber.


The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 3 October
2000 from the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the
United Nations, which will be issued as document
S/2000/938, and which reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the forthcoming meeting of the Security
Council to be held on Tuesday, 3 October 2000,
with regard to the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem."

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the current debate in accordance with the
rules of procedure and the previous practice in this
regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al-Kidwa
(Palestine) took a seat at the Council table.


The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in response to the requests dated 2
October 2000 from the Permanent Representatives of
Iraq, Malaysia and South Africa to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council,
contained in documents S/2000/928, S/2000/929,
S/2000/934 and S/2000/935, respectively, as well as the
request dated 2 October 2000 from the Permanent
Observer of Palestine to the United Nations, contained
in document S/2000/930.

I should also like to draw the attention of
members to document S/2000/921, letter dated 29
September 2000 from the Permanent Observer of
Palestine to the United Nations.

The first speaker inscribed on my list is the
Permanent Observer of Palestine, to whom I give the
floor.


