Mr. Ahmed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank you, Mr. Minister, for presiding over
this morning's meeting. I would also like to express
my thanks and appreciation to the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2019/305). I also thank Mr. Jeremiah
Mamabolo, Joint Special Representative for Darfur,
and Ms. Ursula Mueller, Assistant Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief
Coordinator, for their valuable briefings.

We have reviewed the report of the Secretary-
General on the situation in Darfur, which stresses that
the security situation throughout Darfur is improving,
with the one exception of the area under the control
of Abdul Wahid Mohamed Nour in Jebel Marra. His
troops are attacking the armed forces and civilians in
neighbouring towns. In turn, the military and security
forces confront those attacks to protect civilians.

In the past period, Central Darfur state has
focused on issues related to strengthening security and
stability through the weapons collection campaign and
the restoration of State authority. That was done by
increasing police troops in order to ensure the voluntary
return of internally displaced persons and the success
of the harvest season. We hope that will positively
affect the security situation and living conditions
throughout Darfur states, which are improving daily
towards achieving stability and development. We
hope that those initiatives will enjoy the support of the
international community.

Some parts of the report before the Council have
been overtaken by time following the changes that took
place since the glorious revolution of December 2018.
In that regard, let me reiterate what I said to the Council
last week (see S/PV.8509) with regard to the Sudan's
commitment to respecting all regional and international
agreements, treaties and conventions, including those
signed with the United Nations involving the deployment
of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID). I also reaffirm the Sudan's
commitment to facilitate the work of the mission and
humanitarian organizations working in the Sudan, in
general, and Darfur in particular. In addition, I reiterate
that the Sudan looks forward to cooperating with the
Secretariat and the Security Council to implement
UNAMID's exit strategy pursuant to resolution 2429
(2018) and according to the agreed time frame set forth
in the resolution, namely, June 2020.

Moreover, we expect our agreed plans to transition
from peacekeeping to peacebuilding in Darfur to be
implemented, and we also look forward to the dialogue on
the report of UNAMID concerning its strategic review.
We hope that the recommendations of the report will be
in line with the objectives set forth for UNAMID's exit
in 2020. We also hope that the report will be in keeping
with our aspirations for peacebuilding and sustained
peace in Darfur, as well as for UNAMID's exit. That
would represent an example of success and a model that
truly embodies the meaning of partnership between the
African Union and the United Nations in the context of
peacekeeping and establishing peace in Africa.

We commend the intense efforts geared towards
concluding the peace process, and, once again, we
welcome peacebuilding, which means development and
an end to the conflict, in conjunction with the major
developments in my country following the glorious
December revolution.

My country's delegation would like to thank
UNAMID for everything that it has been able to
accomplish in a number of areas and for the sacrifices
of its peacekeepers in recent years. In that regard, we
thank the countries that have contributed military,
police or civilian personnel. We reiterate that the Sudan
is ready to cooperate with all regional and international
partners in all the different aspects of UNAMID until
it exits my country.

In conclusion, I wish to comment on the remarks
made by some members of Security Council. I clearly
state that what has been happening in the Sudan since
December 2018 is an internal matter, according to the
Charter of the United Nations. We do not believe that
there is any justification for the Security Council to
discuss this matter, especially because the exceptional
situation that the Sudan is currently experiencing
requires great caution so that stakeholders can conclude
their consultations on reaching a peaceful, smooth and
democratic transition of power. The same applies to the
Secretariat, which must adhere to its mandate in the
preparation of its reports.

We are keen to not take any step that might have
negative repercussions on the current situation. We are
also confident that the members of the Council share the
same concern. Those present and the entire world have
seen that the Sudanese revolution is a peaceful one that
seeks to bring about a change that the Sudanese people
desire. If the revolution, which has lasted for months, is
able to meet its aspirations, then the Sudanese people
will also be able to reach theirs and conclude their
peaceful and civilized revolution in a manner that is
appropriate to the circumstances and challenges of
our country.

