Mr. Kleib (Indonesia): My delegation joins
previous speakers in welcoming the Presidents and
Prosecutors of both Tribunals to the Council and in
thanking them for their comprehensive briefings on the
progress of the implementation of the completion
strategies of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR).

Like others, we underscore the importance of the
completion strategies, which are instrumental in the
performance of the ICTY and ICTR in their final
phases. In that regard, Indonesia notes with
appreciation that various concrete measures have been
taken to implement the strategies and that significant
progress has been achieved towards the completion of
the work of the two Tribunals. We fully appreciate the
significance of the continuous efforts of the Tribunals
to achieve greater efficiency by exploring further ways
to expedite proceedings while respecting the rights of
the accused.

In connection with some functions of the
Tribunals that will remain in place following the
completion of their work, we wish to underline the
need for the Security Council to establish a particular
mechanism to deal with residual functions. Such a
mechanism should be able to address residual
functions, particularly those related to fugitives at
large, transfers of cases to national jurisdiction, witness
protection, sentence supervision and archives. The
mechanism, we believe, should hold only the particular
residual functions that are necessary to retain.
Functions other than those should be transferred to
national jurisdiction or other relevant bodies.

It is also the view of my delegation that the most
essential residual function that the Council should
consider is the trial of fugitives. In that regard, it is
pertinent for all States concerned to fully cooperate in
order to bring all perpetrators of crimes against
humanity in the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda to
justice. Impunity is unacceptable.

Another significant feature of the two Tribunals'
completion strategies as they relate to residual
functions is the referral of cases to national courts. My
delegation recognizes the merits of challenges posed
by such referrals. It is therefore vital for the
international community to continue to support the
capacity-building performance and programmes of the
relevant national courts. Much work remains to be
done if the national courts are to take over the judicial
function of the Tribunals in the future. In that regard,
we commend the efforts of the Tribunals to strengthen
their cooperation with the respective national
authorities.
In the light of that, my delegation would like to
specifically mention that the informal working group
on the Tribunals chaired by Belgium has successfully
arrived at some areas of agreement in identifying
residual functions and possible solutions to the issues
they raise. We share the View that the agreement could
serve as good common ground for the working group

to move forward to a new phase of work by focusing
on the possible elements of a Security Council
resolution. We encourage the continued close
cooperation between the two Tribunals and the working
group on the Tribunals' legacy, most crucially with
respect to mechanisms required to disposing of the
Tribunals' residual functions.

Before concluding my remarks, I would like once
again to reiterate my delegation's support to both
Tribunals in discharging their mandates, including the
implementation of their respective completion
strategies. We also wish to express our appreciation for
their contribution to bringing to justice those
responsible for crimes against humanity in the former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda.

