Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I would
like to thank Ms. Bensouda for her briefing and to
welcome her back to the Security Council today. The
United States looks forward to continuing our active
engagement with the International Criminal Court
(ICC) and the Office of the Prosecutor, consistent with
our law and policy, to ensure accountability for the
most serious crimes of international concern.

Libya continues to make progress under its first
democratically elected Government in more than
40 years. The Libyan people are moving forward
and charting their own future, and the United States
congratulates them for it.

There are clearly tough challenges ahead, from
building political consensus to strengthening security
and to protecting human rights. There is no doubt that
justice and accountability will remain central to the
success of Libya's transition and lasting peace in the
country. But Libya is not alone on that path. The United
States and others in the international community stand
ready to assist the Libyan Government and people in
reforming their institutions of justice, strengthening
the rule of law, and advancing human rights and respect
for international law.

We welcome the statements in the Prosecutor's
report and briefing today regarding Libya's cooperation,
particularly in the cases involving Abdullah Al-Senussi
and Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi. As the Prosecutor noted,
the proceedings involving Al-Senussi and Al-Qadhafi
are reaching critical stages and will continue to attract
considerable attention.

This is an important moment for both Libya and
the International Criminal Court. We urge Libya to
continue adhering to its international obligations,
including under resolution 1970 (2011). Furthermore,
the United States remains deeply concerned by
allegations of rape and sexual violence, as documented
by the United Nations Commission of Inquiry. We
believe that accountability for those and other serious
crimes is critical.

Whatever the outcome of the admissibility
proceedings before the ICC, Libya will need to bolster
domestic accountability structures and processes to
create a strong, fair and credible system ofjustice. The
Government must not tolerate impunity for perpetrators
of serious crimes, regardless of their affiliation or
the nature of their crimes, and it should act to ensure
transitional justice consistent with Libya's international
human rights obligations. In particular, we urge Libya
to develop and implement a comprehensive transitional
justice strategy that uncovers the truth about past
abuses, holds accountable those most responsible,
brings justice to the victims and addresses the root
causes of abuse. Only by reckoning with its past can
Libya finally realize the promise of its transition.

