Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We wish to note the briefing by Mr. David Shearer, Special Representative of the Secretary- General, and assure him of our full support in his work and the United Nations peacekeeping operation in South Sudan that he leads. We also thank Ms. Betty Sunday for her briefing. We are also grateful to the troop- and police-contributing countries within the United Nations Mission in South Sudan. South Sudan is a very young country at a crucial moment in its history. It is the task of the international community to provide the necessary support to the South Sudanese to overcome the challenges facing their country. Moscow welcomes the recent positive developments in the peace process in South Sudan. That was the result of the compromise agreements reached by the main parties to the South Sudanese process. We would like to highlight the important initiative of President Salva Kiir, who showed political will and made compromises on the administrative division of the country. We also note Mr. Riek Machar's decision to join the process to form the Transitional Government of National Unity and assume the post of First Vice-President. We believe that the beginning of the formation of the country's new governing bodies and the conclusion of the pre-transition period within the previously agreed time frame create the necessary conditions for South Sudan to move towards political stability and national reconciliation so as to successfully address the urgent socioeconomic development challenges for the benefit of all South Sudanese people.We believe it important that the parties be ready to overcome their differences through frank dialogue. We hope that all necessary formalities will be completed as soon as possible and that the transition agreements will continue to be implemented. We believe that only the full and complete implementation of the commitments undertaken by the parties will help to increase mutual trust and prevent the recurrence of past mistakes. We note the overall reduction in the level of armed violence and in the number of intercommunal clashes since the signing of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan of 2018. The improvement in the security situation has facilitated greater humanitarian access. The number of human rights violations has decreased. All that has a positive impact on the rate of return of South Sudanese refugees and internally displaced persons to their places of origin. We attribute that primarily to the implementation of confidence-building measures and contacts between the opposing parties on the ground. It is important that they continue to respect the terms of the ceasefire. We call on the South Sudanese to strictly abide by those agreements. We also call on the non-signatory parties to the Revitalized Agreement to join the State-building process as soon as possible. We highlight the efforts of the Community of Sant'Egidio and the Italian Government to that end. We have repeatedly stated and reiterate today that the leading role in supporting the South Sudanese peace process must be played by regional actors. In that connection, we welcome the efforts undertaken by the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the African Union, the Sudan, Kenya, Uganda and the Republic of South Africa. It is important that their approaches continue to promote unity. That will help advance the implementation of the principle of African solutions to African problems. We believe that progress in settling the situation in South Sudan was not facilitated by stronger sanctions against the country or, in particular, the imposition of unilateral restrictions. A key component in that progress was the contribution made by regional mediators. We trust that the South Sudanese will be able to expeditiously reach an agreement on the whole array of issues, which will give the Security Council a reason to conduct an assessment of the sanctions regime, with a view to tailoring it to reflect the real situation on the ground.
