Mr. Sareer (Maldives): Let me begin by
congratulating Senegal on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. 1
would also like to thank Minister Nidaye for organizing
this timely debate on dealing with asymmetrical threats
to peacekeeping missions.
Peacekeeping operations are at the core of the
United Nations work and essential to its first and most
fundamental missionof maintaining peace and security
in all regions of the world. Countless lives have been
saved through their work, and countless more have,
through them, been given a chance to live more
peaceful, more hopeful and more fruitful lives.

The critical element ofUnited Nations peacekeeping
operations is the protection of civilians in and from
conflict. Therefore, in order to strengthen its work in
this function, the Security Council, United Nations
agencies and relevant State parties must all accord
the protection of civilians commensurate priority in
the process of determining the scope and mandate of
peacekeeping missions. Their collective work must be
guided by a precise and comprehensive framework for
identifying threats to civilians in the respective local
context, adaptive and flexible strategies for responding
to changes in the security environment, and clearly
defined objectives.

Such strategies are made even more essential by
the increasing prevalence of asymmetrical threats.
The existence of asymmetrical threats in a conflict
environment is often the result of a convergence of
social, economic and political factors. Therefore,
while it is essential for peacekeeping missions to be
equipped with the appropriate tools to respond to these
challenges, these must include mechanisms to ensure
peacekeeping missions' legal, technical and monitoring
aspects, in addition to physical materiel.

Peacekeeping missions must first and foremost be
afforded adequate personnel and staff to implement
their mandate. Likewise, the core goals and unique
aspects of mission mandates should be reflected in their
training courses. The relevant principles of international
humanitarian law, and international law in general,
must become an integral part of national training for
peacekeepers in order to ensure they are respected.
This is necessary if we are to ensure that their efforts
against asymmetrical threats will not only be effective,
but remain consistent with the fundamental principles
of peacekeeping: consent of the parties, impartiality
and non-use of force except in self-defence and defence
of the mandate.

It is also critical to actively monitor and review the
progress of peacekeepers at the individual level, and
peacekeeping missions at the organizational level, in
order to ensure progress is being made in the fulfillment
of their mandate. In this regard, the Maldives welcomes
the introduction of new indicators to better evaluate the
performance of peacekeeping missions and to enhance
their effectiveness, as recommended in the report ofthe
Secretary-General.

It is important to ensure that if efforts on the
ground are to be delivered effectively, they be coherent
with the programmes and plans being run by various
agencies. There is also a lot of scope for Member
States, regional organizations and domestic agencies
to coordinate towards better information-sharing and
knowledge-sharing. Such collaboration would go far in
making our efforts effective as well.

It is not merely the Maldives' hope, but our firm
conviction that each and every State Member of the
United Nations should do its utmost to ensure the
fulfillment of its aspirations to peace and security,
as laid out in the Charter of the United Nations, and
thus the success of its peacekeeping operations. This
conviction should only become stronger when faced
with emerging operational challenges. In doing so, we
must hold ourselves to the highest standards, mindful
of this common cause and shared endeavour, to which
we have all committed in the Charter. If we remain
fully cognizant of what we aim to achieve and what this
requires of us, we are convinced that we shall succeed.

