Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): We thank the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive and insightful
briefing. His statement rightly focused on the broader
Middle East. However, I will focus on the most pressing
issue at hand, the use of chemical weapons in Syria.

The Charter of the United Nations starts with the
words "We the peoples of the United Nations", and
while the Russian Federation is blocking the Council
from taking effective action on the crimes of Russia's
ally Syria, all peoples of every nation are outraged by
the continued unrestrained violence that the Syrian
regime has unleashed against its own people. As the
Secretary-General just said, the people of Syria have
lived through a litany of horrors. No responsible
Government can ignore the universal outrage that those
horrors have provoked.

Our collective incapacity in the Council to stop
the crimes in Syria should weigh heavily on the
conscience of all our members, but on the conscience
of one permanent member in particular. It was our
collective conscience that created the Charter of the
United Nations. It was our collective conscience that
created the Chemical Weapons Convention. The use of
chemical weapons is unlawful in and of itself. It is a
violation of the Charter of the United Nations. It is a
serious violation of international law and may constitute
a war crime and a crime against humanity.

We strongly believe that the international
community must fully uphold the standard that the
use of chemical weapons is never permissible. As the
Secretary-Generaljust said, the norm against the use of
chemical weapons must be upheld. The non-proliferation
regime must be upheld. Accountability for the use of
chemical weapons in Syria is therefore neither optional
nor negotiable. The images of last weekend's attack
in Douma are appalling. Atrocities have once again
been inflicted on Syria's civilian population. Once
again, dozens of innocent civilians have been killed
and hundreds injured. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
believes that it is highly likely that the Syrian regime is
responsible for the attack. It has a proven history of such
attacks, having used chemicals as a weapon against its
own people in 2014, 2015 and 2017. It is unacceptable
that four years after Syria joined the Chemical Weapons
Convention, its declarations can still not be verified as
accurate or complete.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands is a long-time
supporter of fighting impunity when it comes to
chemical weapons. Regrettably, all attempts to achieve
accountability in the Council have failed. Referral to the
International Criminal Court was vetoed. The renewal
of the mandate of the Joint Investigative Mechanism
(JIM) was also vetoed. This week, accountability was
again vetoed. With its vetoes, the Russian Federation has
assumed much responsibility for the crimes committed
by the Syrian regime. The draft resolution for a new
accountability mechanism that was vetoed this week
remains the bare minimum of what is acceptable to
the Kingdom of the Netherlands. We will not settle for
anything less than an independent, impartial attribution
mechanism that can ensure that the culprits of that
vicious attack will be identified and held accountable.

No veto can wipe from our memory the clear
findings presented by the JIM. on the use of chemical
weapons by the Al-Assad regime and Da'esh. No
veto can stop our compassion for the victims of the
chemical-weapon attack last weekend. No veto can end
our determination to achieve justice for the victims and
for the people of Syria as a whole.

In conclusion, the Kingdom of the Netherlands
remains committed to fighting impunity. We reiterate
our strong support for an international, impartial and
independent mechanism, the Commission of Inquiry,
the International Partnership against Impunity for the
Use of Chemical Weapons and a referral of the situation
in Syria to the International Criminal Court in The
Hague, as the most appropriate path to accountability
andjustice. At the heart of our policy on Syria is a deep
desire for peace and justice for its people. Impunity
cannot and will not prevail.

Let me end with warm words of appreciation to the
Secretary-General and his tireless efforts for justice
and the international legal order.

