Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): I thank the delegation
of Guatemala for scheduling today's very important
open debate on the situation in the Middle East. Allow
me to express our appreciation to the Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs Jeffrey Feltman for his
comprehensive briefing this morning.

The delegation of Bangladesh aligns itself with the
statements made by the representatives of the Islamic
Republic of Iran and Kazakhstan, who spoke on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement and the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation, respectively. In addition, I wish to
briefly make certain points that Bangladesh believes to
be of importance.

The people of Palestine are being denied their
fundamental rights to self-determination and to live
freely in their own land, while displaced Palestinians
have been denied their rights to return home and live
with dignity and in safety. Achieving a lasting solution
in the Middle East requires Israel's complete and
unconditional withdrawal from the occupied Palestinian
territories, including East Jerusalem.

The occupying Power's extensive destruction
of property, homes and economic institutions, its
construction of new walls, confiscation of land and
farms, its settlement activity and indiscriminate air
strikes and incursions in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including in and around East Jerusalem, are
all contrary to international law. They have seriously
hampered the already critical dire socioeconomic
situation faced by the Palestinian people. In that regard,
we support the invitation from the Palestinian Observer
Mission to the Security Council to visit the occupied
Palestinian territories.

The humanitarian situation in Gaza remains
an issue of concern. One could duly concur with
Palestinian resentment that the Paris Protocol has been
selectively implemented in favour of Israel insofar as
provisions that would allow the Palestinian Authority
to enter into free trade agreements with other States
or which mandated access to Israeli markets have not
come about. We urge Israel to lift its harsh restrictions
in order to ease the plight of civilians and bring an end
to the blockade of Gaza. Walls and blockades do not
work in the long run; indeed, even the Berlin Wall had
to come down.

The situation of Palestinian prisoners in Israeli
detention centres has deeply offended those who truly
believe in human rights and the fairness of justice.
Those detained must be charged and face trial with
judicial guarantees, or be released without delay. We
know that justice delayed is justice denied.

During the recent general debate of the General
Assembly on 27 September 2012, Palestinian
President Mahmoud Abbas indicated that Palestine
intended to seek upgraded status at the United
Nations - from Permanent Observer to "non-member
observer State - through a draft resolution to be
submitted for adoption by the General Assembly
(A/67/PV.12). Since the Palestinian application to
become a State Member of the United Nations has
remained unresolved in the Security Council since
September 2011, we believe that Palestine's current
demand warrants due consideration from the world
body.

However, we are saddened to see that there is very
little momentum this year for breaking the impasse. in
contrast to September 2011 when the Quartet issued a
new timeline for the Middle East peace process that
called for each side to submit a comprehensive proposal
on borders and security within three months, to be
followed by direct negotiations leading to a solution by
the end of 2012 (see SG/2178). Although the Palestinian
Authority submitted its proposals soon thereafter, the
Israeli Government did not meet the initial three-month
deadline, and no direct negotiations have taken place. I
would add that the European Union should now assume
greater responsibility because it has received this year's
Nobel Peace Prize. Let it prove its worth by taking a
lead role in realizing peace and security in the Middle
East.

We believe that the best guides for achieving
a two-State solution are the relevant General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions, namely,
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 425 (1978), the
principle of land for peace, the Madrid Conference
terms of reference, the road map and the Arab Peace
Initiative.

The principled support of the right of the Palestinian
people to self-determination from all corners of the
globe, both bilaterally and multilaterally, has been
an essential pillar of Palestinian resilience over the
decades. In that regard, let me reiterate Bangladesh's
long-standing position that the continued illegal
occupation of Palestine over the past six decades is the
root cause of violence, unrest and destabilization in
the region. Let me also reiterate our full support for a
lasting peace for all inhabitants of the region - both
Arabs and Israelis - and our strong commitment to
the realization of an independent, sovereign and Viable
State of Palestine with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital,
living side by side and in peace with all its neighbours.

