Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria): First of all, I would like
to thank the Argentine presidency for the programme
of work they have scheduled for this month and for
organizing today's special meeting on the situation in
the Middle East. I thank the Secretary-General as well.

There is no need to recall the consequences and the
profound impact of 50 continuous days of the Israeli
pounding of Gaza. The killing of 500 children is the
most appalling fact, but we must also mention the
100,000 displaced, with the tragic irony of Palestinian
sons ofrefugees being displaced once again within their
own land. I would like to quote the Secretary-General's
statement, made just 10 days ago in the Gaza Strip: "1
am here with a very heavy heart. The destruction which
I have seen coming here is beyond description."

No further words are needed. Let us leave it to
the independent commission of inquiry established by
the Human Rights Council pursuant to its resolution
adopted on 23 July for the investigation of all violations
of international humanitarian and human rights law.
Let us just say that accountability and justice are
essential for the international system. We have also
witnessed the formidable international response for the
reconstruction of Gaza. The successful convening and
conclusion of the International Conference convened
in Cairo and hosted by Egypt and Norway resulted in
pledges of $5.4 billion, and it is a good omen that the
Palestinian Government of national consensus will
carry out the reconstruction plan in coordination with
the United Nations. Algeria will obviously continue to
provide its full support for the Palestinian cause in that
regard. During the Cairo conference, my Government
pledged $25 million in financial aid, which is in
addition to humanitarian aid, food and medical supplies
totalling more than $22 million.

It is obvious that the international community,
States, international organizations and civil society have
been responsive to the situation. There is a strong and
urgent need that must be fulfilled. But it is legitimate
to ask ourselves: are we going to reconstruct and simply
write off the damages, destruction and death, with
no hint of a peace process in sight? Are we not just
paving the way for the next Gaza destruction? Are we
going to endlessly continue to act as the - obviously
necessary - fireman, while never addressing or facing
the arsonists?

The current status quo is destructive. While we still
evoke the need for a resumption ofthe peace talks, Israel
has chosen not only to renege on its past commitments
but also to blatantly continue its illegal settlement
policy and practices. The most recent decision on the
construction of more than 2,600 new units in occupied
East Jerusalem is not only a blatant violation of all
norms of international law but also another stumbling
block on the already uncertain road to peace. We repeat
and underline that such a situation needs the effective
and genuine response of the international community,
in particular the Security Council. That is an obligation
that cannot be evaded or ignored.

Concerning another important issue with regard to
the extremely volatile situation throughout the region,
let me mention that, with respect to Syria, the window
of opportunity is narrowing daily. It would be extremely
short-sighted to think that anyone would ever benefit
from the current situation. Destroying houses and souls
goes with the building of incessant hatred, terrorism
and war.

Let me just recall simple facts. Palestine is illegally
occupied. There must be an end to the occupation
for the sake of justice and peace for the people of the
entire region. There are international principles for
the establishment of a just settlement of the issue.
Otherwise, it will continue for another generation. The
prospective settlement is being completely destroyed
by Israeli policies and practices, which are making it
progressively impossible to achieve peace. That is why
my country fully supports the initiative of President
Abbas to set a time frame for the end of the occupation.
That is also why my country fully supports the urgent
need to protect the Palestinian population in accordance
with international humanitarian law.

