Mr. Mercado (Philippines): We welcome Mr.
Alvaro de Soto, Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process, and thank him for his first briefing
to the Council on the latest developments in the region,
particularly the recent outbreak of violence that not
only claimed the lives of several people and wounded
several dozens more, but also left a tenuous ceasefire
in tatters.

It has been nine days since a Palestinian militant
slipped into the city of Netanya, blew himself up,
together with five Israelis, and scarred 30 others for the
rest of their lives. That tragedy, which we all wish had
not happened, plunged the region into another bloody
episode in a war that seems to have no end. The
Philippines condemns the suicide bombing in Netanya
and the resulting cycle of violence and counter-
violence, from the assassination by Israel of suspected
militants to the torrent of death and destruction
unleashed by Palestinian extremists, which shattered
the fragile truce that the international community has
been trying to keep in place since February.

The Philippines recognizes Israel's right to
legitimate self-defence as a result of the latest suicide
bomb set off inside its territory, but we strongly feel
that that should not be seen as a licence for Israel to
take extrajudicial actions. We join others in deploring
this Israeli reaction. In the same way, we abhor the
retaliatory action of militants who were responsible not
only for launching rockets and mortars against Israeli
targets, but also for setting off what has been described
as the worst factional fighting in northern Gaza in
years.

The ceasefire needs to be put back in place, and it
must hold if we want the peace process to move
forward. We call on both parties to abide by the
agreements reached at Sharm el-Sheikh. The
Philippines also calls on Israel and Palestinian
militants to salvage the truce by exercising restraint
and by refraining from taking further action that could
jeopardize the efforts of the Palestinian Authority to
enforce the rule of law and maintain peace and stability
in the area.

We commend President Mahmoud Abbas for
asserting his authority by ordering Palestinian security
forces to prevent militants from launching further
rocket and mortar attacks against Israel. Having been
in office for a little more than six months, President
Abbas should be encouraged and given the time and
the support he needs to consolidate his authority and to
pursue reforms in his Government. We continue to
place our trust and confidence in President Abbas as a
key partner in the international community's efforts to
find a meaningful and comprehensive solution to the
conflict.

We also join others in welcoming the efforts of
the Quartet's special envoy, James Wolfensohn, to
address the dire economic and humanitarian situation
in the occupied territories. In addition, we commend
Egypt for facilitating the agreement between Fatah and
Hamas that ended several days of street fighting
between Palestinian security forces and rival factions.
Such fighting has complicated the efforts to bring
peace to the region.

While we welcome Israel's planned
disengagement from Gaza and parts of the West Bank,
that disengagement must be full and complete if it is to
contribute positively to our search for a permanent
solution to the Palestinian question. At the same time,
we call on Israel to help bring the peace process
forward by halting its settlement expansion activities,
particularly in Maaleh Adumim, in compliance with its
commitments under the road map.

We also join others in urging Israel to stop the
construction of its separation wall, as called for by the
international community in General Assembly
resolution ES-10/15 of 20 July 2004 and the 9 July
2004 advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice.

