Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I apologize to you, Mr. President, and to the
members of the Security Council for taking the floor a
second time in order to exercise my country's right to
respond to the statement just made to this meeting by
the terrorist State of Israel in this international forum.

The disregard shown by Israel for this
international Organization and for international law
had its genesis at the very moment when this
Organization gave birth to Israel from historic
Palestine with its resolution on partition. The partition
resolution conditioned the creation of the State of
Israel on the establishment of a Palestinian State side
by side with the new State of Israel in the land of
Palestine. Since the adoption of that resolution more
than sixty years ago, the birth of the Palestinian State
has not taken place.
Organized Israeli terrorism, State terrorism, by
the Ergun and Stern Gang at the time, led by former
Israeli Prime Ministers, undermined the noble

objective that this international Organization had
provided for. By its organized terrorism, Israel has
killed hundreds of thousands Palestinians and Arabs.
Israel has occupied the land of others by force, in
Syria, Lebanon, Jordan and Egypt. It has assassinated
representatives of international legitimacy as well as of
United Nations forces in the region. Israel committed
the first act of piracy against a civil aircraft in the
world in 1954. Israel introduced nuclear devices into
the region in the 1960s, thus seriously exposing the
region and its peoples to danger.

The representative of Israel boasts of his
disregard for the presidency of the Security Council.
What can one say? One cannot but say that the words
of the Israeli representative increase his isolation both
in the Security Council and in the international
community. Such words show how unprofessional and
immoral his reaction is to the very rules that govern the
work of the Security Council.

The representative of Israel does not have the right
to boast of Israel's State terrorism against the Palestinian,
Lebanese and Syrian peoples - and, indeed, the peoples
of Jordan and Egypt. Israeli State terrorism has reached
Tunisia and Iraq as well. Israel boasts of manufacturing
missiles with a 4,500-kilometre range and capable of
carrying nuclear warheads. What is the need for such
missiles? Whom do they target?

Israeli State terrorism stands naked before the
eyes of the international community. The words of the
Israeli representative truly reflect his desire to turn the
Council into a despicable theatre. However, we will not
allow that endeavour to succeed. We have come here in
an effort to achieve a just, lasting and comprehensive
peace. No one should attempt to derail that
undertaking.

The resolutions of the Security Council and the
resolutions of international legitimacy are not mere
polemics. This is a responsible political dialogue,
whose primary objective is the maintenance of
international peace and security. The goal is to avert a
confrontation in our region, free the occupied
territories and help the Palestinian people, who are
languishing under the ugliest of crimes against
humanity.

