Mr. Burian (Slovakia): I would like to join the
previous speakers in thanking Under-Secretary-General
Pascoe for his briefing. I also take this opportunity to
extend our thanks to Mr. Ashraf Qazi for the
outstanding work he has done in and for Iraq in his
previous capacity of Special Representative for Iraq, as
well as to all involved staff of the United Nations and
the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI). I also thank United States Ambassador
Khalilzad for his report on behalf of the countries
making up the Multinational Force, among them my
own country, Slovakia.

As we have heard in the briefing, Iraq continues
to face many challenges, with the security situation on
the ground remaining highly complex. We regret and
deplore the continuing high level of violence in Iraq
and its devastating effects on almost every aspect of
life. It remains a source of our constant concern. We
strongly condemn all those acts of violence and call for
additional efforts and measures to improve the security
situation, the protection of civilians and the overall
humanitarian conditions, which are truly alarming, as
we heard in the briefing by Mr. Pascoe.

Nevertheless, encouraging developments and
initiatives have been taking place at national, regional
and international levels recently. We believe that those
concerted efforts are vital in assisting Iraq to bring
about stability, security and prosperity in the country.

In this respect, the unanimous adoption of
Security Council resolution 1770 (2007) in August,
renewing and extending the mandate of UNAMI, is a
significant and welcome step. Slovakia supports a
strong United Nations presence and expanded mandate
in Iraq to help that country in its transition towards
stability, democracy, the rule of law and economic
prosperity. We are convinced that increased United
Nations assistance, strengthened presence and
expanded role will make possible further advances in
genuine political dialogue, national reconciliation,
economic reform, respect for human rights and the rule
of law in the country. We hope the Iraqi leadership will
use this assistance to achieve a sustainable solution to
the crisis in Iraq.

I would like to use this opportunity to reaffirm
my country's support for a secure, stable, democratic
and prosperous Iraq and to reiterate our commitments
to this goal. In this regard, Slovakia also reaffirms its
unambiguous support for an active United Nations
engagement and role in implementing the International
Compact with Iraq. We are encouraged by the
conclusions of the mid-year progress report, which
highlighted significant achievements in many sectors
despite the difficult security situation.

We also welcome the establishment of the
Compact secretariat as an agency of the Government of
Iraq, which will facilitate the practical implementation
of Compact plans and activities on the ground. As a
member of the European Union (EU), Slovakia
expresses its readiness to participate actively and
constructively in common EU efforts to promote and
implement Compact priorities.

We fully share the View that the regional actors,
mainly Iraq's immediate neighbours, could and should

play a more active role in promoting Iraq's peace and
stability. That would benefit not only Iraq, but also its
neighbours in turn, as well as the wider region. We
agree with Mr. Pascoe that constructive regional
engagement and contributions to the success of Iraq's
stabilization remain instrumental and are in the interest
of all Iraq's neighbours. We are therefore looking
forward to the next expanded meeting of Iraq's
neighbours, to be held in Istanbul early next month. We
hope that meeting will further enhance a process of
regional confidence-building through concrete dialogue
and practical cooperation.

At the same time, we continue to believe that the
active engagement and full responsibility of the
Government of Iraq in the process of transition and
stabilization remain decisive. To put it simply, the Iraqi
ownership of this process is truly fundamental. Without
it, it will be difficult to succeed in tackling the many
challenges faced by this country and its people.

In this regard, we strongly encourage the
Government of Iraq, together with all relevant parties
and leaders in the country, to make substantial progress
on the promotion of political compromise and genuine
national reconciliation. It is imperative to act
responsibly and work across ethnic, sectarian and
political divides.

In conclusion, I would like to underline that it is
important that all possible efforts be undertaken to
address the increasing humanitarian suffering of a large
number of Iraqi refugees and internally displaced
persons. Appropriate measures are also needed to
alleviate the heavy burden carried by neighbouring
countries, in particular Jordan and Syria, in this
connection. The role and activities of such bodies as
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, the International Committee of the Red
Cross and the International Organization for Migration
remain important and highly required. However, here
again - and especially in this particular case - we
see how imperative it is to promote successful national
dialogue in the reconciliation among all constituencies
and communities in Iraq. Only such an approach can
effectively prevent further outflow of people and
enable Iraqi refugees and displaced persons to return to
their homes.

Finally, we also would like to join others in
wishing the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General all the success in his new mission.
