Mr. Maes (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I too
would like to thank Presidents Meron and Joensen and
Prosecutors Brammertz and Jallow for their briefings
and reports on the activities of the International
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR). I
also thank them for the information they have given us
in the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals. We commend the excellent work of both
Tribunals in developing international law, bringing
justice to the victims, apprehending fugitives and
prosecuting the individuals guilty of genocide and
serious violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law.

The International Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia is currently dealing with very complex
cases. We welcome the steps it has taken to meet the
deadlines established by the completion strategy while
respecting the fundamental principles of equity and due
process. We are pleased that Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Croatia and Serbia have continued to cooperate with
the ICTY. Such cooperation on the part of States is
essential if the Court is to be able to fulfil its mandate.

We note, however, that according to the Prosecutor's
report (S/2014/351, annex II), the capacity of national
institutions to prosecute war crimes effectively
remains a source of concern, particularly in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We share the Prosecutor's concern about
the slow progress with category II cases transferred to
the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities, as well as with
other war crime cases, particularly those involving
sexual violence. In that regard, we welcome measures
taken by the Office of the Prosecutor to improve
capacity-building through a joint training project with
the European Union for national prosecutors and young
professionals from the former Yugoslavia.

As regards Bosnia and Herzegovina, we commend
the efforts of the European Union to strengthen available
resources at the State and local levels to prosecute war
crimes. We also welcome the training efforts by the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Last year, we marked the twentieth anniversary
of the establishment of the ICTY. This year, we will
mark the twentieth anniversary of the conception of
the ICTR. Established on 8 November 1994 upon the
request of Rwanda, the ICTR has played a critical role
in prosecuting perpetrators of genocide. The ICTR is
about to conclude its work, and the transition towards
the International Residual Mechanism is under way. By
the end of 2012, the first trials were concluded.

The Tribunal is now continuing with the appeal
proceedings, which will be concluded, we hope, in 2015
with the delivery of a judgement in the Butare case.
Three high-level fugitives are still being sought, and
their arrest must remain a priority. They will be judged
by the Residual Mechanism when they are apprehended.
Cooperation among all States and the Tribunal and the
Mechanism is an obligation under Security Council
resolutions, and it is important that the Mechanism
have the necessary support to successfully conduct its
work.

Regarding assistance to the Tribunal, the pending
issue of the resettlement of nine acquitted individuals
and two others who were freed after serving their
sentence and still live in Arusha, also has our full
attention.

In establishing the International Criminal Tribunals
for the Former Yugoslavia and for Rwanda, the Security
Council responded to the universal appeal that those
responsible for the most serious crimes against the
international community be brought to account for their
actions. The International Criminal Court, a permanent
court with international jurisdiction, has now assumed
a key role, which ensures that justice will be served.

At a time when the work of both Tribunals is
coming to a close, it is more important than ever for
the Security Council to shoulder its responsibilities in
putting an end to impunity and providing unwavering
support to the International Criminal Court (ICC).
The fact that the Security Council can refer situations
to the ICC is a key tool in establishing responsibility
and accountability. At a time when current events,
in particular in Syria, demonstrate that widespread
atrocities remain a challenge for the international
community, the legacy of the ICTY and the ICTR
should serve to warn perpetrators across the world that
they will have to bear the consequences of the choices
they have made, the measures they have taken, and the
orders they have given.

I conclude by welcoming the fact that the two
Tribunals are making available the lessons learned from
their ground-breaking work so as to strengthen national
capacities across the world and create an international
justice system that is more effective.

