Mr. Skracie (Croatia): As this is the first time
that my delegation is taking the floor this month, allow
me to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency for the month of October.
We also extend our appreciation to Ambassador
Kafando and his delegation for their excellent work in
the previous month. We would also like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for his detailed
report, as well as Ambassador Maria Ribeiro Viotti of
Brazil, Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission's
Guinea-Bissau configuration, for her detailed briefing.

Croatia is encouraged by the hard work Guinea-
Bissau and its international partners have carried out
thus far in their efforts to reconstruct the country and
to re-establish a lasting peace, and we hope that this
process will continue to move in the right direction. It
is for that reason that we are concerned about the
deepening political crisis and the further development
of military tensions that have been growing in the past
few months in Guinea-Bissau, especially in view of the
quickly approaching elections.

In that context, Croatia welcomes the
stabilization of the situation following the appointment
of the new caretaker Government. We welcome the
determination expressed by the new Government to
continue the necessary reforms, especially in the areas
of security, the public sector and drug trafficking.

Croatia welcomes the steady preparations for the
elections, and we commend the Government on
successful voter registration, which has recorded 94.6
per cent participation. It is particularly important that
the results of the registration are accepted by all main
electoral institutions. Moreover, it is encouraging to
see a narrowing of the electoral financial gap thanks to
generous donations and the Government's efforts.

Assurances from the highest positions, including
the clearly expressed intention of the new Government
that legislative elections will be held as scheduled on
16 November 2008, are also of the highest importance.
The elections should take place in a stable and secure
environment, with the open and unhindered
participation of professional and credible media and
other forms of international verification. Croatia
welcomes the recent visit of a European electoral
observer mission to Guinea-Bissau and its
recommendation to deploy an estimated 50 European
Union electoral observers, as well as the recent visit to
the country by the African Union assessment mission.

Croatia especially commends the role of the United
Nations system in assisting the Government of Guinea-
Bissau with the upcoming elections and the coordinating
role of the United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office
in Guinea-Bissau regarding international observers who
will not operate under a European Union umbrella.

We would like to commend the considerable
efforts made in cooperation between the Government
and the international community in promoting security
sector reform and concrete actions in that regard. One
such action, which we welcome, is the deployment of a
team of 15 European Union civilian and military
personnel under the European Security and Defence
Policy programme, with the aim of promoting a better
understanding of the four-pillar programme on justice,
security, defence and veterans affairs.

Croatia is extremely concerned by reports of drug
trafficking and organized crime spreading throughout
Guinea-Bissau. It is obvious that the increasing
incidence of drug trafficking threatens peace and
security in Guinea-Bissau and in the subregion. We
strongly support decisive action against drug
traffickers, and in that regard, as a step in the right
direction, we welcome the concrete efforts of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to
strengthen the judicial police involved in counter-
narcotics activities. We also welcome the convening by
the Economic Community of West African States of a
regional conference on combating drug trafficking and
the resulting regional plan of action to effectively deal
with the menace posed by drug trafficking to the
countries of West Africa.

In particular, Croatia welcomes the Secretary-
General's recommendation to establish a panel of
experts in order to investigate the identity and
activities of those involved in drug trafficking and
organized crime. That recommendation deserves, in our
opinion, further consideration. Croatia welcomes the
adoption of the Strategic Framework for Peacebuilding
in Guinea-Bissau by the Peacebuilding Commission's
country-specific configuration on 1 October 2008, and
the ongoing implementation of the four quick-impact
projects for electoral support, youth employment, the
rehabilitation of prisons and military barracks.

On a final note, my delegation would like to
thank the delegation of Burkina F aso for preparing the
draft presidential statement on the situation in Guinea-
Bissau, on which it has our full support.

