Mr. Mitri: The Security Council has received the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/516), which
provides information on the work of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) over the past six
months and offers a sober reading of the political and
security developments in Libya during that period. A
combination of internal and regional dynamics continues
to place a huge strain on the political processes taking
place in the country, which compounds further the
difficult tasks facing the Libyan authorities - both the
Government and the General National Congress - as
they strive to ensure that the country's transition moves
peacefully forward.

During the past three months, we have seen more
pronounced political disagreements among the various
political forces. The main political blocs within the
General National Congress decided separately to
suspend their participation as organized political
parties in the work of national political institutions.
Although partially reversed, those decisions were in
large part a reaction to widespread popular discontent
with political parties and, at the same, reflected an
accentuated polarization of public life.

There is also a regional dimension to the significant
political changes in Libya. Recent developments,
particularly in Egypt and Tunisia, have had a palpable
effect on the political scene and greatly influenced the
behaviour of some political forces. Those events have
injected a sense of unease into the political system, as
different political actors reassessed their positions both
with regard to the major problems confronting Libya
and the region more generally.

The recent and severe disruption in the country's
oil exports, following protests at a number of
terminals, mostly in the east, has grave consequences
for Libya's economic stability. The disruption has
compelled Libya's National Oil Company to take the
unprecedented measure of declaring a force majeure,
indicating its inability to meet contractual export
obligations. Conflicts related to oil terminal protection
and federalist demands in eastern Libya are at the core
of the protests.

In a country where oil revenues account for
approximately 80 per cent of Libya's gross national
product and 97 per cent of exports, the Libyan
Government faces the dangerous prospect of not being
able to meet its financial obligations unless a resolution
to the crisis is reached immediately. We believe that the
resolution of that crisis, as well as of the many others
confronting Libya, through peaceful means is vital to
the country's national interests and its ability to make
meaningful progress in its transition. In that context,
we also urge all parties to desist from the manipulation
of Libya's resources for political ends.

With regard to the development of new legislation,
the adoption of a law on transitional justice remains
pending before the plenary of the General National
Congress. UNSMIL believes that the passage of such a
law is vital to helping Libya deal with many of its past
tragedies and crimes. It is equally essential in facilitating
the difficult process of national reconciliation.

The situation of many of the estimated 8,000
conflict-related detainees remains problematic. While
the Ministry of Justice has reported a reduction in
complaints, reports of deaths in custody, torture and
other forms of ill-treatment continue to be a source of
concern. However, UNSMIL has observed a marked
improvement in conditions and treatment of detainees
in centres that are effectively under the authority of the
Ministry of Justice and where there are experienced
and trained judicial police officers.

There have been new developments regarding the
trials of senior members of the Al-Qadhafi regime.
Further to the conviction and sentencing to death on
31 July ofAhmad Ibrahim Al-Qadhafi, former Minister
of Education and Information, the trials of some 250
defendants, including Saif al-Islam Al-Qadhafi, are
expected to commence soon.

In that regard, UNSMIL continues to underline
the need for a coherent approach to secure acceptable
standards in the prosecution of former regime officials
so as to avoid random charges and contribute to
establishing a historical record of the crimes committed
under the former regime. Ensuring fair trails for former
regime officials will test the Libyanjudicial institutions
in the coming months. The prevailing security
situation in the country and the continuing attacks on
judges, lawyers and courthouses continue to present a
formidable challenge to the authorities.

In spite of the numerous difficulties and
uncertainties, I am pleased to report that the Libyan
constitution-making process has made some progress,
with the adoption by the General National Congress
of a law for the election of the Constitution Drafting
Assembly. UNSMIL had advocated for special measures
for better representation of women in the Constitution
Drafting Assembly. However, the adopted electoral law
provides for limited representation for women, granting
them six reserved seats in the 60-member Assembly,
which is lower than the 16 per cent allotted to them
in the July 2012 elections to the General National
Congress.

For their part, cultural and ethnic minorities were
granted six reserved seats. Some of their influential
organizations and personalities are quite assertive
in demanding that constitutional issues pertaining to
their cultural and linguistic rights be decided upon
by consensus rather than by a two-thirds majority
of the 60-member Assembly, as stipulated in the
Constitutional Declaration. The constitution-drafting
process presents an opportunity for the Libyan people
to forge a new social contract that will govern the
new Libya, therefore making it imperative that it be
transparent, consultative and inclusive.

The new Board of Commisionsers for the
permanent High National Election Commission was
recently selected. With the full support of the United
Nations electoral team in the various areas of its work,
the Commission is actively engaged in planning and
preparing the elections to the Constitution Drafting
Assembly.

The security problems in Libya are still, arguably,
the predominant concern for the Libyan people. Since
my last briefing to the Council (see S/PV.6981), there
have been armed clashes in Tripoli between rival
revolutionary brigades. Due to the limited State capacity
to secure the capital, the newly elected President of the
General National Congress, Mr. Nouri Abu-Sahmain,
assigned the task of protecting the city to the Libyan
Revolutionaries Operations Room, a coalition of
revolutionary brigades.

Tensions among various political, tribal and armed
groups have also escalated into confrontations in
various parts of the country, resulting in several deaths.
Assassinations of security figures, mostly in the east,
and more recently of political activists and journalists,
improvised explosive devices, attacks against members
of the diplomatic community, threats against the United
Nations and general criminality continue in the face
of weak State security institutions. Border security is
increasingly a critical issue that the authorities have yet
to address effectively.

Progress in integrating revolutionary fighters into
the police and the Libyan army remains very limited,
as is their reintegration into civilian life. In an attempt
to encourage revolutionaries to enlist in the army and
to improve the salary scale for current uniformed
personnel, the Government recently announced an
increase in salaries for the military, effective from
January 2014. The Government has also announced that
it is moving forward with the training ofbetween 12,000
and 15,000 soldiers outside of Libya. Restructuring the
army and addressing the inflated ranks of the officer
corps are urgent priorities. The Libyan police continue
to integrate individuals from the armed brigades. Some
are already enlisted and many more are in the vetting
and enrolment process.

The Government's preoccupation with the
deteriorating security situation and the increasing
divisions among political groups and revolutionary
brigades have all inhibited the development of a solid,
coordinated and effective national security system.

When I last briefed the Council in June, I alluded to
the enormous difficulties confronted in the aftermath
of four decades of despotic rule. Next month marks the
two-year anniversary since the fall of the authoritarian
Al-Qadhafi regime. It is more evident today that
preconceived ideas about political transition are likely
to be a recipe for disappointment, ifnot failure. Free and
fair elections may have augured a democratic process,
but they raised greater expectations than the political
institutions and forces have been capable of meeting.

Today, there is a sense of scepticism, and perhaps
of rejection, with which the Libyan people view the
political process. But this should not be mistaken for
a loss of faith in national unity, democracy and the
rule of law. Their commitment to the principles for
which they fought their revolution remains deep. The
Libyan experience has demonstrated the urgent need
for an inclusive dialogue and consensus-building on
national priorities during the transition period, as well
as regarding guiding principles, norms of governance
and basic rules of political action.

In response to the increasing demand across the
political spectrum for a national dialogue that can
address the country's faltering transition, the Libyan
authorities agreed on preparing and convening this
dialogue. A national dialogue would provide a platform
for engaging political, revolutionary, traditional and
other actors in discussing urgent national issues
and seeking consensus on strategies, as well as
basic principles, that ought to govern political life
in the transitional period until the adoption of a new
constitution and the holding of new elections.

In my meetings with the leadership of the General
National Congress and the Government, I noted a shared
belief that a national dialogue process would allow for
the Libyan national interest to prevail over factional,
regional and short-term interests. In the light of the
growing disillusionment with the political process,
such a dialogue would give voice to many Libyans and
open a space that does not exclude any of those who
may have contributions to make to public life and who
are otherwise isolated, separated or entrenched in their
partisan attitudes. It would also promote a national
capacity to address urgent priorities and ensure public
support for State-building efforts, particularly in the
security and justice sectors.

There has been an increasing number of calls for
the United Nations to play an active role in initiating
and facilitating national dialogue. We will not shy away
from shouldering our responsibility but will continue
to insist that the process should be Libyan-convened
and Libyan-led. I have assured the Libyan authorities
time and again, as well as many political leaders and
opinion-makers, of our readiness and commitment
to giving advice and technical support to dialogue
endeavours, whatever form they may take. It is our
hope that those efforts will come to fruition in the near
future.
