Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to welcome Spain's initiative in convening
an open debate on the working methods of the Security
Council. I also thank you, Mr. President, for the concept
note (S/2015/793, annex) prepared for this meeting.

Peru associates itself with the statement made by
the Permanent Representative of Switzerland on behalf
of the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
(ACT) group, particularly with regard to the importance
of General Assembly resolution 69/321 as it pertains to
the procedure for selecting the next Secretary-General.
We hope that it will be effectively implemented soon.

In signing the Charter of the United Nations all
States Members grant to the Security Council the
mandate to ensure international peace and security and
also undertake to comply with its resolutions. That gives
us the necessary legitimacy to express our views with
regard to the working methods of this organ. In that
context, my delegation would like to reiterate the urgent
need to continue to make progress towards reforming
the working methods of the Council with the aim of
increasing its legitimacy, its necessary transparency in
multilateral relations, as well as its efficiency and the
effectiveness of its work. In that regard, my delegation
would like to share three ideas that have been mentioned
by some of the speakers who preceded me, which shows
a meeting of minds on so many of these things.

First, in order to find transparency, this organ
needs to hold more public meetings, and they need to
be substantive meetings and held at the appropriate
time. My delegation also favours the scheduling open
debates, given that they provide non-members of the
Council an opportunity to express their opinions.

Secondly, with regard to the democratization of the
Security Council, my country has always expressed a
position of principle whose ultimate aim is that that the
right to the veto should be eliminated. We are aware of
the difficulties of doing that, which is why we support
all efforts aimed at restricting the use of the veto.
We should point out that, without genuine reform of
the working methods as they pertain to the veto, the
important concept of the responsibility to protect is
at serious risk of being diluted. In that context, Peru
supports the political declaration put forward by France
and Mexico aimed at preventing the use of the veto
in cases of genocide, crimes against humanity and
flagrant violations of human rights law or international
humanitarian law. We call upon the other permanent
members of the Council to support that initiative. Also
in the framework of the ACT group, we have been
working towards the adoption of a code of conduct
according to which Member States would commit to not
vote against a draft resolution of the Security Council
aimed at preventing cases of genocide or crimes against
humanity.

Thirdly, in order to promote greater interaction
and participation, Peru considers it fundamental
to consolidate the practice of Security Council
consultations with countries that contribute troops to
peacekeeping operations. The increasing complexity
of the mandates of peacekeeping operations as well
as the growing challenges that they face requires ever
greater coordination and an exchange of information.
The opinions oftroop-contributing countries need to be
taken into account when mandates are being renewed
or designed, as they will have to implement them on
the ground.

Finally, as others have pointed out, I should like
to stress the importance of moving from a conflict-
management approach to a prevention approach. Only
an early warning system can prevent conflicts and fully
meet the primary objective of our Organization, which
is to preserve future generations from the scourge of
war.

