Mr. Badji (spoke in French): On behalf of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People, I congratulate you, Mr. President,
on the exemplary and effective manner in which you
are steering the work of the Council during this first
month of the year. I also thank Mr. Oscar Fernandez-
Taranco, Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, for his comprehensive and objective briefing
on the situation in the Middle East, and on Palestine in
particular.

Last week, at the first meeting of the Committee
in 2010, Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon drew the
Committee's attention to the current state of peace
negotiations between Israelis and Palestinians. In
particular, he emphasized that "if we do not move
forward on the political process soon, we risk sliding
backwards". The Committee fully shares that concern.
We very much fear that the prospects for a resumption
of negotiations are slipping away. Israel is determined
to establish a state of affairs on the ground that appears
to be irreversible, even on the very land where
Palestinians are to establish their future State.

Today, it would seem that the Israeli Government's
announcement on 25 November concerning what Prime
Minister Netanyahu referred to as a policy of restraint
for a period of 10 months was not made in good faith.
Construction has continued apace in spite of that
announcement. In addition, the Israeli Government
continues to give financial support to established
settlements. That temporary moratorium on the
establishment of settlements moratorium explicitly
excluded East Jerusalem, where settlement infrastructure
is being expanded and consolidated while Palestinian
residents are dispossessed, discriminated against and
evicted.

I take this opportunity to remind Israel that the
international community as a whole does not recognize
its annexation of East Jerusalem. Resolution 252
(1968), which the Security Council adopted 42 years
ago, clearly states that
10-22138
"all legislative and administrative measures and
actions taken by Israel, including expropriation of
land and properties thereon, which tend to change
the legal status of Jerusalem are invalid and cannot
change that status". (resolution 252 (1968), para. 2)

The Committee welcomes the fact that major
international stakeholders have recently reaffirmed that
position of principle of the Council.

Unfortunately, one year after the end of Israel's
Operation Cast Lead - whose violence and brutality
are still fresh in our minds - Palestinians in Gaza
continue to suffer the disastrous consequences of a war
that was imposed on them by Israel. The nearly airtight
blockade of the Gaza Strip continues. Israel allows the
occasional entry of certain essential goods to pass
crossings that it established and controls. The funds
generously pledged by the international community at
Sharm el-Sheikh for the reconstruction of Gaza have
not yet reached the Palestinians for whom they were
intended. The initiative of the Secretary-General to put
United Nations agencies on the ground in charge of the
most pressing reconstruction projects continues to be
ignored by the occupying Power.

Various United Nations bodies, with the General
Assembly in the lead, have raised the issue of
responsibility for certain acts committed during the war
in Gaza. First and foremost, the report of the United
Nations Fact-Finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict
(A/HRC/12/48), which was established by the Human
Rights Council and led by Justice Richard Goldstone,
presented a comprehensive and balanced account of the
events in Gaza. The Mission submitted ample and
unbiased evidence that both Israel, the occupying
Power, and Palestinian armed groups had committed
serious violations of international human rights and
humanitarian law during the fighting, including some
that should be prosecuted as war crimes.

The Committee supported the Mission's main
recommendation that Israel and the Palestinians
conduct impartial and credible investigations and
prosecute those found responsible, as called for by the
General Assembly in its resolution 64/10. We look
forward to receiving the Secretary-General's report on
the implementation of that resolution. The Committee
calls on the Security Council to remain seized of this
matter.
The Committee also encourages principled action
by the international community aimed at ensuring
respect for the norms of international humanitarian
law. In particular, the Committee calls on the high
contracting parties to the Fourth Geneva Convention to
fulfil their obligations under article 1 of the
Convention, which requires them to respect and ensure
respect for the Convention in all circumstances. In that
regard, we welcome the efforts of the Swiss
Government acting as depositary of the Conventions.

The main elements for resolving the problem that
lies at the core of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict - the
Israeli occupation of Palestinian territory - are
contained in Security Council resolutions 242 (1967),
338 (1973), 1397 (2002), 1515 (2003) and 1850 (2008).
The continuing lack of political will to implement
those resolutions has devastating consequences for the
Palestinians in the occupied territories, for the Israeli
people and for the region as a whole. The active
involvement of the Security Council in bringing about
a peaceful resolution of the conflict in accordance with
the norms of international law is crucial. On behalf of
the Committee, I urge the members of the Council to
live up to the responsibility entrusted to them by the
Charter of the United Nations.

