Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America):
I thank Executive Representative of the Secretary-
General Toyberg-Frandzen for his briefing on the
situation in Sierra Leone and for his work on bringing
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Mission
in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL) to a successful close and
in driving the smooth transfer of UNIPSIL's remaining
responsibilities to the United Nations country team. We
would also like to express our gratitude to Ambassador
Rishchynski, Chair of the Sierra Leone country-specific
configuration Peacebuilding Commission (PBC),
for his efforts to spearhead the PBC's work in Sierra
Leone. We also welcome Foreign Minister Kamara to
the Security Council today.

With the grisly images of the war that ravaged Sierra
Leone still seared in our memories, today's meeting is
all the more remarkable. While many in Sierra Leone
lost so much, we have witnessed how the victims of the
war never lost the strength to rebuild their country. We
are in the Council today to mark the official closure
of UNIPSIL because of its determined work and
the helping hand offered by the United Nations and
international community to Sierra Leone. This has not
been an easy journey, and we commend Sierra Leone
for the distance it has travelled.

Not only does the situation in Sierra Leone
offer other nations embroiled in conflict a concrete
example of how to rebuild from the most devastating
of circumstances, it also offers the international
community a promising example of the valuable role
the United Nations can play in helping a country work
through civil war and post-war crises. We remember
not long ago when 15,000 peacekeepers were deployed
to Sierra Leone to maintain a shaky peace. United
Nations peacekeepers, humanitarian and development
experts all deserve our praise for helping to foster the
peaceful conditions that Sierra Leone enjoys today.
Today, seeing Sierra Leone as a troop contributor, we
know we have witnessed a great turnaround.

Sierra Leone and the United Nations must be
commended for their collective and collaborative
successes. The Special Court for Sierra Leone, which the
United Nations established, has fostered reconciliation
by bringing the worst perpetrators of that terrible war to
justice, including Charles Taylor. Sierra Leone also did
the hard and slow work of rebuilding its Government
with UNIPSIL's help. We encourage Sierra Leone to
continue strengthening Government institutions.

We also encourage the Government to continue to
seek guidance and support from the United Nations
country team, focusing especially on much-needed
economic development. Unemployed, uneducated
youth leave a country vulnerable to unrest, as Sierra
Leone learned all too well. Jobs and economic growth
are key ingredients to keeping the hopes of the next
generation alive. Ranked at the bottom of the Human
Development Index just two years ago, Sierra Leone
has already climbed 10 places, and we have every
expectation that this trajectory will continue. The
international community must continue to support that
growth as well.

Sierra Leone is a model post-conflict country,
but we know that tensions remain and the underlying
causes of war have not been fully addressed. The
ongoing constitutional review process should be used
to reconcile those underlying tensions. We encourage
Sierra Leone to broach that effort cautiously and
inclusively in order to ensure that all Sierra Leoneans
have a voice in the process.

Despite the many successes of the Anti-Corruption
Commission and its transnational organized crime
unit, corruption in Sierra Leone remains a deeply
rooted problem that compromises citizens' access to
basic public services and institutions such as health,
education and the police. Unfortunately, the public
views the judiciary as one of the most corrupt sectors.
The rule of law and public trust in the fairness of
courts are essential to preserving peace. We strongly
encourage Sierra Leone to redouble its efforts to
improve the judicial sector to preserve the progress it
has made.

Sierra Leoneans will not face those challenges
alone. The international community remains invested
in peace and stability in Sierra Leone and will continue
to offer assistance. The United States, for example,
is launching a new $2.5 million, 18-month pilot
programme in the region that will address corruption
and transnational crime, most notably in Sierra Leone.

Finally, we support the recommendation made
by the Chair of the Sierra Leone configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission that Sierra Leone's PBC
configuration evolve to a lighter role over the coming
year, as suits the situation in-country. We also support
Ambassador Rishchynski's suggestion that we review
the PBC's role in 2015, with a view to further refining
and possibly drawing down the PBC in Sierra Leone.
That potential drawdown should be carefully planned
based on the situation on the ground, and considered
when the time is right and sustainable peace is firmly
in place.

