The President (Spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Somalia, in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mohamed
(Somalia) took a seat at the Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council reaffirms all its
previous statements and resolutions concerning
the situation in Somalia, in particular the
statement by its President of 15 March 2006
(S/PRST/2006/11).

"The Security Council reiterates its
commitment to a comprehensive and lasting
settlement of the situation in Somalia and its
respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity,
political independence and unity of Somalia,
consistent with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations.

"The Security Council reiterates its strong
support for the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Francois Fall. The
Security Council encourages Ambassador Fall
and other United Nations agencies and offices to
actively engage in the region to promote peace
and stability. It calls upon all Member States to
provide him their full support in this regard.

"The Security Council supports the
Transitional Federal Government (TFG) and
Transitional Federal Parliament (TFP) as the
internationally recognized authorities to restore
peace, stability and governance to Somalia. It
notes the importance for stability in Somalia of
broad-based and representative institutions and of
an inclusive political process, as envisaged in the
Transitional Federal Charter (TFC).

"The Security Council welcomes the
agreement reached in Khartoum on 22 June
between the TFG and the Islamic Courts, sent to
the presidency of the Security Council on 29 June
2006 (S/2006/442). The Security Council
commends the League of Arab States (LAS) for
facilitating the talks. The Security Council
condemns the recent fighting in Mogadishu and
requests all parties to adhere to the ceasefire
agreed on 22 June. In this regard, the Security
Council emphasizes the importance of dialogue
between the Transitional Federal Institutions
(TFIs) and the Islamic Courts.

"The Security Council therefore urges all
parties involved in this dialogue to engage
constructively at the next round of talks,
scheduled for 15 July, where it looks forward to
further progress in pursuit of a lasting political
process.

"The Security Council requests all parties
inside and outside of Somalia to refrain from
action that could provoke or perpetuate violence
and violations of human rights, endanger the
ceasefire and political process, or further damage
the humanitarian situation.

"The Security Council expresses its grave
concern at the deteriorating humanitarian
situation in Somalia, and demands that all Somali
leaders ensure complete and unhindered
humanitarian access, as well as providing
guarantees for the safety and security of the
humanitarian aid workers in Somalia.

"The Security Council commends the
African Union (AU) and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) for their
continuing efforts to promote peace and stability
06-42832
in Somalia and the region. The Council notes
their meetings of 19 June and 28-29 June 2006,
and welcomes the role of the AU/IGAD/LAS and
European Union fact-finding mission to Somalia
on 5-7 July 2006 in promoting peace, stability
and a political process.

"The Security Council welcomes the
meeting of the Heads of State and Government of
the AU in Banjul on 5 July 2006, and notes that
meeting's request for the Security Council to
consider an exemption to the arms embargo
imposed on Somalia by resolution 733 (1992) of
23 January 1992, to pave way for a possible
deployment of a Peace Support Mission (PSM)
and to help facilitate the re-establishment of the
national security forces of Somalia.

"The Security Council states its willingness,
if it judges that a PSM. would contribute to peace
and stability in Somalia, to consider the above
request for a PSM, on the basis of a detailed
mission plan from IGAD or the AU.

"The Security Council welcomes the fact
that the T FG and the TFP were able to agree on
14 June 2006 to adopt the National Security and
Stabilization Plan for Somalia. The Security
Council believes that the adoption of a security
plan is an important step towards providing a
06-42832
framework for effective security sector reform in
Somalia, in order to help deliver peace for all
Somalis.

"The Security Council expresses its
readiness to consider a limited modification of
the arms embargo to enable the TFIs, on the basis
of a sustainable peace process, to develop
Somalia's security sector and national institutions
capable of responding to security issues.

"The Security Council emphasizes,
however, the continued contribution made to
Somalia's peace and security by the arms
embargo, and calls on all to comply with it. The
Security Council reiterates its intention to
consider urgently how to strengthen the
effectiveness of the arms embargo.

"The Security Council welcomes the
outcome of the first meeting of the International
Contact Group on Somalia."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2006/31.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 3.15pm.
