Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I wish to express to the President the
appreciation of my delegation for convening this
important meeting. In addition we thank the Secretary-
General, Mr. Kofi Annan, for his report on children and
armed conflict in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (S/2006/389). My delegation expresses its
appreciation to the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, for her tireless efforts to
promote and protect the rights of children in armed
conflict. I also express our appreciation to Ms. Ann
Veneman, the Executive Director of UNICEF, as well
as the other speakers in the Council today. I take this
opportunity to reiterate Egypt's support for all of their
efforts and the efforts of the United Nations and its
entities to achieve the objectives.

Since 1999 the Security Council has given special
attention to the issue of the protection of human rights
during armed conflicts, in particular as that issue
concerns refugee and internally displaced children and
the children killed in armed conflicts. Since then the
Council has convened several open debates and
adopted six resolutions, the most recent of which is
resolution 1612 (2005) of 26 July 2005. That resolution
created the Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict. The Group is considering, inter alia, the
situations in the Sudan, Sri Lanka, Cote d'Ivoire and

Burundi, after considering the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo last June and
submitting its report.

While we reiterate our support for all the
Council's efforts to promote ways and means of
protecting children in the above-mentioned armed
conflicts, as an expression of our African and our
international responsibilities, Egypt is astonished at the
Council's exclusion of a group of most unfortunate
children, those under foreign occupation and in
particular the children in the occupied Palestinian
territories. Those children are killed every day due to
the oppressive and inhuman acts committed by Israel
against them. They are punished for the mere
expression, with their faint voices and stones, of their
refusal of the occupation of their lands, the
imprisonment of their families and the blockade and
prevention of access to supplies and humanitarian
assistance that is leading to the denial to them of all
means of a decent life.

Last Friday, Mr. Nambiar, Special Adviser to the
Secretary-General, briefed the Security Council on the
situation in the Middle East. Among other things, he
correctly stated that the latest military actions by Israel
had resulted in the killing of 147 Palestinians thus far,
at least 15 of whom were children killed in their houses
and villages as the result of a series of attacks. The
most recent such incident was the killing of a large
number of children who were spending their summer
vacation on the beach of Gaza, by bombarding them
from the sea.

There is no doubt that the Security Council's
neglect of the suffering of the Palestinian children
under occupation has encouraged Israel to widen and
expand the scope of its military operations to include
the children in Lebanon, within the context of its
current ongoing military operations.

Under-Secretary-General Jan Egeland stated to
the Council last Friday, and reaffirmed during his
subsequent visit to Lebanon, the magnitude of the
humanitarian tragedy confronting one million
Lebanese, due to the disproportionate and arbitrary
Israeli military attacks that have resulted in a huge
number of children losing their lives or being maimed
or disabled. In addition, other Lebanese children are
suffering from severe humanitarian crises and tragedies
as a result of the military operations and blockade that
have led to the lack of food, water, medicine and other
essential needs of life.

I was delighted to see Ms. Coomaraswamy
interviewed this morning on an Arab television station,
where she reaffirmed her readiness to make all
necessary efforts to protect children in Lebanon. I hope
that we will soon see practical steps in that regard.

Egypt demands that the Security Council
immediately take a decision to broaden the scope of the
work of the Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict to include the children in the occupied
Palestinian territories and Lebanon. Egypt requests the
Council to take the necessary effective measures to
guarantee equality between the Arab children in
Palestine, Lebanon and Iraq, on the one hand, and, on
the other hand, African children in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Sudan, Cote d'Ivoire and
Burundi, who are duly protected by the Council and the
United Nations from such inhuman acts.

Egypt requests that all measures be taken at the
level of both the Security Council and the General
Assembly to prevent Israel from attacking children and
to ensure that it respects, as an occupying Power, its
legal commitments, as well as to guarantee that a
comprehensive and just solution to the Middle East
crisis is achieved exclusively through the final status
negotiations under the auspices of the United Nations
as soon as possible. That would provide the necessary
protection for Palestinian, Lebanese and Israeli
children alike.

