Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank you for convening this meeting,
Mr. President, and to thank the High Representative
for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy ofthe European
Union, Baroness Catherine Ashton, for her briefing.

The Republic of Argentina welcomes cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations, in this case, the European
Union. In establishing the Security Council as the
organ with primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peacekeeping and security, the Charter
of the United Nations, in Chapter VIII, also provided
for a role for regional agreements or bodies, particularly
in seeking peaceful solutions to disputes, as long as
such agreements and bodies and their activities are
compatible with the purposes and principles of the
United Nations and as long as the Security Council
is kept fully informed of whatever activities are
undertaken or planned by such regional agreements
and bodies for maintaining international peace and
security. We would like to see the meetings now being
held with the European Union and the African Union
extended with similar regularity to other regional and
subregional bodies that also deal with matters relating
to the maintenance of international peace and security.

I would now like to discuss a few of the issues
mentioned by Ms. Ashton in her briefing. Over the
past two years both the Government and the opposition
groups in Syria have chosen to try to resolve the crisis
there by military means. One of the most worrying
results of that decision has been the catastrophic
humanitarian situation that exists not only in Syria
but also in neighbouring countries, which continue to
receive an endless influx of refugees. In that regard, we
must recognize the solidarity shown by the European
Union and its member States in continuing to respond to
that humanitarian tragedy. Argentina believes that the
unacceptable levels of violence and destruction in Syria
have been largely enabled by the assistance provided by
external players in arming and financing the parties to
the conflict. In that regard, we concur with the appeal
made by the Council of the European Union in its
conclusions adopted on 15 October in Luxembourg for
all States to refrain from sending arms to Syria.

Briefly, with respect to the peace process in the
Middle East, I would like to say that my country holds
and has always held a clear position. We consider
it crucial to work towards a two-State solution and
essential to renew and strengthen the mechanisms
and strategies that the international community has
developed to contribute effectively to that goal, with
the understanding, as our President has said, that the
question of finding a peaceful solution in the Middle
East should not be seen as a regional conflict but as a
universal issue.

We also support Ms. Ashton's comments on the
nuclear test carried out by North Korea and on that we
do not have to speak in depth. Both the Argentinian
authorities and the Security Council have made
clear, forceful and prudent statements on the matter.
Regarding non-proliferation, as in other cases that have
arisen, Argentina is of the view that the issue should
be resolved through effective negotiations. As the High
Representative said, the imposition of sanctions cannot
be an end in itself, and we share that position; they
must be supported by negotiations. We believe that the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons is
the cornerstone of a coherent non-proliferation regime
and that all States should support it.

In that context, I would like to point out that
Argentina has a very clear historical commitment to
disarmament and non-proliferation. We are party to all
of the export-control regimes and firmly support the
efforts of the international community in that area.
We do, however, understand that such efforts cannot
be used as indirect means for limiting the inalienable
rights of States that are party to the Treaty to develop,
produce and use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes.
In the case of Iran, Argentina believes that that country
should cooperate fully with the International Atomic
Energy Agency in order to regain the trust of the
international community regarding the nature of its
nuclear programme.

Argentina takes note of the crisis in Mali and
recognizes the European Union's initiative on the issue.
We have always stressed that a medium- and long-
term solution to the Mali crisis cannot be a military
one; we should prioritize the political process by
holding free, fair and transparent elections as soon as
conditions allow, as well as an inclusive dialogue as a
necessary condition for the restoration of the rule of
law, constitutional order and full enjoyment of human
rights. We also believe that it is important to make
progress with regard to the country's development
in order to ensure security in the medium and long
term. In that regard, initiatives such as the Brussels
conference held on 5 February on the future of Mali
and the announced resumption of the European Union's
assistance for development are all measures worthy of
note.

I cannot conclude without mentioning the European
Union's support for the work of the Security Council in
the area of women and peace and security, which the
Ambassador of Luxembourg also remarked on. Issues
concerning children and armed conflict and every
area related to sexual and gender-based violence are a
priority for Argentina, and we attach great importance
to them within the framework of our human rights
policy. In that respect, I would like to recognize the
fact that the European Union is one of the parties that
is most committed to the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) and subsequent resolutions on women and
peace and security. Like my own country, the European
Union itself and more than half of its member States
have adopted action plans on women and peace and
security.

Finally, the promotion and protection of the rights
of the child are a priority of European Union human
rights policy, as can be seen in its many efforts to
provide critical assistance to children affected by
conflict and for the demobilization and reintegration of
child soldiers.

My country is a member of the International
Criminal Court and has signed the Rome Statute. When
it comes to the recruitment of children under the age
of 15 to be used to play an active role in hostilities, the
Statute states that such children are the victims of a
war crime. Argentina has set that age in line with the
provisions of the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
We know that international human rights instruments
are a bare minimum, not a ceiling.

In conclusion, I reiterate the importance that my
delegation attaches to this dialogue with regional
and subregional organizations in the framework of
the central role of the Council in the maintenance of
international peace and security.

