Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The last three speakers employed 50 shades
of black. We would like to call on everyone to be
more objective, which is in the interest of settling the
conflict. However, we understand that in this case such
appeals are useless.

We are grateful to Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs Jeffrey Feltman and to the Director of
the Coordination and Response Division of the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. John
Ging, for their briefings.

With regard to Mr. Ivan Simonovie, we believe that
his briefing to the Security Council is inappropriate
for several reasons. First, the Council has not taken
a decision to establish the human rights mission
in Ukraine and had not asked for a reporting line.
Secondly, Mr. Simonovie already had an opportunity,
just a few days ago, to address the Human Rights
Council in Geneva and to convey his views to Member
States. This is a classic example of a duplication of
effort in the United Nations. Previous appearances by
Mr. Simonovie the Security Council have led only to
an excessive politicization of the issue. Objectivity was
sacrificed to propaganda. It has reached the point where
the Human Rights Monitoring Mission in Ukraine has
begun to express its views on military aspects that have
nothing to do with human rights issues. That is why
today we will not comment on Mr. Simonovie's report
or on his briefing. We have already done so in Human
Rights Council.

On 17 February, the Security Council unanimously
adopted resolution 2202 (2015), which approves a
package of measures aimed at implementing the
Minsk agreements, which established a framework
for peaceful settlement and a way to address the
conflict in the Council. The package of measures of
12 February raised the bar for the settlement of the
conflict to a more advanced stage, and it became a
kind of new affirmation of the process. The document
provides a comprehensive approach - from military
issues to confidence-building measures - and includes
constitutional reform, which should be carried out in
consultation with Donetsk and Luhansk.

There are also a number ofother important elements,
including amnesty for participants, the restoration of
socioeconomic relations and humanitarian aspects.
Now, thanks to resolution 2202 (2015), everything has
been reinforced by the international authority of the
Security Council, which in addition to the leaders of
the Normandy quartet, has become a guarantor of the
package of measures. The document is clear, both with
regard to the sequence of the steps to be taken and the
participants that must take those steps. In that regard,
it is important to act in good faith and implement the
steps without any attempt to rewrite them.

The Special Monitoring Mission ofthe Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) plays a
crucial role in implementing the package of measures.
It is tasked with observing the process, in accordance
with the parameters prescribed in the document,
in an impartial and coordinated way. If the special
monitoring mission needs strengthening with more
observers, equipment or financing, we are ready to
consider that in a more constructive manner and in
more detail in the framework of the Permanent Council
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe in Vienna.

Being both realists and optimists, we are satisfied
with the positive development of the situation on
the ground. The ceasefire is generally holding. The
withdrawal of heavy weapons has begun. One of the
parties to the conflict, the Donetsk People's Republic
and the Luhansk People's Republic, has already
completed that process. We hope that Kyiv will fall in
line and finally withdraw its heavy equipment to the
line of contact. We hope that this will help to foster
a climate of trust, and that isolated violations of the
ceasefire will cease. We also note the progress made in
the exchange of prisoners.

At the same time, progress has stalled on a number
of points. On 24 February in Paris, Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of the Normandy quartet called on
the Trilateral Contact Group to immediately establish
a working group to address the remaining aspects.
Unfortunately, Ukrainian authorities refuse to do
that and are dragging their feet. That is alarming and
counterproductive. On 3 March, after having delayed for
several months, President Poroshenko signed a decree
establishing a constitutional commission, which will
draft changes to the Constitution. However, the process
is far from transparent. According to the package of
measures, constitutional reform must be carried out
in coordination with representatives of Donetsk and
Luhansk. Otherwise, the deep-rooted causes of the
Ukrainian crisis will not be dealt with.

A separate issue is the catastrophic socioeconomic
and humanitarian situation in Donbas. The measures
taken by Kyiv to suffocate the south-east have become
a veritable blockade. Social benefits and pensions
paid to Donbas residents have been cut off. Exiting
and entering the area requires overcoming almost
insurmountable bureaucratic obstacles. Convoys with
humanitarian assistance and food are not reaching
civilians, as confirmed by international organizations.
Dozens of hospitals and schools have been destroyed.
Kyiv recently ended the delivery of gas to Donbas.

Russia is undertaking extensive efforts to meet
the urgent needs of the population of Donbas. It has
already 17 sent convoys with humanitarian assistance.
By the way, the most recent convoy, as well as some
previous ones, was fully inspected by Ukrainian
customs officials at the Donetsk checkpoint. I would
ask Ambassador Power to take an interest in what her
Embassies in Kyiv and Moscow are doing and in why
they are not providing her with such basic information,
instead giving her with disinformation on this topic and
many other issues related to Ukraine.

Thanks to the humanitarian convoys approximately
30,000 people are being provided with food rations,
250 hospitals are receiving medical equipment and
approximately 150 social service facilities have been
reopened. Drinking water is being provided to 80 per
cent of the population in the affected areas. We believe
it is unfounded and cynically politicized to criticize us
for sending those convoys. That criticism will in no
way undermine our determination to help the people
of Donbas.
The statistics about the 1 million internally
displaced persons in the territory of Ukraine is well
known. However, almost as many people - 950,000
people since April 2014 - have left Ukraine and stayed
in Russia. Of them more than 650,000 have requested
to be granted special status. We make no distinction
as to whether those people come from the east or the
west of Ukraine or as to what their political views
are. We are making comprehensive efforts to welcome
them and provide them housing and jobs. There are
some 527 temporary accommodation sites throughout
76 regions of the Russian Federation where more than
27,000 people, including nearly 9,000 children, are
currently residing. Those people are being provided
with humanitarian, medical and psychological support.

In the medium term, the socioeconomic problems
of Donbas cannot be resolved without implementing
the provisions of the package of measures pertaining
to the full re-establishment of relations with the rest of
Ukraine, including the resumption of transfers of social
benefits and pension payments and the functioning of
the banking system. That work must begin without
delay in the framework of the Contact Group.

We have heard dozens of times in this Chamber
that the Ukrainian crisis can be resolved only through
political means. Today the main work is being carried
out in the Normandy and Minsk formats, which are
making an important contribution to achieving results
that give us hope for a solution. However, against the
backdrop of positive steps, we are very worried about
the continuing sabre-rattling by Kyiv - statements by
President Poroshenko about the expansion of the army,
the delivery of a new batch of tanks to the National
Guard and the armed forces, trips by Kyiv officials
around the world looking for weapons, and the drafting
in the United States Congress of a law to provide
$1 billion for the equipping and training of Ukrainian
forces.

According to data we have, in Lviv oblast these
days some 300 military personnel from the United
States have arrived to train Ukrainian soldiers in
the use of foreign equipment. Everyone knows that
wherever American military appear bad things can be
expected to happen. I just want to recall, for instance,
that when the Saakashvili regime attacked South
Ossetia, there were 127 United States military advisers
working in Georgia. The result was conflict, bloodshed
and destruction. Only irresponsible politicians refuse
to understand what this kind of a scenario could lead
to in Ukraine.
