Mr. Rastam (Malaysia): My delegation joins
others in congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for this
month. We also wish to pay tribute to your predecessor,
the Permanent Representative of Pakistan, for his
stewardship of the Council last month.

I wish to thank you, Mr. President, and members
of the Council for having convened this public debate
on the important issue of protection of civilians in
armed conflict. I also thank and congratulate the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs,
Mr. Jan Egeland, for his presentation of the
comprehensive report of the Secretary-General to the
Security Council on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, which examines the issues outlined in earlier
reports and resolutions of the Council.

In that regard, my delegation is encouraged by
the report, which has identified specific ways in which
performance in the protection of civilians can be
further improved. This examination will give rise to
further discussions that should assist the Council and
the other principal organs of the United Nations - the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council - in reaching a consensus on the issues at
hand.

The alarming increase in the number of civilians
caught up in armed conflicts is cause for concern for
the international community. Civilians have been
displaced and are struggling to survive in harsh
conditions. Many have been killed or subjected to
extreme human rights violations, including rape and
sexual violence. In Iraq, the increasingly serious threats
to security and the continued fighting have resulted in
more civilian deaths and injuries. Civilian detainees
have been subjected to torture and to other serious
violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law. The continued deterioration of the
situation in the occupied Palestinian territories,
including East Jerusalem, as a result of escalating
violence and military attacks, as well the blatant
disregard of international law by Israel, has caused
civilian deaths and sufferings.

In these conflicts, women, children, the aged and
the infirm continue to be the most vulnerable groups.
They constitute some 90 per cent of conflict casualties
around the world. This is a deplorable development. Such
inhumane acts committed against those groups are
unacceptable and must be condemned in the strongest
possible terms. The perpetrators of these criminal and
cruel acts must be brought to justice to put an end to
the culture of impunity that is so pervasive in so many
areas of armed conflict around the world.

My delegation believes that the protection of
civilians in armed conflict should be all-encompassing.
The affected civilians should not only be assured of
their physical security in situations of armed conflict
but also be provided with legal protection under
international law. This point is underscored by the
Secretary-General in his report. There are in existence
a number of international instruments and conventions
that provide the legal basis for the protection of
civilians. It is important that the perpetrators of war
crimes and crimes against humanity be made
accountable for their actions and face the full penalty
of the law even after the conflict is over. The
international community must collectively demonstrate
its resolve to punish those responsible.

My delegation reiterates its condemnation of the
direct attacks on United Nations staff and other
humanitarian personnel in Iraq, particularly the
bombings of the United Nations and International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) headquarters in
Baghdad on 19 August and 27 October 2003,
respectively. The killing of 27 United Nations staff
members and the assault on more than 426 others mark
a disturbing trend of disregard for humanitarian
principles and a deliberate targeting of humanitarian
workers for political or tactical purposes. The
perpetrators of such attacks must be held accountable,
as affirmed in Council resolution 1502 (2003) of 26
August 2003.

My delegation is concerned over the continuing
obstructions placed against humanitarian access to
people in need of food, water, shelter and medical care
in conflict situations. The statistics are far from
encouraging, in Africa and elsewhere. In the occupied
Palestinian territories, humanitarian assistance for 3.5
million civilians has been severely affected following
the construction of the wall by Israel. This has had a
profound humanitarian impact on civilians by
separating the inhabitants of Palestinian communities
from their jobs and markets and severely limiting their
access to food, water and power supplies and essential
social services, including schools and hospitals.

I urge the Council to take effective measures to
protect the Palestinian civilians, who have long
suffered under harsh and brutal Israeli occupation. The
Council has to agree that the protection of Palestinian
civilians forms the very essence of the question
addressed by the Council today, given its longstanding
nature.
The protection of civilians in armed conflict
requires a comprehensive approach on the part of the
international community, including through regional
approaches. It also requires coordinated and concerted
efforts on the part of all concerned - Governments,
the parties in conflict, peacekeepers, United Nations
humanitarian workers, and the personnel of other
international relief agencies and non-governmental
organizations. They are indispensable partners in the
field. While performing its own specialized duties,
each plays a supportive and reinforcing role in ensuring
the physical, legal and psychological protection and
well-being of the hapless civilians caught up in the
trauma of armed conflict.

The observations made by the Secretary-General
in his report must be seriously attended to in order to
strengthen the mechanisms already agreed in the past
by the Council for the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. Malaysia fully supports the emphasis on
reaffirming the commitment to the principles of
international law based on justice, the peaceful
settlement of disputes and respect for human dignity.

