Mr. Al-Otaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me, Mr. President, to congratulate you on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for this month and
to commend the remarkable efforts of the Permanent
Representative of China, who chaired the Council last
month.

The prompt response of the Council to the request
of the Organization of the Islamic Conference to hold
this important meeting to discuss the dangerous and
deteriorating situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories only proves the Council's conviction that it
must take steps to stop this deterioration by reason of
the Council's responsibility to international peace and
security, as stated in the United Nations Charter. In
fact, the international community's standing idly by
while the Palestinian people suffer since September last
daily aggressions by the Israelis has encouraged the
Israeli Government to intensify and escalate its
aggression against the Palestinian people, with a view
to imposing a status quo policy and to forcing the
Palestinians to renounce their legitimate rights.

The situation in the occupied territories is very
grave and poses a real threat to peace and stability in
the region because of the insistence of the Israeli
Government on its aggression and on its rejection of all
international commitments and resolutions. From time
to time, the Israeli authorities launch full-scale
aggression against Palestinians in the West Bank and
Gaza, thereby violating the Fourth Geneva Convention
of 1949, using all forms of oppression and all forms of
weapons. This has led to the death of hundreds and the
injuring of thousands. Israel has been closing
Palestinian areas in order to intensify the economic
siege, which has exacerbated the suffering of the
Palestinian people and has led to great deterioration in
their standard of living. The Israeli Government is also
pursuing policies of assassinations, arrests and
demolition of houses, ignoring all the appeals of the
international community to desist from such
abominable practices, which violate basic human
rights.

A few days ago, the occupation forces occupied
Orient House and nine other offices of the Palestinian
Authority in East Jerusalem, again violating the
agreements signed with the Palestinian Authority
within the framework of the peace process. In this
context, we affirm our adherence to all the Security
Council resolutions on Jerusalem, which declare null
and void all the measures undertaken by Israel to
change the features of this Holy City.

The Israeli Government is clearly trying to shake
off its responsibilities in the agreements signed with
the Palestinian Authority. It is flouting the basic
principles agreed to in these agreements and more
specifically, resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973),
and the principle of land for peace.

Israel's aggressive policies will continue unless
the Security Council and the international community
assume their responsibilities and take firm measures to
put an end to the crimes perpetrated against the
Palestinian people and to try their perpetrators, and to
send international observers as soon as possible to
protect the Palestinians from the oppression of the
occupying force. In this respect, we call on the co-
sponsors of the peace process, the European Union, and
all peace-loving countries and organizations to exercise
maximum pressure on Israel to respect the bilateral
agreements it signed with the Palestinians and to
implement the recommendations in the Mitchell report
in order to pave the way for the resumption of
negotiations within the context of the peace process
and to reach a final settlement that includes all issues
and that will give the Palestinian people all their
legitimate rights.

The Israeli Government has to realize that its
oppressive measures and practices will not result in the
security it is seeking as long as it continues occupying
other territories and as long as it ignores its
international obligations and the agreements it signed
with the Palestinian Authority within the peace
process. This violation of agreements will only lead to
an increase in the tension and in the cycle of violence
and wars that has been witnessed in this vital region in
the last four decades, and which has affected all the
resources, potentials and capabilities that could have
been directed to development.

For peace to be permanent, comprehensive and
lasting, it has to be based on international legitimacy,
more specifically, Security Council resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973), the principle of land for peace,
and the withdrawal of Israel from all the Arab land
occupied in 1967, including the Golan Heights and
territories in southern Lebanon.

In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm Kuwait's
support for the struggle of the Palestinian people to
achieve their inalienable rights and to establish an
independent State on their territory, with Al-Quds Al-
Sharif as its capital.

