Mr. Koonjul (Mauritius): Sir, as you assume the
presidency of the Council for the month of December,
let me convey to you our best wishes for a very
successful presidency and pledge to you my
delegation's full support and cooperation.

I also wish to echo the sentiments you have
expressed to Ambassador Patricia Durrant of Jamaica
for her excellent stewardship of the Council in the
month of November.

Let me join previous delegations in thanking the
Secretary-General for his report on the activities of the
United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH), and Mr. Hedi Annabi, Assistant Secretary-
General, for his very useful briefing this morning.

My delegation takes note of the progress that has
been made since the last report of the Secretary-
General. The Mission has been very successful in
restructuring law enforcement bodies in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, in particular the police force. We
commend the work done by the High Representative,
Mr. Petritsch; the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Klein; and all men and women
working with them to implement the Peace Agreement
in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

UNMIBH has been successfully - albeit in very
difficult situations and despite much political
indifference - working for the creation of solid
structures for a professional police force to administer
and enforce the rule of law in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We are pleased to learn that the Police Commissioner
project is progressing well and that several ad interim
police commissioners have been appointed in the
Federation Ministry of Interior, the six Federation
cantons and the Ministry of Interior of Republika
Srpska. We are concerned, however, that the project is
facing obstruction in the mixed Croat-Bosniac canton
and in the cantons with Croat majorities. We call on the
parties concerned to cooperate fully with UNMIBH to
find a quick resolution to this problem.

My delegation is concerned that the
representation of minority communities in the local
police forces continues to pose a serious problem. It is
extremely important that every effort be made to ensure
that minorities are adequately represented in the police
force. We welcome, in this respect, the appointment of
a Bosniac police officer to the post of Deputy Station
Commander at the newly opened police station in
Srebrenica. Such appointments will help build the
confidence of the population in the local police force.
We are also pleased to note that there has been a 1.4
per cent increase in the number of females represented
in the police force. My delegation welcomes this
evolution and encourages the participation of women in
the enforcement of law and order in their country.

The increase in the return of minority
communities to Bosnia and Herzegovina is another
clear indication that the situation on the ground is
improving. We encourage other refugees and internally
displaced persons to return to their homes.

The core mandate of UNMIBH will be completed
at the end of December 2002 and, before that, Council
members will have to decide which type of mission
will take over from UNMIBH - whether a stand-alone
police monitoring mission or a comprehensive rule-of-
law mission as envisaged in the Dayton Accords. We
believe that these options should be examined very
seriously, taking into account the financial aspects as
well as the need for continued monitoring and
assistance to preserve what the international
community has achieved so far in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We understand that Mr. Klein is
cooperating with the European Union and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe to
assess the requirements for the follow-up police
mission. We look forward to receiving a
comprehensive report, which will help us take the right
decisions.

While UNMIBH has made significant
achievements in improving the situation on the ground
since its establishment, the economic situation remains
very fragile. The unpaid assessed contribution to the
account for UNMIBH, as at 31 October 2001, is $107.6
million, out of $144.7 million appropriated for its
activities by the General Assembly. The lack of funds
can have a negative impact on the success of the
Mission. We therefore call on all Member States to
make the necessary disbursements, and also appeal to
donors to provide funding for the priority projects of
UNMIBH. As highlighted in the report of the
Secretary-General, more still needs to be done to
overcome the tragic past and to strengthen the capacity
of the country for self-sustainability and help fulfil the
conditions for European integration.

The last time we discussed the question of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, the Norwegian delegation had rightly
observed that the progress in the region was
incremental, but not fundamental. In the new report
that we have now, it does appear that some
fundamental changes are in progress, especially in the
areas of security, including a strategy to combat
organized crime and terrorism, of poverty alleviation
and of reconstruction of the electric infrastructure, as
well as of human rights awareness. It is our duty and
that of the international community to fully support
these efforts and the democratic forces that will
promote political stability and economic growth in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

