Mr. Martirosyan (Armenia): Allow me to begin
by extending my congratulations to you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
and to assure you of my delegation's full support for
the Council's work.

This open debate on United Nations
peacekeeping operations is of paramount importance as
the Organization is currently planning at least four new
peacekeeping missions and is contemplating a possible
expansion of its activities in Iraq. This debate is being
held at a time when questions are being asked about
the efficacy of current peacekeeping operations in
Africa, Asia and Europe and about the ways and means
to improve them. It is being conducted as the
Organization is taking its first steps to address security
and development challenges in conflict areas through
integrated peace-building approaches.

It is indubitable that peacekeeping operations
have made great headway during the past decade,
evolving from classic peacekeeping operations into
extremely complex ones encompassing conflict
management, confidence-building and post-conflict
peace-building. Sometimes, inadvertently, the United
Nations has found itself carrying out peacemaking
functions in rather complicated situations, raising
doubts about the legitimacy and successfulness of its
actions under such circumstances. Despite the fact that
all those issues have been duly analysed by the high-
level Panel headed by Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi and
subsequently reflected in its report of March 2000
(S/2000/809) we still ponder the same issues when the
question of a new peacekeeping operation comes up.

Armenia is taking its first steps in this field. In
2003, my country made a decision to participate in the
NATO-led peacekeeping operation in Kosovo. Since
February 2004, a platoon of 34 peacekeepers from the
Armenian armed forces has been operating as part of
the Greek forces of the United States-led multinational
brigade of the Kosovo Force (KFOR). In 2003,
Armenia hosted NATO Partnership for Peace
exercises - known as Cooperative Best Effort 2003 -
the main goal of which was the planning of interaction
between Partnership nations during peacekeeping
operations.

As we become part of an international community
that strives to bring peace to different parts of the
world, we want to make sure that the efforts are well
spent and rewarded by the creation of self-sustaining
peace in those areas. In this respect, my delegation
would like to raise several issues that it believes could
be considered as necessary precursors for effective
intervention.

First, the issue of the regionalization of conflict
or the regional dimension of conflict has to be taken
into account when planning for peacekeeping
operations. Transborder armed groups, illegal
trafficking and trade, and transborder social networks
are issues that should not be overlooked when
considering the establishment of a security
environment, humanitarian assistance, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration. Such an approach,
despite its extreme complexity, may prove to be more
effective if it is duly considered in all its aspects for its
impact in such operations as that currently being
discussed for the Sudan.

Secondly, for the past decade United Nations
peacekeeping operations have evolved into
multifaceted and multidimensional missions. Yet, the
time has probably come to contemplate the idea of the
establishment of multi-phased operations as well,
where a gradual development from peacekeeping to
peace-building is planned in advance as part of an
operation. Apart from providing an opportunity for
better planning for the transition from the military to
the development phase of a peacekeeping operation, it
would also send the right message to war-torn
communities about the sound commitment of the
international community to helping to reconstruct the
social fabric of the country in such a manner that it will
be able to sustain the hard-achieved peace and advance
on the path to democracy and the rule of law on its
own.

The identification of the end state that the
peacekeeping operation aims to achieve might set the
right agenda for the programmes and projects to be
implemented on the ground. In this respect, we cannot
overstress the need for tangible results to keep hope
from dwindling and to prevent the resumption of
conflict. Quick-impact projects could be one way of
making a real difference in the lives of people, and
consequently in their minds.

Thirdly, we realize that this kind of planning
would require a proper analysis of the situation on the
ground and of the roots and causes of the conflict, yet
we believe that it should be a priority in the
consideration of a peacekeeping operation in the first
place. As past experience shows, no operation is
successful if it does not address deep-rooted grievances
and the causes of the conflict or take its dynamics into
account.

A holistic understanding of the range of security
and development challenges in conflict areas, as well
as developing programmes based on those realities, and
sometimes on worst-case scenarios, and not on the
theoretical models of best assumptions, might help to
address the need for the urgent improvement of the
ways the United Nations deals with conflict situations.
Honouring pledges made, be they political or financial,
would help to transform the United Nations into an
Organization that is capable of successfully fulfilling
its founding mandate "to save succeeding generations
from the scourge of war".

