Mr. Aguilar Zinser (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
As the delegation of Germany has done, we too would
like to express our sincere thanks to the Presidents of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda - Judges Theodor Meron and Erik Mase -
for the exhaustive presentations they have made to the
Security Council regarding the reports on their work.
Those presentations have given us the useful
information necessary to conclude that those judicial
institutions are functioning efficiently and with the
dedication to dispensing criminal justice and ending
impunity. We also recognize the difficulties they face
in seeking to complete their cases satisfactorily. We are
considering their recommendations to the Council with
regard to strengthening their capacity to carry out their
work in the phase they are now beginning.

I would also like to extend a warm welcome to
Mr. Hassan Bubacar Jallow, who was recently
appointed Prosecutor for the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda. My delegation wishes him every
success in his work and expresses its confidence in
him. We would also like to congratulate Ms. Carla Del
Ponte for the professional and independent work she
has done as the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, as well as to once again
express our confidence in her ongoing work as the
Prosecutor for the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia.

Allow me to take this opportunity to make a few
comments and ask a few questions. I should first like to
turn to the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia.

Mexico has on previous occasions stressed that full
cooperation by all States with that Tribunal is essential to
achieving the goals set out in the completion strategy and
the ultimate goals for which the Tribunal was established,
namely, to maintain peace and security in the region,
bring about national reconciliation and put an end to
impunity. In that regard we welcome the efforts and
progress made with regard to the cooperation extended
by Balkan States in apprehending persons charged by
the Tribunal. However, as Security Council resolution
1503 (2003) itself recognized, we must remember that
the States mentioned in the resolution should provide
greater cooperation and assistance to the Tribunal in
order to bring before it all persons charged, including
those specifically named in the resolution. It is
important for my country to emphasize that nothing at
all should stand in the way of the Tribunal's ability to
exercise its powers. There should be no obstacles to
bringing accused persons before the Tribunal, with the
full cooperation of the States involved.

Yesterday we welcomed the presence in the
Chamber of Lord Ashdown and Judge Meron, who
provided us with information regarding the establishment
of a chamber within the State Court of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to specifically address serious violations
of international humanitarian law. Undoubtedly, that
represents a significant step towards the full
implementation of the completion strategy.
With regard to the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda, my delegation would like in
particular to thank President Erik Mase for having
presented to us an encouraging picture of the visible
progress made concerning the efficiency of that
Tribunal's judicial and administrative functions. In that
connection, we believe that the Security Council
should continue to consider with interest the request by
President Mase to authorize the use of 9 ad litem
judges at any given moment. We believe that will
contribute to the sound implementation of the
completion strategy. It will also make it possible for
the investigations begun by Ms. Carla Del Ponte to
lead to bringing those responsible to trial under the
new Office of the Prosecutor.

I would like to ask Prosecutor Jallow some
questions with regard to the completion strategy. My
delegation is aware of the fact that Ms. Del Ponte
began investigations of the Rwandan Patriotic Army.
Resolution 1503 (2003) itself appealed to all States to
cooperate with the Tribunal in those investigations. In
the completion strategy, recently drafted by the
Tribunal, it is, in the judgement of my delegation, not
entirely clear what steps the Office of the Prosecutor
will have to take to continue the investigations
concerning elements of the Rwandan Patriotic Army.
Although we are aware of the need to make some
reductions in the list of accused persons, as has been
explained here, that should not be at the cost of
investigations begun by the previous Prosecutor. That
would create an atmosphere of impunity. My delegation
would therefore like to know from Mr. Jallow how he
intends to continue those investigations and how that will
be properly reflected in the completion strategy.
Likewise, we would like to know what steps are going
to be taken in order to have those investigations
culminate in trials of the persons involved.

In raising those questions my delegation is aware
that the purpose of the completion strategy is to focus
on investigations and trials of those with the greatest
responsibility for crimes that fall under the Tribunal's
jurisdiction, namely, genocide, crimes against
humanity and Violations of international humanitarian
law. However, we believe that there will be no chance
for national reconciliation in Rwanda if impunity
thrives or if the same treatment is not afforded to all
perpetrators of crimes. There is therefore a need for
independence and universal treatment.

Finally, we believe that the completion strategy
has served to underscore the importance and
complementary nature of national justice systems. We
share the views expressed here by both Judges and both
Prosecutors that it is important to have a very complete
view of the cases in order to be able to transfer to
national courts the cases that are indeed suitable for
such treatment, depending on the circumstances and
merits of the individual cases. However, we believe
that enhancing the capacity of national courts is critical
in order for the countries to actually be in a position to
fulfil their tasks. We also believe that the necessary
resources and capacities must exist in post-conflict
periods to build institutions and to establish and
strengthen independent and impartial judicial systems.

A few days ago in this Chamber, at the initiative
of the United Kingdom, we discussed the role of the
United Nations in justice and the rule of law. We
believe that that discussion was very useful in helping
us recognize the importance of our Organization's
work in promoting and strengthening national judicial
systems in post-conflict situations.

