Mr. Belinga-Eboutou (Cameroon) (spoke in French): Cameroon would like to thank and
congratulate the Secretary-General for his report of 21
April 2003 on the United Nations Mission of Support
in East Timor (UNMISET) (S/2003/449).

My delegation welcomes the presence among us
of Ambassador Kamalesh Sharma and is grateful for
the clear, concise and thorough briefing that he has
given the Council on the situation in Timor-Leste.

We are closely following the developments taking
place in that young State, which despite some
setbacks - some of which were serious - remains an
example of success for United Nations action in the
areas of peacekeeping, security and post-conflict
management. It is gratifying to note that, after the
events that took place in Dili and the Ermera District in
December and January 2002, which gave us cause to
fear the worst, the situation has returned to normality.

Given the events described in the report before
us, political and administrative problems, internal and
external security and the reconstruction and financing
of the economy are all issues that require the vigilance,
commitment and support of the United Nations and the
international community.

By declaring 2003 as the Year of Administrative
Restructuring and Justice, the Government of
Timor-Leste has clearly charted the course the
followed. The strengthening of human and institutional
capacity, particularly in the area of administration and
justice, is the most urgent challenge facing the
Timorese authorities.

Minister Ramos-Horta was fully justified last
week in deploring the chronic lack of resources for
financing employment and essential public services. He
forcefully emphasized that unemployment and a weak
administrative and judicial infrastructure were at the
root of the main problems currently faced by
Timor-Leste.

It is clear that the sharp decline in the civilian
component of UNMISET has further highlighted the
institutional and personnel needs of the country. The
Government's recruitment and training campaign must
therefore be encouraged. In this regard the
Administration should be called on to demonstrate its
transparency and objectivity with a View to ensuring
that it retains the apolitical character that is so
necessary.

The lack of resources and the weakness of the
judicial structure, which is very inadequately staffed -
inadequate in terms of quantity and quality - are
cause for real concern in a country in which the
citizens need to be reassured on issues of justice. The
report states that that drastic lack of personnel has been
reflected in delays in the administration of justice,
prolonged periods of pre-trial detention and prison
overcrowding, with all the problems that they involve.

I would like to echo the concerns expressed by
human rights organizations with regard to the
management of the file of serious crimes perpetrated in
1999, in both Timor-Leste and Indonesia. It is
imperative that both countries strengthen their
cooperation on this issue with a view to resolving it, as
it is of great importance for the citizens of Timor-Leste
as well as for the international community.

The Special Representative and head of
UNMISET, and his office in Jakarta, should make
further efforts in particular to induce Indonesia to send
more positive signals in two important areas: the
extradition to Timor-Leste of persons against whom
there are charges, and the expansion, at the national
level, of the field of action of the relevant ad hoc
tribunal. Furthermore, the Security Council should
begin to give some thought to how to ensure follow-up
of this very important issue when UNMISET's mandate
ends next year.

With regard to internal and external security, my
country reiterates its support for the approach of
UNMISET and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations enshrined by the Council in resolution 1473
(2003).

We therefore subscribe to all of the report's
proposals in this area, and we would like in particular
to encourage the Government of Timor-Leste to
continue to cooperate with Indonesia with a View to
better discharging its new security responsibilities in
the area of the Tactical Coordination Line.

The political and institutional stability of Timor-
Leste will depend upon the rapid economic and social
development of the country. Combating poverty must
therefore be the highest priority, not only for the
Government of Timor-Leste but for the United Nations
and the international community. To that end, the so-
called Transition Support Programme should be better
supported by the donor community.

Certain recent developments are cause for
optimism. One such is the ratification of the Timor Sea
Treaty, which opens the way for the exploitation of gas
and oil, guaranteeing significant revenue for Timor-
Leste, which should serve as an impetus for economic
growth. This is also true of the implementation, with
the support of the United Nations Development
Programme, of the Recovery, Employment and
Stability Programme for Ex-Combatants and
Communities in Timor-Leste (RESPECT), which is
designed to ensure the reintegration of former
combatants, as well as to provide assistance for
vulnerable segments of the population.

While the real political, economic and social
difficulties facing this young democracy cannot be
hidden, there are good reasons for optimism regarding
its future, as long as the United Nations, the financial
institutions and bilateral partners continue to step up
their support for the country. Cameroon therefore
endorses the recommendation of the Secretary-General
that the mandate of UNMISET be renewed for one
year
I should like in conclusion to express my
country's appreciation for all the elements of
UNMISET and to the head of the Mission, Ambassador
Sharma, for the outstanding work that they, together
with the young Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste,
have accomplished since 20 May 2002. They have been
able to mobilize their many relationships and contacts
in the international economic and financial field in the
service of the people of that country.

