Mr. Rock (Canada): Canada is grateful for the
opportunity to participate in this discussion on the
situation in Afghanistan, and we are grateful to the
presidency of Japan for putting this matter on the
agenda.

At the outset, may I say that Canada's
commitment to Afghanistan has been significant. We
have committed over $600 million through 2009 in
development assistance. We have doubled our embassy
contingent. We have been and we remain a significant
contributor to the NATO-led International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF) mission. In fact, we recently
augmented our presence in Afghanistan by sending the
first contingent of a provincial reconstruction team in
Kandahar, which will eventually include both civilian
and military components. This deployment in
Kandahar, I might say, will eventually number 1,500
persons, which we expect to be in place by February
2006.

The shared objective of the international
community and the Afghan people is the creation of a
stable, democratic, self-sustaining Afghan State that
can provide for its own security and that will never
again serve as a haven for international terrorism.
Afghanistan has made significant progress on the path
towards those goals. It is now at a stage where
democracy has taken root and is paying dividends, in
particular in terms of building the confidence and the
pride of Afghans in their own country. Both the
adoption of a Constitution and the presidential election
last October were watersheds in Afghanistan's
transition, and key elements of the Bonn Agreement.

While Canada acknowledges that the challenges
that continue to confront Afghanistan are serious, we
do not believe that they are insurmountable. Let me
address four challenges that we believe must be
resolved on a priority basis: first, uncooperative local
commanders; secondly, governance; thirdly, past
injustices; and, fourthly, strategic coordination.

First, with respect to commanders, it seems to us
that we can no longer defer facing some of the most
difficult problems, including how to deal with local
commanders who continue to challenge the authority of
the central Government by pursuing illicit activities.
Those non-compliant power brokers must be made
aware that there are consequences to their actions.
Their continued involvement with narcotics, illegal
armed groups and human rights violations must be
addressed. Without a commitment to take decisive
action against those who most overtly defy the rule of
law, they will continue to subvert our best efforts and
contribute to instability.

The security situation in Afghanistan remains
fragile. Al-Qaida, elements of the Taliban and other
insurgents are still active, compromising both Afghan
and international security. Canada remains concerned
about persistent violence directed at civilian
populations and at humanitarian and development
agencies. We call on all actors to ensure respect for
international human rights law and humanitarian law.

On the second subject, governance, we agree with
the conclusions reached by the Secretary-General in his
report on the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and security
(S/2005/525). Canada firmly believes that building
institutions and lasting capacity is the only way to
ensure that our investment will endure long beyond our
engagement.

Thirdly, with regard to transitional justice, the
confidence of the citizenry is key to any Government's
success. The inclusion in the Government of
individuals responsible for serious past transgressions
of Afghan and international law would call into
question the credibility of the Government,
complicating efforts towards future progress. Canada
therefore supports the work being done by Afghan
authorities in close cooperation with the Afghan
Independent Human Rights Commission to develop a
national strategy on transitional justice. We are pleased
that the strategy contemplates a wide spectrum of
mechanisms to address past injustices, ranging from
vetting the public service to ending impunity.

The fourth challenge is strategic coordination.
Recognizing that the pillars of the security sector are
interdependent and mutually reinforcing, and that
shortcomings in one pillar will jeopardize the
sustainability of progress in another, we must increase
strategic coordination. Canada is committed to
assisting in the facilitation of that coordination.

(spoke in French)

Given those challenges, it is important that we
give sufficient attention to charting the path ahead. We
should expand the vision of the Bonn Agreement. After
all, its goals - national reconciliation, lasting peace,
stability and respect for human rights - have yet to be
fully realized.

The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan and the Government of Afghanistan have
cooperated in the development of the Kabul process,
which will result in the achievement of an agreement
between Afghanistan and the international community
that identifies reciprocal responsibilities. That will be
an opportunity to focus on setting goals to provide for
security-sector reform; promote and protect human
rights, especially the rights of women; establish a
sound legal framework that includes access to justice
for all Afghans; create accountable governance
institutions; and agree upon a strategy for economic
development and investment that can promote long-
term economic growth in the country.

(spoke in English)

In sum, Canada supports the Secretary-General's
vision for future engagement in Afghanistan, in
particular the continued role for both the United
Nations and the international community in
consolidating peace. In order for the United Nations to
continue to be successful in coordinating donor
engagement, it will need to upgrade its capabilities on
the ground in Afghanistan in the areas of governance,
the rule of law, the police, justice and the private
sector. Canada will continue to stand with Afghanistan
and the international community and the United
Nations as Afghanistan works to take its place among
stable, democratic and self-sufficient States.

