Mr. Goledzinowski (Australia): Thank you,
Mr. President, for the opportunity to speak today on
Australia's assessment of the current threats to
international security from terrorism.

First, I would like to join others in expressing our
condemnation and disgust at the recent attacks in
Mumbai. Australia reiterates its sympathy and
solidarity with the Government and the people of India.
Australians, I know, were deeply shocked by those
attacks, not just because we lost two of our own, but
also because of the randomness and cruelty with which
they were carried out. These were well-organized and
deliberate attacks that would have required careful
preparation, planning, facilitation and training. Every
effort must be made to bring the perpetrators to justice
and to ensure that no such attack can ever happen again.

In Australia's assessment, while headway is being
made to counter Al-Qaida-inspired violent extremism,
it is likely to remain a challenge to the global security
environment for the foreseeable future. Indeed,
whenever we are tempted to think that this problem is
behind us, we are reminded in a cruel fashion of how
much further we need to go.

The ideology of such extremism appeals across
generations and continues to attract new adherents
despite its appalling record of violence. Al-Qaida
continues to be the vanguard of the movement. It has
itself planned and undertaken attacks and funded and
facilitated attacks by others. It has also created a
sophisticated global propaganda machine, which in
turn has inspired others.

At the same time, we also recognize that
Al-Qaida-inspired extremism has never depended on a
single overarching group or organization. Its fluid and
decentralized nature is exemplified in the phenomenon
of so-called home-grown terrorism, which is carried
out largely in developed countries by those who have
been radicalized and organized independently.

The evolving and persistent nature of the terrorist
threat calls for a long-term international strategy. No
country can combat terrorism effectively on its own.
The Australian Government recognizes that, in order to
protect Australia and Australians from the threat of
terrorism, international cooperation is essential. Our
international counter-terrorism engagement is based on
three pillars: policy dialogue, including this debate;
operational collaboration; and counter-terrorism
capacity-building with international partners. Australia
also supports the Vital work of the United Nations in
developing a comprehensive legal framework in the
field of counter-terrorism and in promoting cooperation
among Member States in combating terrorism.

As the representative of Costa Rica emphasized,
effective counter-terrorism efforts are not susceptible to
purely military solutions; they require police,
intelligence, political and broader developmental
activities, as has been emphasized by a number of
speakers today. Effective mitigation of terrorist attacks
involves the combination of an appropriate security
response with broader strategies to enhance social
cohesion and community resilience and to lessen the
appeal of radical ideology leading to violent extremism.
In addition, we recognize that the flexible and
networked organizational structures of terrorist groups
enable them to take rapid advantage of new
technologies. In seeking to counter the influence of
extremist propaganda on the Internet and elsewhere and
the challenges of cyber-terrorism, Governments need to
become more flexible, adaptive and collaborative.

A key concern for the international community in
examining the connections between terrorism and other
threats to global security is the threat of terrorists'
acquiring and using chemical, biological, radiological
or nuclear materials. Australia strongly supports efforts
to prevent this within the framework of measures such
as the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism.

Australia's whole-of-Government counter-
terrorism capacity-building and operational
collaboration efforts will continue, particularly in
South-East Asia. The region's foremost terrorist
organizations have been significantly disrupted through
successful counter-terrorism actions carried out by
Indonesia and other regional Governments, but the
terrorist groups are resilient and have not abandoned
their violent goals. Splinter groups and independent
cells continue to pose a threat. We will continue to work
with Governments in our region to ensure that counter-
terrorism successes are consolidated.

Australia is also deeply committed to expanding
its cooperation with the countries in South Asia. The
Pakistan-Afghanistan border region remains in the
forefront of the fight against terrorism. All nations
have a direct interest in ensuring that Afghanistan
never again becomes a base for the export of terrorist
activity and a focus for terrorism in South Asia and
more widely.

Finally, in the spirit of the Secretary-General's
Alliance of Civilizations initiative and other interfaith
dialogue activities, Australia is working with regional
Governments to underline our shared values based on
tolerance, non-violence, respect for human dignity,
diversity and pluralism, as well as our consistent,
unequivocal and strong condemnation of terrorism in
all its forms and manifestations.

I should like to thank the President for convening
this debate and also for his uncompromising national
statement and for undertaking to prepare a presidential
statement for adoption at the conclusion of this debate.

