Mr. Roman-Morey (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to commend the initiative of
the United Kingdom presidency in convening this
debate on the situation in Haiti. We also welcome the
presence of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Haiti, Mr. Mariano Fernandez,
and thank him for his briefing.

Since 2004 Peru has taken an active part in the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH), with a military contingent of 366
troops, as well as military officers in the Mission's
command. Moreover, Peru is a member of the Group of
Friends of Haiti, the Economic and Social Council's
Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti, the Organization of
American States Group of Friends of Haiti and the
Latin American mechanism for political cooperation on
Haiti.

On that subject, my delegation would like to draw
the attention of the Security Council to two aspects of
the Secretary-General's report (S/2012/128) that Peru
believes to be of the greatest importance to address
right away. The first is the need to maintain support for
the Haitian authorities in creating and strengthening
solid public institutions to deal with the security and
development problems the country faces. And the
second is the need to continue working to stabilize the
fragile political situation in Haiti.

Peru strongly believes that enduring, sustainable
social and economic development is impossible
without solid institutions that promote and support
development. The work of MINUSTAH is essential in
providing the Haitian authorities with the help needed
to create the security under which to strengthen the
rule of law, consolidate democracy and build
capacities. However, as we have noted on previous
occasions, the challenge remains to foster a principle
of national ownership whereby the Haitian Government
itself would take the lead in the process of
reconstruction and institution-building, in keeping with
its established national strategies and priorities.

As already stated by previous speakers -
especially in the statement made by the representative
of Uruguay on behalf of the Group of Friends of Haiti,
to which Peru subscribes - there is great concern
about the fragile political situation in Haiti, especially
around the most recent reported events. In that
connection, Peru calls on the Haitian authorities to find
a prompt solution to the political crisis, which is
directly affecting the reconstruction process in Haiti,
and could undermine advances made in recent years.

Along the same lines, and noting the democratic
yearnings of the Haitian people, my delegation
expresses its hope that the next electoral process will
take place within the established time frame and in a
democratic and transparent way. I would like to stress
the importance of the work being done by MINUSTAH
in that regard, as well as the support of other regional
organizations, in ensuring that the electoral process
takes place without irregularities.

On the other hand, I want to recognize the
progress made in institutionalizing and strengthening
the Haitian National Police, which continues to take an
active role in protecting the safety of civilians. We
hope that in the near future the Haitian Police will
stand as an example of a solid institution that promotes
respect for the rule of law and safeguards the
population.

On the subject of security I want to underline
that, while the situation is stable because of the
presence of the MINUSTAH force, my delegation is
greatly concerned by the irregular or illegal armed
groups - as the Haitian authorities themselves call
them - who take organized action, in military
uniform, under the name of the Haitian armed forces.
The Haitian authorities must without delay investigate
the truth about those groups, and learn about their
financing and training, as the Secretary-General states
in his recent report. There have been indications that
the groups might well have long possessed small arms
and light weapons.

Although that is most worrying, Peru also
believes it is of great importance to improve
coordination among the various United Nations
agencies operating in Haiti. I should like to remind the
Council that the United Nations Regional Centre for
Peace, Disarmament and Development, based in Lima,
has broad regional experience in collecting and
destroying small arms and light weapons that remained
in civilian possession in various post-conflict
situations. We believe the United Nations should at
least consider making use of that opportunity.

Finally, my delegation believes that the work of
MINUSTAH is far from clone and trusts that the
Security Council will renew its mandate and maintain
ongoing support to achieve reconstruction and solid
national institution-building, so as to solidify the rule
of law and fill the gaps created by weakened
institutional capacity and the country's lack of human
and material resources, emphasizing the three factors
directly affecting Haiti's recovery and reconstruction
process - governability, security and development.
