Mr. Al-Hussein (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): First,
I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month and wish you every success in your
presidency. I must also extend my thanks to your
predecessor, Mr. John Negroponte, the Ambassador of
the United States, for his efforts during his presidency
of the Council last month.

It is regrettable that we are meeting to discuss
once again the Israeli practices against the Palestinian
Authority and people, which have been continuing
since our last meeting in July 2002. Israel is still
attempting to subjugate the Palestinian Authority and
has been practising all forms of violence against the
Palestinian people, arbitrary sieges, closures and
curfews, ever since it reoccupied the Palestinian
territories in September 2000.

We support and welcome the progress that has
been achieved during the past few weeks, particularly
the Gaza-Bethlehem agreement, and we viewed with
great hope the calm that prevailed while international
efforts were made to bring the peace process back to its
right track. We call on all parties to commit themselves
to the results of the last meeting of the Quartet, held in
New York a few days ago, which resulted in a plan of
action and a timetable to realize the American vision of
establishing two States living side by side in peace
with an independent Palestinian State established
within the borders of 4 June 1967, and to put an end to
the Israeli occupation of all Palestinian and Arab
territories. At the same time, we strongly condemn all
acts by Israel to undermine the political process and to
escalate the situation, particularly the recent military
acts against the headquarters of the Palestinian
Authority and president Yasser Arafat. I would also
like to reiterate my country's position of condemning
all forms of suicide attacks against Israeli civilians,
which are used as a pretext by certain groups to hinder
international efforts to revive the peace process. We
believe that those acts are perpetrated not only against
Israeli civilians but against all the peoples of the region
who wish to live in security and who want a
comprehensive and just peace.

We would also like to reiterate that Israel's
practices and its siege of the Palestinian Authority have
weakened the Palestinian side's ability to shoulder its
responsibilities. We therefore call upon all the parties
concerned to enable the Palestinian Authority to
rebuild its security institutions in order to carry out its
duties.
We call on all parties concerned to bring calm to
the situation, to exercise self-restraint and to shoulder
their responsibilities to support the efforts made by the
Quartet and the brotherly Arab countries to bring the
peace process back to its right track, based on the
Madrid terms of reference, Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 1397 (2002)
and the Arab peace initiative.

