Mr. Mayr-Harting (spoke in French): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union and
its member States.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2014/162) and the Special Representative
for her presentation. I also thank the Permanent
Representative of Haiti for his presentation today.

The candidate countries Turkey, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Iceland
and Serbia; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the Republic
of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with this
statement.

The European Union shares the assessment of
the Secretary-General in his report with regard to
the relative improvement in the political situation in
Haiti. During the recent visit of President Martelly
to Brussels, the European Union expressed to him its
satisfaction with the progress achieved in the context of
the inter-Haitian dialogue, which has made it possible
to reach significant compromises with regard to the
electoral and institutional disputes. We are pleased to
note that our calls and those of other partners for the
continuation of that dialogue have been heard and that
an agreement on the date of the upcoming elections
has finally been reached by the parties concerned. The
Government's commitment to cover one third of the
costs for the organization of the upcoming elections is
also an encouraging sign.
The consolidation of democracy and its institutions
remains an important pillar in our cooperation with
Haiti. With that in mind, the European Union and the
Government of Haiti decided in December 2013 to
launch a political dialogue, as provided for in article 8
of the Cotonou Agreement. That framework will make
it possible to support the political and economic reforms
necessary for sustainable socioeconomic development
in Haiti, but also to have a constructive exchange of
views on subjects of common concern. The political
dialogue is further complemented by a programme of
support to the Haitian Parliament aimed at improving
dialogue among political parties and a more efficient
management of the legislative agenda. We also asked
the Club de Madrid to carry out another high-level
political advisory mission, which is already under way.

With regard to the humanitarian situation, the
European Union first of all welcomes the progress
mentioned by the Secretary-General, in particular the
ongoing reduction in the number of displaced people
still living in camps. However, we remain concerned
about the precarious living conditions ofthose families,
most of whom do not have access to basic services.
The European Union would like to underscore once
again its concern with regard to the cases of forced and
sometimes violent evictions reported by several civil
society organizations. The Haitian authorities must
ensure that the rights of the persons concerned are
respected and find humane and sustainable solutions to
help them in their relocation.

The European Union also welcomes the efforts to
find a coordinated response to the cholera epidemic
in Haiti and welcomes the two-year plan of the United
Nations, which supports the National Plan for the
Elimination ofCholera in Haiti. I am pleased to confirm
that the European Union will continue its humanitarian
efforts in Haiti in 2014 with a programme in the amount
of €18 million euros, which will include our continued
support for the eradication of the epidemic.

Finally, with regard to the humanitarian situation,
we would like to express our dismay at the number
of Haitian children under the age of five that suffer
from malnutrition. As stated in paragraph 18 of the
Secretary-General's report, approximately 100,000
children are affected, of whom 20,000 suffer from
severe acute malnutrition, which will have irreversible
consequences for their growth. This is truly a national
tragedy that should mobilize all the political forces in
Haiti. We reiterate our request to the Haitian authorities
and political forces to put issues related to combatting
poverty and malnutrition at the top of the Government's
agenda.

The European Union takes note of the proposals
made in the report of the Secretary-General with
regard to the future reconfiguration of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
Determining the most appropriate option will require
in-depth analysis of the security situation and progress
on the four key benchmarks of stabilization.

The European Union supports the goal of a gradual
and conditional handover from MINUSTAH to the
Haitian Government. The pace of that transition will
depend upon the political will and determination
of the Haitian authorities to implement legislative
and administrative reforms needed to carry out
the tasks delegated at present to MINUSTAH. The
European Union, through its development cooperation
programmes, aimed at, among other things, important
support for the reform of State administration,
will continue to support the process of mission
reconfiguration.

As we did in prior debates, we reiterate our concern
at the limited progress in the field ofjudicial and prison
reform. In our view, it is essential that the Haitian
authorities undertake reform of the security sector as a
whole, including the police, the border control regime
and the judicial and prison systems. To that end, we
are working in cooperation with the United Nations
Development Programme to support the capacity-
building of the Superior Council of the Judiciary, for
which a specific programme funded by the European
Union has just been launched. Furthermore, we
welcome the decision of the Court of Appeal confirming
the judicial proceedings against former President Jean-
Claude Duvalier for crimes against humanity.

The binational high-level dialogue begun between
Haiti and the Dominican Republic represents an excellent
opportunity to find consensual solutions on cross-
border issues of common interest. We congratulate the
two Governments for their constructive engagement.
The European Union will continue to actively support
that process through its participation as an observer
in the dialogue and through its regional cooperation
programmes.

In conclusion, the European Union would like to
express its appreciation of the excellent cooperation
between our delegation in Port-au-Prince and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Sandra
Honore, and the United Nations country office in Haiti.
We will remain engaged and continue our support to
Haiti and MINUSTAH so as to strengthen the reform
efforts under way.

