Mr. Reynders (Belgium) (spoke in French):
Belgium fully associates itself with the statement to
be made by the representative of the European Union.
I would also like to make some comments in my
national capacity.

I would like to thank the delegation of Peru for
organizing today's debate and the speakers for their
statements. I congratulate Mr. Simpson and his team
on the considerable research they have done, which has
resulted in an ambitious document (see S/2018/86) that
not only gives very concrete recommendations to the
United Nations, regional organizations and Member
States, but also invites us to deeper reflection and to
confronting the challenges related to the implementation
of resolution 2250 (2015).

Belgium welcomes the study's emphasis on a
positive discourse on young people. It challenges a
number of stereotypical conceptions and demonstrates
that young people have an important capacity for
action that promotes peace. Creating an environment
conducive to young adults' participation and inclusion
in prevention and peacebuilding processes is crucial.
Equal access to inclusive and quality education, as
well as opportunities for decent employment, are also
key elements in creating that environment. Through
education we can help young people to become
conscious, critical and open citizens, responsible and
capable of thinking constructively about their place and
role in society.

Accordingly, our Department of the Interior
coordinates a project called Bounce, financed by a
European Commission fund. Through a combination
of action and reflection, the project is aimed at
strengthening young people's qualifications and skills
with a View to guiding them towards resilience, which
is the ability to bounce back in the face of difficulties.
Its training is based on a positive perspective * the
strengths and talents of every young person. We have
found that by changing perspectives from risk to
opportunity, from fear to openness and from control
to accountability, we can constructively address the
complex issue of violent extremism and make progress
towards inclusion.

At the national level, Belgium already provides
a structured platform for young people to express
themselves and be heard. Our active participation
in the United Nations Youth Delegate Programme
is another example of our commitment to inclusion,
whereby young people can contribute effectively to the
preparation of high-level meetings and participate in
them themselves. It is clear that effective inclusion can
be achieved only by ensuring the dignity, protection
and quality of life to which young men and women are
entitled. In that regard, as always, Belgium remains
firmly committed to the promotion of human rights,
which is a fundamental condition for peace and
development, and attaches particular importance to
the rights of vulnerable groups. We believe that it is
essential to protect the rights ofyoung people and invest
in their development so that they can realize their full
potential and thereby contribute to peace and security.

It is also important to intensify our efforts to
involve young people in achieving the Sustainable
Development Goals. Pathways for Peace, the joint
World Bank-United Nations report, emphasizes the
importance of including young people in the prevention
of violent conflict and strengthening the relationship
between development, humanitarian action and
peacebuilding. Working for the future of young
people as conscious, critical and open citizens who
are capable and responsible is working for peace. We
therefore fully share the vision that young people must
be recognized as essential partners in peace. That is
why, in its partner countries, Belgium's development
cooperation supports appropriate training, stimulates
employment and entrepreneurship and promotes the
rights ofyoung people with a view to actively involving
them in decision-making processes.

In conclusion, I would like to stress that Belgium is
committed to continuing to promote the rights of young
people with a view to active inclusion in crucial peace
and security processes. In particular, in our work as
a member of the Peacebuilding Commission, we will
work to ensure that the youth dimension is positively
integrated into the Commission's activities. Taking
into account the report's recommendations, Belgium
will also work to draw attention to the challenges
surrounding young people and will advocate for greater
integration of the youth and peace and security agenda.

We must also work together on the ways in which
the United Nations, including the Security Council,
follows up on those recommendations. On behalf of
my country, I welcome the fact that the report under
discussion today opens the door to a new dynamic in
the Security Council. I consider it important that the
Council be informed in a timely and comprehensive
manner of specific situations that concern young people
and are relevant to its mandate. It will have to be better
organized, particularly through the use of mechanisms
to access the necessary information. The stakes are
high, and Belgium intends to make its contribution.

