Mr. Maquieira (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I wish
thank the Permanent Representatives of the United
States and the United Kingdom for the information
they have provided, in accordance with paragraph 24 of
resolution 1483 (2003).

Chile valued the agreement reached between the
Governing Council and the Coalition Provisional
Authority last 15 November. Among other things, it
envisages a timetable that essentially establishes a
process for returning sovereignty to the Iraqi people.
That objective, which is of great importance, has
always been part of the will of the members of the
Security Council, and that is reflected in its resolutions
on the subject.

The future handover of sovereignty, which is
scheduled for 30 June, has the consensus of the Iraqi
people, according to the report of the technical team
that recently visited the country, and also the
agreement of the Coalition authorities, as they
expressed in connection with maintaining the date
envisaged. That handover of sovereignty involves
major challenges for the various parties involved. It is
the beginning of a political process that should lead to
the establishment of a democratically elected
Government, one that fulfils the minimum
requirements of credibility and transparency and has
the support of all the political, religious and civil
society forces in Iraq.

In order to ensure the legitimacy of that process,
there must be, inter alia, an electoral law, electoral
registers, an appeals mechanism and appropriate levels
of security. According to the background information
in the report of the fact-finding team, at least eight
months of preparation will be needed to conduct an
electoral process that meets United Nations standards
of legality and transparency. We therefore agree that it
is not feasible to set up elections before the date
established for the transfer of sovereignty to the Iraqi
people. This situation gives rise to major challenges
that must be met in the short and medium terms, for
example, the establishment of a mechanism to regulate
the transfer of sovereignty, the body that will exercise
that sovereignty, and the preparation of the electoral
process, within the most feasible timetable.

We support the will expressed by the Secretary-
General to the effect that this Organization can
contribute to the creation of consensuses among the
Iraqi people which make it possible to form a transition
Government to lead the country toward adoption of a
new political constitution and the election of a
representative Government. The United Nations can
also play an important role in technical assistance in
the future elections. That will contribute to realizing
the intentions of the international community,
represented by this Council, for the reconstruction and
democratization of Iraq. That should contribute to
expanding the consensus and the unity of will that
governs the work of the Council and the Secretary-
General in this regard.

We are extremely concerned at the security
situation in Iraq, because, inter alia, it determines
freedom of movement and of action by the United
Nations and its personnel in the work of contributing to
the political transition.

Lastly, perhaps we could request some additional
information on progress with regard to the fundamental
law, which, in accordance with the 15 November
schedule, is soon to be promulgated.

