Mr. Kubuabola (Fiji): Fiji aligns itself with the
statement delivered by the President of Kiribati, His
Excellency Anote Tong, on behalf of the Pacific small
island developing States (SIDS).
I thank you, Mr. President, for the invitation to
participate in this Security Council debate. I wish in
particular to convey Fiji's gratitude to you, Foreign
Minister McCully, and the Government ofNew Zealand
for convening this debate. I also take this opportunity
to extend Fiji's congratulations to you on the occasion
of your presidency of the Council for the month of July.

By way of introduction, may I also make the point
that many small island developing States are actively
contributing to the management of global security
problems. Fiji, for instance, has been participating in
United Nations peacekeeping operations since 1978.
Our participation has come at a considerable cost to
our country. We have lost precious, innocent lives in
the course of Blue Helmet duties, and the provision
of peacekeeping personnel has cost our Government
substantial amounts from our national budgets. Despite
these burdens, Fiji remains steadfast in its commitment
to the cause of United Nations peacekeeping.

Climate change has emerged as the biggest threat
to the security of small island developing States, and
Fiji is no exception in this regard. Climate change
has been accurately described as a risk multiplier.
The man-made causes of climate change are now well
established, and it must be clear to all by now that small
island developing States are the victims of a problem
not of their creation.

In the south-west Pacific, we face a future in which
sea levels will rise to the great detriment of our island
foreshores. Likewise, we will be attacked by tropical
storms of unprecedented severity and frequency. While
the rest of the world debates the implications of climate
change, we in the small islands and atolls of the Pacific
are having to deal with the problem, because it is
already upon us.

To respond to the security threat of climate change,
we need strategic investment in adaptation measures.
We need to move from rhetoric to a more pragmatic
and action-oriented response. We believe that it is for
the Security Council and development partners to bring
greater international effort to ensuring that we have the
capacity, both human and institutional, to deal with
this existential threat to the security of the small island
developing States.

One obvious response measure is to address
the issue of sustainable energy in a meaningful way.
Supplying energy through burning fossil fuels for
electricity, heat and transport is a major source of
greenhouse-gas emissions, causing climate change
and ocean acidification. This has to stop, or at least be
severely curtailed, if we are going to have sustainable
development on this planet. We therefore call for a
much greater share of global capital to be directed at
the development of renewable energy sources and green
growth frameworks for the future we want.

I turn now to the threat to the biodiversity of the
world's environment, with particular emphasis on
oceans and seas. It is essential that we protect and
restore the health, productivity and resilience of our
oceans, marine ecosystems and fisheries. We are
challenged to maintain their biodiversity, enable their
conservation and manage the sustainable use of their
resources for present and future generations.

The marine environment provides opportunities
for sustainable economic growth for SIDS, but only
if we can overcome existing threats. The ongoing
overexploitation of ocean resources through illegal,
unregulated and unreported (IUU) fishing is a
significant security threat to SIDS, in relation to
both sovereignty issues and the overall sustainability
of marine resources. IUU fishing deprives coastal
communities of their source of livelihood and income
and is thus a security threat to the economies of SIDS.

We call on bodies such as the Council to help small
island developing States overcome this problem by
coalescing in international cooperation and technical
support mechanisms to strengthen the monitoring,
control and surveillance of our oceans. It is largely
because of these security threats to our marine
environment that the Triennial Oceans and Seas Global
Conference process is being constructed, in order to
ensure the integrity of the forthcoming sustainable
development goals on the sustainable use of marine
resources.

The third area we wish to address is that of the
vulnerability of small island developing States to
the criminal activities of the wider international
community. By definition, SIDS are vulnerable owing
to their small size, developing economies and isolated
locations. Many struggle to adequately control their
sovereign boundaries. The resources of organized
crime from larger countries often exceed those of SIDS.
It is thus that many of them are fighting losing battles
against the illegal activities of drug traders and human
traffickers.
Transnational organized crime is a security
threat to small island developing States because of
the aforementioned control capacities, particularly in
relation to effective border controls. But it is also a
security threat because of the ways and means by which
organized crime introduces corruption to vulnerable
small island developing States. As the sources of this
organized crime are the supply-and-demand markets
to which these illegal activities are ultimately directed,
we call on the countries concerned to give greater
cooperation, assistance and resources to small island
developing States to combat these illegal activities.

In conclusion, we join with others in calling for
the Council to remain seized of the security challenges
faced by SIDS. We repeat the conclusions of the SIDS
Accelerated Modalities for Action (Samoa Pathway) on
the urgent need to strengthen international cooperation
and ensure genuine and durable partnership at the
national, regional and international levels as the best
means of overcoming these challenges.

