Mr. Gutierrez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I
commend and congratulate you, Mr. President, for your
initiative to include on the Council's programme of
work this open debate, which offers us a further
opportunity to exchange views and submit proposals on
a matter of particular importance and of great interest
to all Members of the Organization. After a gap of 18
months, the Security Council is holding another debate

on its working methods. We see that as a positive sign
of the commitment of Council members, in particular
permanent members, to continually assess and seek to
improve the Council's work. However, it is also
important to remember that this topic is an integral part
of the overall reform process of the Security Council,
which involves the discussion of other issues that seek
comprehensively to render the Council more
transparent, efficient and legitimate.

From reading the paper annexed to your letter of
1 April, Sir, it is clear that the Security Council has
implemented actions to make its work more transparent
and to promote greater participation by non-member
States and civil society actors. On 19 July 2006, the
President of the Security Council issued a note
(S/2006/507), whose annex contained a series of
provisions seeking to update and modernize some areas
of the working methods. It was drafted by a working
group to which Peru, then a non-permanent member of
the Council, contributed.

Document S/2006/507 set out a series of
guidelines summarizing the practice of the Council that
included additional adjustments to its procedures. That
document is an important step forward in improving
the working methods of the Security Council, which
was furthered by the open debate held in August 2008
(see S/PV.5968) and the subsequent - I must say
partial - implementation of some measures aimed at
promoting greater openness in the Council's work.

However, in the view of my delegation, there
remains ample room for increasing the transparency,
effectiveness and accountability of the Council's work.
It is essential to conduct a fair and comprehensive self-
assessment that enables us to identify what new steps
should be taken to enhance transparency, efficiency
and interaction with non-members of the Council. I
must underline that such ideas should be considered
and developed in a balanced way in such a way that no
one concept takes precedence over another. The need to
seek greater efficiency in the Council's work should
not be at the expense of reducing transparency or
increasing openness, participation or access to
information by non-members of the Council.

If the aforementioned principles are fully adopted
as pillars of the working methods, it will be more
feasible to implement the measures and suggestions
raised by a great majority of delegations, which
ultimately seek, as I have said, to make the Security
Council's work more legitimate and render it strong
and efficient.

It is essential to strengthen the institutional
mechanisms for interaction between the Security
Council and the General Assembly that are already
reflected in the Organization's Charter, such as in its
Article 15, which provides that the General Assembly
should receive and consider annual and special reports
from the Security Council, and Article 24, which
specifically provides that the Security Council will
submit annual and, when necessary, special reports to
the General Assembly for its consideration. In that
regard, it is unquestionable that States not members of
the Council have a right to greater access to
information that should be substantive, not merely
descriptive, as is the case in the annual reports.

Clearly, this is directly linked to the question of
working methods. The need to improve and strengthen
the systems of interaction is extremely urgent, all the
more as all of can see how the various cross-cutting
issues, such as security, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding, are becoming interconnected with
development.

Undeniable, there is overwhelming agreement
among Members on the need to make substantive and
steady progress in improving the Council's working
methods so that they heed and reflect the realities of
the twenty-first century. This would help ensure that
the Council is seen as an organ projecting legitimacy in
the eyes not only of the membership but also of
international public opinion. It is in that light that Peru
hopes to see concrete progress by the Security Council
in achieving that objective.

