Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): I would like at the outset to congratulate the Republic of Viet Nam on taking its seat on the Security Council and on presiding over it this month. I wish Viet Nam and its friendly people further progress and prosperity. Since its foundation, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has sought to maintain international peace and security and to enhance collective action under the United Nations, due to our strong belief in the purposes and principles of the United Nations and our desire to promote peace, prevent wars and destructive conflicts while maintaining international peace and security. We meet today at a time when the world is more than ever in dire need of maintaining peace and security and upholding the Charter of the United Nations, especially as we witness frequent and accelerated conflicts and tensions, more so than we have seen in decades, especially in our region, the Middle East and the Arab Gulf region. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia urges all countries to commit to the Charter. We also urge the international community to shoulder its responsibilities, particularly for the need to end the Israeli occupation, including the occupation of Palestinian territory and other Arab territories, which runs counter to the principles of the United Nations and its Charter. The Council must compel Iran to respect the sovereignty of the States of the Middle East States and to abide by international law and treaties, while ceasing its attempts to destabilize the region and the entire world. We condemn Iran's violation of Iraq's sovereignty by attacking two Iraqi military bases. We stress the ongoing efforts of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia to protect brotherly Iraq from conflicts and wars so that the people of that country can live in security and prosperity. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia will always stand by Iraq in order to thwart any attempt to destabilize its security and stability and its place in the Arab world. In order to solve the problems of the world today, we must promote reason and peace over war and destruction. We must together seek to save the world from further conflict, spread the message of peace, strengthen the role of multilateral diplomacy and enhance mediation to resolve crises. That has always been our approach in our foreign policy. We have launched many initiatives, including the signing of the Riyadh agreement between the legitimate Government of Yemen and the Southern Transitional Council and of the peace agreement between Eritrea and Ethiopia. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has taken other initiatives over the past few years. Thanks to our policies, we have spared the region many conflicts and played a great role in maintaining international peace and security. While emphasizing our efforts to maintain international peace and security, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia this week announced the founding of the Council of Arab and African States bordering the Red Sea and the Gulf of Aden. We believe in the importance of that Council for enhancing cooperation, investment and development among the States of the region and helping to maintain security and address challenges and threats. Committing to the purposes and principles of the Charter requires that we review the Charter and amend it in a manner that would take into consideration the aspirations and challenges of the twenty-first century. That is why the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia fully supports the efforts to reform the Security Council, and reform the United Nations in general. We also call on all parties to commit to world multilateral structures and preserve and maintain international treaties. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia will spare no effort in cooperating with the United Nations, and specifically with the Security Council, as well as with other countries, as we believe in collective work to ensure humankind's prosperity. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia will continue to play a responsible diplomatic role and promote international law and its precepts, which have always been the basis for international action. We need to make decisive policies and decisions in order to counter challenges with all firmness and determination. We also need to work seriously and swiftly to maintain global security and stability, while defusing tensions everywhere.
