Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Unfortunately, I have not learned anything
new from my British colleague's further statement.
We heard the same set of unsubstantiated accusations
that we have heard in previous meetings. I would like
to mention a couple of factual things. As I said about
consular access to Yulia and Sergei Skripal, we do
not have that access. Another significant fact is that
Yulia Skripal's own sister, who lives in Russia and who
wanted to visit her - and Yulia had given her consent
to that - has twice been refused a visa for the United
Kingdom by the British Embassy. Does that not tell
us something?

With regard to the request that the British allegedly
made to Russia immediately after the incident, we
have already had the pleasure of commenting more
than once on the nature of that request, which was no
request at all. It was the then British Foreign Minister
Boris Johnson's demand of the Russian Ambassador
in London that Russia admit to the crime and say
how it was committed, whether with the knowledge
of the Russian authorities or by misunderstanding or
lack of oversight. That was in fact the entire so-called
request for cooperation with Russia. There should be no
misleading of the international community here. There
was no request from the British for Russia's cooperation
in investigating this case. On the contrary, Russia's
repeated requests, both within the framework of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
and in other ways, for conducting a joint investigation
with the British confirmed our readiness to engage
fully in this.

Of course, I understand that our British colleague
said that we live in parallel universes - and perhaps
some people would like us to live on another
planet - but there are no colonized planets yet, so we
must live on the one we have. And on this planet we will
have to cooperate, whether others like it or not. And
to most of the questions we have laid out - and there
are more than 40 of them - there are still no answers.
Just as there are no multiple Russian versions of what
happened, something that the British representative
tried to say today, suggesting that journalistic versions
represent the position of the Russian authorities.
We too will be happy to give a briefing to interested
delegations on how we see the situation, on what has
happened and what is now happening with Britain's so-
called investigation.

The meeting rose at 12.55 pm.
