Mr. Hoshino (Japan): Let me first extend my
deepest appreciation to the briefers and all those
who participated in compiling the progress study. I
thank Mr. Simpson for his hard work. As the study
emphasizes, it is important to recognize youth as key
stakeholders in peace and security, while ensuring their
protection from all forms of violence.

The study calls for the international community as a
whole to overcome stereotypes that tend to view young
men as violent perpetrators and potential threats to
peace and young women as passive victims ofviolence. I
could not agree more. Japan has advocated for the active
participation and contributions of young people to peace
and security based on the human security approach,
which has two main strategies - empowerment and
the protection of those in need, including young people.

We need to make many more conscious efforts to
empower young people. As the study points out, the
voices of our young people are not fully or frequently
reflected in important decision-making processes. Cases
are found in which young women and sexual minorities
are even disempowered by being deprived of access to
power and resources, not to mention opportunities for
political participation. In that regard, Japan is working
to empower young people by providing training and
educational opportunities and creating an enabling
environment for them to demonstrate their leadership
and innovative ideas.

In the field of peacebuilding, Japan has been
training civilian experts from Asia, the Middle East
and Africa through the Global Peacebuilders Program,
which particularly welcomes youth participants with
diverse backgrounds. In that connection, I would like
to introduce the case of Ms. Anab Mohamud Osman, a
young female officer from the Government of Somalia
who participated in the training course in 2017.
Carrying the spirit of her colleagues who lost their
lives in tragic terrorist attacks in Mogadishu, she was
proactive throughout the course and is now employed
by the Government as a stabilization and peacebuilding
assistant in order to engage in creating peace in her
country. Japan is pleased that the programme has trained
hundreds of highly motivated young participants, both
from Japan and from conflict-affected regions and
countries, who are now empowered as professional
peacebuilders with a strong sense of responsibility and
initiative for peace and security. Japan continues to
support their future success.

The protection of young people is, of course,
important as they face armed conflicts, terrorism and
gender-based violence. Iwould like to call attention to the
mental health care for young people, in addition to their
physical health, as it tends to be less prioritized. Japan
believes that psychosocial support for young people is
imperative for peacebuilding and reconstruction.

In that context, the Government of Japan is pleased
to note that a project in support of youth in the Central
African Republic is being implemented with the
financial support of the United Nations Trust Fund for
Human Security, to which Japan is a principal donor.
This project is led by the United Nations Development
Programme, with a number of other United Nations
organs - the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations, UNICEF, the United Nations
Population Fund, the International Organization for
Migration, UN-Women, UNESCO and the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic - joining
forces to implement the project to support the local
effort of the people of the Central African Republic.
The project is designed to integrate youth, improve the
delivery of and access to basic social services, enhance
sustainable livelihoods and promote social cohesion.

In addition to that, it should be noted that the project
includes providing medical and psychological care and
protection to women and girls who have survived sexual
violence. We hope that the project will enhance the
security of the people of the Central African Republic,
including young people, through the nexus of peace,
development and human rights in practice.
The study reflects the voices raised by thousands
of young people. We should respond to those voices by
taking into account the recommendations in the study
with regard to the planning and implementation of peace-
and security-related policies. Young people are key
stakeholders in sustaining the peace and development
of a country. The starting point of their journey must
include their protection and empowerment.

In that regard, ending violence and achieving
negative peace is not enough. The elimination of social
inequality and injustice must be incorporated in order
to realize positive peace. Based on the concept of
human security, Japan continues to be committed to
the realization of a world where youth are much better
protected and are fully empowered.

