Mr. Lemos Godinho (Portugal): Taking into
account what you just said, Mr. President, and for the
purpose of efficiency and to save time, I will have to
shorten my statement today. The full text is being
distributed.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union (EU). The candidate countries Croatia
and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the
countries of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidates Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Montenegro and Serbia, as well as
Ukraine, Moldova, Armenia and Georgia align
themselves with this declaration.

First of all, I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for
the opportunity to discuss this important issue. I would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his report on the
protection of civilians (S/2007/643), which, we
believe, also underlines his personal commitment on
this matter. Finally, I would also like to thank Under-
Secretary-General Mr. John Holmes for his informative
briefing.

Throughout history civilian populations have to a
large extent suffered the consequences of conflicts.
Even their deliberate targeting is, unfortunately, not a
new phenomenon. The fact that such practices of gross
violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law are still a reality today is something
that deeply concerns us.

The examples of the suffering of civilians that
Mr. Holmes mentioned here today validate even further
our fears and concerns. The Security Council has
already signalled in resolution 1674 (2006) its
readiness to consider threats to peace and security of
this nature and, when and where necessary, to adopt
appropriate steps.

While we renew our commitment to the important
principles associated with the protection of civilians,
we should not lose sight of the fact that the primary
2

responsibility to protect lies with individual sovereign
States, which should protect their respective
populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity.

Two years ago at the World Summit, heads of
State and Government reached an historic agreement
on the responsibility to protect. The EU welcomes the
reaffirmation of the responsibility to protect by the
Security Council in subsequent resolutions, including
1674 (2006). The international community should
encourage and help States meet that responsibility. If a
State is unwilling or unable to address its problems,
then we would have to make good on our responsibility
to protect by more proactive means, as provided for at
the World Summit.

Humanitarian access is a crucial part of
protecting civilians in armed conflict and a
fundamental prerequisite for humanitarian action. The
European Union is disturbed by numerous cases of
denial or obstruction of access and calls on all parties
to cooperate fully with the United Nations and other
humanitarian agencies and organizations in providing
rapid, safe and unimpeded access to civilians in armed
conflict.

We also strongly condemn attacks on
humanitarian personnel, including United Nations and
associated personnel. In that regard, we fully support
the Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel and its Optional Protocol.

Women, children and other vulnerable groups are
especially affected by armed conflict. Sexual
exploitation and abuse remain widespread atrocities
affecting millions of Victims. In this regard, the EU
highlights the effective implementation of Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000) on women, peace and
security. We also reiterate our full support to the policy
of zero tolerance of sexual abuse and exploitation by
United Nations personnel.

Millions of children continue to suffer in
situations of armed conflict. In that connection, we
would like to call attention to Council resolution 1612
(2005), which sets an enhanced framework for the
protection of children in armed conflict. The European
Union is proceeding with the mainstreaming of issues
concerning children and armed conflict into its
advocacy, policies and programmes and has continued
with its efforts regarding the implementation of the
European Union Guidelines on Children and Armed
07-60635
Conflict, adopted in April 2006. I would also like to
take this opportunity to recall the adoption, in February
of this year, of the Paris Commitments and Principles
against the illegal recruitment of child soldiers.

Still in the sphere of vulnerable groups, the EU
shares the concerns highlighted by the Secretary-
General in his report regarding the risks that conflicts
pose for older persons and persons with disabilities.
We would like to underline the importance of the
recently adopted Convention on the Rights of Persons
with Disabilities in this context.

The special protection needs of refugees and
displaced persons also must be adequately addressed.
The European Union acknowledges the efforts of the
Representative of the Secretary-General on the Human
Rights of Internally Displaced Persons, Mr. Walter
Kalin, but remains concerned by the growing number
of internally displaced persons worldwide. While those
people seek protection abroad or in their own country,
they sometimes remain in danger at their place of
refuge. Camps themselves can be targeted and are often
insufficiently protected. There is a need for increased
and sustained physical protection in these situations.

We also note that steps to ensure the safe return
for refugees and internally displaced persons can also
prove useful in helping to address housing, land and
property issues. The growing number of journalists
being killed or taken hostage is also extremely
disturbing. In that respect, we would like to call
attention to Council resolution 1738 (2006) on the
safety and security of journalists, media professionals
and associated personnel. We also note the efforts of
the United Nations Special Rapporteur on the right to
freedom of opinion and expression in addressing this
issue.

The excessive and destabilizing accumulations of
small arms and light weapons are another element of
concern. It would also be wrong to address the
protection of civilians in armed conflict without raising
the issue of cluster munitions and their humanitarian
impact. The European Union played a constructive role
in the recent meeting of the States parties to the
Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons. While
the result fell short of the EU's own proposal to
negotiate by 2008 a legally binding instrument that
prohibits the use, production, transfer and stockpiling
of cluster munitions that cause unacceptable harm to
civilians and that includes provisions on cooperation
07-60635

and assistance, the EU joined consensus on the
decision because we consider that doing so will allow
us to promote our own proposal, including in the
expert negotiations that will take place in 2008.

The EU calls on Member States that have not
done so to ratify and support existing conventions and
resolutions forming the legal framework for the
protection of civilians and to implement them fully
within their national legal systems.

The EU believes that the investigation of crimes
under international law committed against civilians and
bringing their perpetrators to justice is vital. After all,
there can be no peace without justice and rule of law.

The International Criminal Court (ICC), the
international criminal tribunals and special courts, as
well as reconciliation commissions, are working to end
impunity, which is an essential task and can help
prevent future abuses. The European Union views the
International Criminal Court as an essential instrument
for the prevention of genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes, whose victims are mostly
civilians. We therefore remain firmly committed to the
effective functioning of the ICC. We also wish to stress
the importance of full cooperation with the Court and
call on States that have not yet done so to accede to the
Rome Statute. Moreover, we would like to stress the
importance of the work of the ICC Trust Fund in
assisting the most vulnerable victims of genocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes.

Naturally, the best way to protect civilians in
armed conflicts is to prevent conflicts. The Security
Council plays an important role in that regard.

Finally, the European Union welcomes the
Secretary-General's proposal to develop a more
systematic approach in the Security Council to
protecting civilians. The protection of civilians in
armed conflict is a complex challenge, and perhaps
increasingly so when we consider the asymmetric
nature of many conflicts today. The European Union is
fully committed to that challenge and, in cooperation
with the United Nations, will continue its work for the
promotion of peace and conflict prevention.

