Mr. Buallay (Bahrain) (interpretation from Arabic):
My delegation warmly welcomes the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Georgia to this meeting. We also wish to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on the manner in which
you have been guiding the work of the Security Council
over the past month.

We pay tribute to the efforts of the United Nations
Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG), of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, of the Russian
Federation as facilitator, of the group of Friends of the
Secretary-General, of the Organization for Security and

 

Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and of all others trying to
bring about a peaceful settlement of the crisis in Georgia.

We note that the security situation has deteriorated,
which has had negative repercussions of various kinds,
including in particular the flight of some 40,000 persons
who had returned to live in the Gali region. We believe that
such hostilities are in the interest neither of the parties nor
of the peace that all seek. The international community, and
the United Nations in particular, have made considerable
efforts to restore peace to the region. But the parties
themselves have not fulfilled their obligations to the
international community; this has led to additional problems
and difficulties.

My delegation condemns the attacks on UNOMIG and
on the peacekeeping forces of the Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS). The responsibility for their
security lies with the two parties. If they do not cooperate
with the international community and with the United
Nations, the situation on the ground could further
deteriorate. My delegation urges the two parties to fulfil all
their obligations and to respect all relevant resolutions of
the Security Council. We urge them to exercise the greatest
restraint and to take advantage of the present opportunities
for peace.

We believe that the recent Geneva meetings marked a
path that will allow the parties to return to the negotiating
table and to settle their disputes in a peaceful manner taking
into account all the interests of all the parties.

Among the issues that must be resolved is the question
of refugees and displaced persons. The refugees and
displaced persons must return to their homes in conformity
with the quadripartite agreement concluded on 4 April
1994. A climate of security and other necessary conditions
must be established to that end.

Finally, we support the recommendation of the
Secretary-General, set out in paragraph 41 of his report,
that the mandate of UNOMIG be extended for a further
period of six months, until 31 January 1999. We also
support the draft resolution before the Council today, and
will vote in its favour.

