Mr. Greenblatt (United States of America): I am
pleased to be back in the Security Council today. I
would like to update members of the Council on the
Trump Administration's peace efforts.

I know that this institution has shown a deep
interest in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. I also know
that many of those present are frustrated by the fact
that we have not yet shared the details of the vision
that we have crafted. We understand that. We hope
that when the right time does come, that frustration
will dissipate, as will the frustration that we all have
about the lack of any progress towards the resolution of
the conflict, as well as the lack of progress to improve
lives and the security challenges that plague Israel and
much of the region. We hope that such frustration will
be replaced by a mutual understanding that our vision
provides a unique opportunity to help the two parties
and their neighbours achieve what has been elusive for
too long - a comprehensive peace agreement.
We know that the Palestinians have seen promises
made by some and not kept, but President Trump and
his Administration desire to make the lives of everyone
involved better. That means Palestinians in Gaza,
Jerusalem and what many call the West Bank; and that
means Israelis in Tel Aviv, Jerusalem and what many
call Judea and Samaria.

I want to express my gratitude to the Kingdom of
Bahrain for graciously co-hosting the very successful
Peace to Prosperity workshop with us last month. In
Manama, more than 300 Government, private sector
and civil society leaders came together to demonstrate
an international commitment to improving the lives of
the Palestinians. Government leaders, chief executive
officers and economists at the workshop agreed that
the economic vision is detailed and ambitious, but
achievable and potentially transformative with the
right environment created by an agreed-upon peace
agreement and proper governance structures.

Our economic vision, which has now been
downloaded from the Internet over 1 million times,
contains a detailed portfolio of projects and capacity-
building programmes that have the potential to
unleash exciting, sustainable private-sector growth
for Palestinians, Jordanians, Egyptians and Lebanese.
We have been clear and honest about the fact that
this economic vision can be achieved only if there
is a resolution to the political conflict between the
parties. This is not an economic peace. There will be
no economic prosperity without a political solution,
but no political solution will succeed without a well-
developed economic plan. President Trump has not yet
decided when we will release the political portion of
the plan, and we hope to make that decision soon. In the
meantime, I want to ask for the help of those present
to create the conditions by which we could all have a
serious conversation.

Among the many obstacles that we face is the
constant drumbeat of tired rhetoric that is designed to
prevent progress and bypass direct negotiations. It is
time to retire that rhetoric. Peace will require honesty
and a willingness to consider new ideas, as well as
courage and hard compromises. This is a time for us to
speak to each other candidly, not in stale slogans and
talking points.

Let me get a little specific here. The conflict will
not end on the basis of an international consensus
about who was right and who was wrong and about
who should give up X and who should give up Y.
International consensus might work from time to time,
when such a consensus can actually be achieved. In the
case of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, international
consensus has not been achieved. Those who continue
to call for international consensus on the conflict are
doing nothing to encourage the parties to sit down at
the negotiating table and make the hard compromises
necessary for peace. In fact, they are doing the opposite
by allowing people to hide behind words that mean
nothing. International consensus is too often nothing
more than a mask for inaction.

Let us not forget the day when the United Nations
could not even find a way to build an international
consensus behind the fact that Hamas is a terrorist
organization that relentlessly attacks Israelis by
incendiary balloons, missiles, attack tunnels and
other means, sometimes while hiding in residential
neighbourhoods filled with Palestinian families. Hamas
ghoulishly holds Israeli soldiers Hadar Goldin and
Oron Shaul as bargaining chips. Hamas has imprisoned
Israeli civilians Avraham Mengistu and Hisham
Al-Sayed. Hamas is a brutal terrorist organization that
causes nothing but misery and suffering for Palestinians
and Israelis. It is an organization that continues to vow
to destroy Israel.

That failure is profoundly shameful. If we cannot
even reach an international consensus regarding
Hamas, is an international consensus really going to
end the conflict? And how is it that we cannot find an
international consensus that the Palestinian Authority's
rewarding of terrorism and the murder of Israelis using
public funds, some donated by countries represented in
this very Chamber, is abhorrent and must be stopped?

International consensus is not international
law. So let us stop kidding ourselves: if a so-called
international consensus had been able to resolve the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, it would have done so
decades ago. It did not.

This conflict is also not going to be resolved
by reference to international law when such law is
inconclusive. We have all heard cogent arguments
claiming international law says one thing or another
aboutthisorthataspectoftheIsraeli-Palestinianconflict.
Some of those arguments are persuasive - at least to
certain audiences, but none of them are conclusive.
We will not get to the bottom of whose interpretation
of international law is correct on this conflict. There
is no judge, jury or court in the world that the parties
involved have agreed to give jurisdiction to in order to
decide whose interpretations are correct. International
law with respect to this conflict is a tricky subject that
could be discussed and argued for years without ever
reaching a conclusion. We can therefore spend years
and years arguing what the law is and whether it is
enforceable and prolong the ongoing suffering or we
could acknowledge the futility of that approach.

The conflict will also not be resolved by constantly
referencing the hundreds of United Nations resolutions
on the issue. The constant reference to these heavily
negotiated, purposely ambiguously worded resolutions
is nothing more than a cloak to avoid substantive debate
about the realities on the ground and the complexity
of the conflict. The interpretation of one of the most
often-cited resolutions, resolution 242 (1967), has been
hotly debated over the past half-century. That debate
has not brought us closer to a lasting and comprehensive
peace. That debate has not even bridged the gap
between those who construe resolution 242 (1967) to
call for the so-called right of return and compensation
for displaced Palestinians and the fact that the world
covers its eyes to the fate of the roughly equal number
of Jews who were expelled or forced to flee their homes
in Arab countries in connection with Israel's war of
independence. Resolution 242 (1967) and others may
have been drafted and voted upon in a genuine attempt
to bring an end to the suffering that all involved in this
conflict had endured, but we must acknowledge they
have not succeeded. A comprehensive and lasting peace
will not be created by fiat of international law or by
these heavily wordsmithed unclear resolutions.

The same holds true for the status of Jerusalem.
There is no international consensus about Jerusalem,
and no international consensus or interpretation of
international law will persuade the United States or
Israel that a city in which Jews have lived and worshipped
for nearly 3,000 years and has been the capital of the
Jewish State for 70 years is not today and forever the
capital ofIsrael. Jerusalem is a city ofthree world faiths.
The rights of all who wish to worship at the holy sites in
the city of Jerusalem must be protected. It is true that
the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) and the
Palestinian Authority (PA) continue to assert that East
Jerusalem must be a capital for the Palestinians. But let
us remember: an aspiration is not a right. Please do not
read into that statement anything about the content of
the political portion of the plan. I am simply making a
statement of fact. Aspirations belong at the negotiating
table, and only direct negotiations between Israel and
the Palestinians can resolve the issue of Jerusalem, if it
can be resolved. It will not be resolved in this Chamber,
in this institution or in any other capital around the
world. That does not mean that the Palestinians cannot
aspire to have a capital in East Jerusalem, with creative
solutions that attempt to respect all three religions that
cherish this incredible city. But if there is to be such
a solution, only the parties themselves through direct
negotiations can work this issue out.

Many participants in this conversation continue to
relitigate the events of 1967, when Israel heroically acted
to defend itself against the threat to its very existence.
Many would rather rail against the supposed evils of
what they routinely call an illegal occupation than
engage constructively on the disputes that characterize
the conflict today. That is not a productive dialogue.
The dispute over the territory is a question that can
only be resolved in the context of direct negotiations
between the parties. And I am focused on how to
get those parties back to the table. I hope I have the
Council's support in that.

Those who have weaponized the term "occupation"
in order to criticize Israel are doing nothing to
promote a resolution to this conflict. In fact, they are
heavily undermining the chances for peace and the
improvement of the lives of Palestinians and Israelis.
Both Israel and the Palestinians have asserted a claim
to certain land. This is an unresolved dispute, and it
will only be through direct negotiations between the
parties that we have a chance of resolving that dispute
and achieving a comprehensive peace. Let us not lose
sight of the fact that Israel has already conceded at
least 88 per cent of the territory captured by it in the
defensive war it had no choice but to fight in 1967. We
call on the leadership of the PLO and the PA to put aside
blanket rejections of a plan they have not even seen and
to show a willingness to engage in a good faith manner
in a meaningful dialogue with Israel. And we call
upon each of the Security Council members and each
country that truly wishes to help the Israelis and the
Palestinians achieve a comprehensive peace agreement
to encourage them back to the table.

The vision for peace that we plan to present will not
be ambiguous, unlike many resolutions that have passed
in this Chamber. It will provide sufficient detail so that
people can see what compromises will be necessary
to achieve a realistic, lasting comprehensive solution
to this conflict, the conflict that has robbed so much
potential from Palestinians, Israelis and the region as

a whole. I ask all members to reserve judgment until
we publish, and Council members read, the 60 or so
pages that detail what peace could look like. Achieving
that vision will require difficult compromises by both
parties if they are willing to make such compromises,
but we believe both sides will gain far more than
they give.

We all want this conflict resolved. We all want to
help those who continue to bear the unendurable weight
of this conflict, whether they are Palestinians, Israelis
or their many friends and neighbours in the region.
So let us start by acknowledging that there are no
shortcuts and that fictions of international consensus,
international legitimacy, arguments about who is right
and who is wrong as a matter of international law, and
aspirations expressed as rights will not achieve peace.
A solution cannot be forced on the parties. Unilateral
steps in international and multilateral forums will do
nothing to solve this conflict. Let us be honest with
ourselves and the parties and the region that the only
way ahead is direct negotiations between Israel and
the Palestinians.

And let us also not lose sight of the deep division
that exists among Palestinians themselves - between
Fatah and Hamas - a serious issue that must be
resolved to make progress. Let us start a new realistic
discussion. We need to look to the future rather than
dwell on the past. Let us build real foundations ofpeace
and work to truly transform lives by speaking the truth
directly to one another across the table.

