Mr. Djani (Indonesia): As others have done, let me
begin by thanking you, Mr. President, for convening
today's meeting and, of course, welcoming you to
preside over it as we debate a very important topic.
I also welcome His Excellency Mr. Heiko Maas,
Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs of Germany, to
the Chamber.

I would also like to thank our briefers
today - Mr. Miguel de Serpa Soares, Mr. Peter
Maurer and Ms. Annyssa Bellal * who provided us
with insights into what is happening with regard to
international humanitarian law and its implementation.

Our meeting coincides with the seventieth
anniversary of the four Geneva Conventions. This year
also marks the twentieth anniversary of the Council's
adoption of resolution 1265 (1999), on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. All are very important
milestones in what the Council has achieved thus
far. In that regard, allow me to re-emphasize that our
concerted efforts in the Council and in the United
Nations framework are and should always be based on
respect for international law, in particular the Charter
of the United Nations. Respect for the Fourth Geneva
Convention is not an exception in that regard. We must
stress that parties to any conflict must honour their
obligations under international humanitarian law and
respect human rights. Civilians, civilian facilities,
schools and hospitals, humanitarian workers and
peacekeepers are not targets. Attacks on them must
stop. Indonesia offers its deepest condolences to the
innocent victims, including United Nations personnel
all over the world, including recently in Libya.

I will make three pertinent points today.

First, as the first step towards peace, we need to
address the root causes of conflict, as Indonesia has
always advocated, and we must continue to build trust.
The Geneva Conventions are the jus in hello, the laws
of war, which must be respected; war is inhuman, but
there are codes of conduct. Addressing the root causes
of conflict will enable States to achieve greater security.
Confidence-building measures should be put in place to
enhance the trust among parties and communities.

My second point is that we must work to save lives.
We need to ensure effective implementation of and
compliance with international humanitarian law. Not
only should countries respect international humanitarian
law but they should also ensure that it is respected and
implemented, as stipulated in various resolutions related
to the Geneva Conventions. I would like to underline
the words "ensure respect", which means that countries
should be proactive in ensuring compliance, through
awareness programmes, training, rules of engagement,
inter alia, as Mr. Maurer mentioned.

Engagement with all parties is key to addressing
conflict. The Council can become a true partner and
build trust among all sides to a conflict, including
through regional organizations, which have local
knowledge ofwhat is truly needed to resolve such crises.
Existing international rules, including the resolutions
of the Security Council, and United Nations-sanctioned
arms embargoes must be obeyed and respected. We call
on external actors in conflicts to restrain themselves and
silence the guns by stopping their flow. The message
should be clear to non-State actors and armed groups
that they are not beyond the law, including international
humanitarian law.

Thirdly, we need to strengthen the capacities
of concerned States, which includes international
partnerships to support States in conflict that are unable
to provide such protections themselves. Indonesia is
continuing its support for conflict and post-conflict
States through South-South and triangular cooperation.
Just last week, in Jakarta, Indonesia held a regional
conference on humanitarian assistance, which provided
a platform to share best practices in conducting
humanitarian actions in the South-East Asia and
neighbouring countries. We have also worked with the
Red Cross in this regard. The conference highlighted
once again the need for partnership.

International humanitarian law is a living doctrine.
It is still and will always be relevant, today and in future.
But noting that the world has changed dramatically, we
should adapt to present-day realities. Our approach in
bringing the message of compliance and the need to
abide by international humanitarian law by all parties
should also be adapted.

In conclusion, allow me to quote the Indonesian
Foreign Minister, who, at the open debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict held during the
Indonesian presidency of the Council in May, said that
the Security Council should be reminded

"not only of our political commitments, but also
[of] our duty to implement those commitments to
ensure the primacy of human safety and security.
After all, the United Nations was established
upon the mandate 'we the peoples of the United
Nations'. We cannot afford to let our people down"
(S/PV8534, p. 9).

