Mr. Gillerman (Israel): We are all tired, both
figuratively and literally, so I will limit myself to a few
brief comments. It has been a long debate, and like
previous debates of its kind, those seeking to censure
Israel have been long on propaganda and short both on
fact and on self-reflection. I will not bother to respond
to each of the accusations made. The tendency of the
Palestinian observer for exaggeration and
misrepresentation is well known. But I will say that it
is difficult to see how these kinds of events help the
peace process forward or encourage understanding
between the parties.

Let us not forget that we would not be here today
had the Palestinians agreed at least to negotiate in good
faith the two-State solution offered at Camp David,
rather than embark, on the orders of the Palestinian
representative's sponsor, on a path of terrorism and
destruction.

The fence is a direct outcome of that terrible,
horrible Palestinian decision. Familiar talk of
occupation as the source of all evil rings hollow when
an opportunity to end the present situation was so
clearly rejected by the Palestinian side. The message
sent by that rejection, by the fact that no Palestinian
State was established during the 19 years of Jordanian
and Egyptian occupation of the West Bank and Gaza,
and by the daily murder of innocent Israelis, is that this
has nothing to do with so-called occupation. Not a
single inch was so-called occupied between 1948 and
1967. It has to do with the rejection of the right of the
Jewish people to self-determination and their ancient
homeland, side by side with their Palestinian and Arab
neighbours. When the Palestinian side and our Arab
cousins are willing to rectify this and accept some
measure of responsibility, the path to peaceful
settlement will be laid out before us.

Unfortunately, the terror Israel is facing is global.
It is not limited to one region or one conflict. The
dilemmas Israel faces today are dilemmas other States,
sadly, may well face tomorrow. We would urge
delegations, before deciding how to respond to this
issue, to think about this, and also to think of the lives
that can be saved by this security fence, and the lives
that could have been saved had it been constructed
earlier, and to consider whether their energy, and the
energy of the Security Council should be expended
debating security measures adopted in self-defence, or
addressing the terrorism that made such measures
necessary.

The families that were wiped out last week in
Haifa by the suicide bomber who infiltrated through an
opening in the yet incomplete fence could be with us
today if there had been a fence. Unfortunately, we
cannot bring them back. But we can and must save
other families who could face a similar fate. It is our
duty to protect them, and it is the duty and obligation
of the international community and the Security
Council to see that we do.

