Mr. Bouabid (International Organization of la Francophonie) (spoke in French): At the outset, I
should like to congratulate you, Madam President, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of May and to thank you, on
behalf of the International Organization of la
Francophonie, for having convened this debate on the
report of the Council's mission to Haiti, which was a
founding member of la Francophonie and which is
close to our hearts.

Today's meeting is an important one for more
than one reason. It is being held in the wake of the
recent Security Council mission to Haiti, led by the
Ambassador of Brazil. It is an opportunity to discuss
the conclusions and recommendations of the mission
and to identify the adjustments that will be necessary
to make to the mandate of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) when the
time comes to renew it at the end of the month.

This is an especially crucial time, because we are
just a few months away from the important date of the
elections, whose conduct and credibility will be
considered by all as one of the main pillars of the long-
term stability of the country.

La Francophonie is committed to seeing Haiti
break the cycle of confrontation and violence and usher
in an era of peace and prosperity. Haitians must make
the necessary effort to embark once again on the path
of peace, democracy, the rule of law and sustainable
development. They must be able to rely on increased
support from the international community and on
increased humanitarian and material resources, so as to
give the best possible chance to the transition and to
establish the basis for a future which will be a better
one in the long term.

It is that message of encouragement, hope and
solidarity from the Francophone community that
President Abdou Diouf, Secretary-General of La
Francophonie, delivered to the authorities and the
people of Haiti on 20 March last - the date of the
commemoration of the International Day of la
Francophonie. We see in the Security Council mission
to Haiti a few days later the first mission ever
dispatched to that part of the world - a reflection of
the common objectives that the Council and our
organization are seeking to promote in Haiti. But to
ensure that those goals are achieved, we believe that
special attention should be given to the following three
questions.

First, in terms of security, we cannot hope for an
electoral process to be conducted normally in a tense
security situation. That is why we support the request
of the Interim Prime Minister of Haiti to beef up
security forces during the electoral period, particularly
in the region of Port-au-Prince, where the problem
seems to be particularly acute. We also support his
request to deploy more French-speaking civilian police
in MINUSTAH, since it appears that a French-speaking
presence would make the police operations more
effective.

We hope that the mission dispatched by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations to assess
security needs will make positive recommendations in
that respect, and in particular we hope that the Council
will act on those recommendations and authorize a
significant increase in civilian police personnel, so that
the good work done by MINUSTAH over the past few
months might be further enhanced and that security
conditions could be effectively improved.

Were the Security Council to adopt that measure,
la Francophonie could help to mobilize its member
States to provide additional French-speaking civilian
police officers, as it did last year, when MINUSTAH
was established. The Secretary-General of la
Francophonie is in contact with the Secretary-General
of the United Nations on this subject. I would recall in
passing that of the roughly 30 countries that are now
providing civilian police contingents to MINUSTAH,
almost half are members of the International
Organization of la Francophonie.

The second issue is compliance with the electoral
timetable and the need to make every effort to ensure
that the elections are truly free, fair and transparent.
The international community has a crucial role to play
in that respect, in particular by providing technical
assistance and financial support. For our part, we shall
continue to contribute to that effort by providing
necessary expertise to the Electoral Council until the
elections are held.

Finally, we believe it is crucial that we all fulfil
the commitments we made at the July 2004 donors
conference in Washington, which endorsed the Interim
Cooperation Framework. The International
Organization of la Francophonie intends to keep its
part of the bargain. In addition to the assistance to the
Electoral Council that I have just mentioned, we intend
to follow up concretely on the two missions that we
dispatched to the country in recent months. The first
focused on the media, given its crucial role,
particularly in the electoral period. The second mission
focused on the key sector of support for justice and
judicial system reform; it will be followed up through a
programme to be implemented with quadripartite
cooperation among the Haitian Ministry of Justice, the
Canadian International Development Agency, the
European Union and the International Organization of
la Francophonie. The programme seeks to strengthen
the fight against impunity, promote the independence
of the judiciary and promote a better administration of
justice through, inter alia, the training of judiciary
personnel and the development of legal information.

In conclusion, I would like to echo those
delegations that recalled the importance of an inclusive
national dialogue for the long-term reconciliation
process, those that stressed the crucial need
urgently to implement a comprehensive disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme and those
delegations that stressed the importance of tackling the
underlying cause of Haiti's instability: poverty.

The challenges are considerable. It is a difficult
job, and the stakes are high. Thus, my organization
supports the Security Council's oft-reaffirmed position
in favour of a long-term United Nations presence in
Haiti.

