Mr. Strammen (Norway): I would also like to
thank the High Commissioner for his informative
statement and for the timely and highly relevant issues
that he raised this morning.

It remains a fact that the victims of forced
displacement, be they refugees or internally displaced
persons, are an inherent symptom of conflicts and war
as well as a source of new conflicts and antagonisms. It
goes without saying, therefore, that the work of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) must be closely interlinked with
all international efforts to prevent, mitigate and end
wars and armed conflicts and arrive at durable
solutions. How well these efforts succeed will
determine the need and extent of UNHCR's
involvement.

The international community has an obligation to
safeguard the human rights of the victims of forced
displacement. Norway has been among the active
proponents of the need to pay special attention to the
most vulnerable among the victims - children and
women. We have come to realize that general measures
often fall short, all the more so because the norms are
so frequently determined from a male perspective. We
commend UNHCR on the progress it has made towards
gender mainstreaming.

All the national and regional situations that the
High Commissioner mentioned in his statement this
morning warrant a more thorough discussion than is
possible on this occasion, in particular given our time
constraints. I will therefore limit my remarks to two of
the situations he mentioned.

For a number of years, Afghanistan has produced
the highest number of refugees in the world. Even
though the prospects for repatriation are better than
they have been for years, we see how decisive the
security situation will be for successful repatriation. In
fact, as Chair of the Afghan Support Group, Norway is
keenly aware that all humanitarian and reconstruction
efforts of the international community will fall short if
the security situation is allowed to deteriorate. We must
underpin the political process and the authority of the
Interim Administration in Kabul and do our utmost to
provide a stable security environment for the enormous
rehabilitation and reconstruction tasks ahead.

The return of Afghan refugees and internally
displaced persons is a huge task for UNHCR. If we are
to succeed, we must begin to regard refugees and
internally displaced persons not only as victims but
also as a resource and give them their legitimate voice
in the running of their own lives. Empowerment of
women is a special challenge. We place much trust in
UNHCR's ability to do its part of the job and
coordinate its efforts with those of all other relevant
international actors.

A word on West Africa: with regard to Liberia,
we are glad that the security situation appears to have
improved in the areas where displaced Liberians and
refugees from Sierra Leone last week fled the
intensified fighting between rebels and Government
forces. The fact that many of these Liberians have been
displaced several times and that some were repatriated
to Liberia only a few years ago, after having been
forced to live abroad as refugees, illustrates fully the
tragic human aspects of these issues. It also illustrates
the importance of ensuring security for refugees after
they have been helped to return home. I hope that
UNHCR can now go ahead with the planned voluntary
repatriation of refugees to Sierra Leone and that
appropriate steps will be taken to prepare for their
homecoming.

Finally, we welcome the High Commissioner's
update on the situation in Eritrea and Ethiopia, which is
particularly valuable in view of the forthcoming
Security Council mission to these countries. We will
keep his remarks in mind.

