Mr. Adom (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): First
of all, with your permission, Mr. President, I would like
to firmly condemn the reprehensible terrorist attacks
that claimed the lives of 29 people in Burkina Faso
yesterday, Sunday. My country shares the grief of the
families affected and extends its resolute support to the
Government of Burkina Faso at this difficult time.

I welcome today's debate on the reform of United
Nations peacekeeping operations, which is of particular
interest to C6te d'Ivoire given our recent experience
as host country to a United Nations peace mission
and our hope to regain our place as a troop- and
police-contributing country. The briefing by Mr. Jean-
Pierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peace
Operations, whose analysis is always very relevant,
served to underscore the need to reform peacekeeping
operations. The peace and security architecture must
evolve in order to adapt to new threats to peace and
security and become an increasingly effective tool for
conflict prevention and peacebuilding.

Resolution 2378 (2017) was the first of its kind
to holistically address the issue of reforming United
Nations peacekeeping operations. It was adopted in a
context marked by efforts by the Secretary-General
to reform the United Nations peace and security
architecture, based on the recommendations of the
report of the High-level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations (see S/2015/446). More than ever, the reform
appears to be a call for collective action, which requires
constant interaction among the Secretariat, the Security
Council and troop-contributing countries. Cote d'Ivoire
therefore welcomes the inclusion of that collective
dimension in the Declaration of Shared Commitments
on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations, which
more than 152 countries have signed to date, thereby
demonstrating their commitment to supporting ongoing
reform efforts.

Resolution 2378 (2017) also underlines the
importance of properly implementing and monitoring
peacekeeping reform in accordance with existing
mandates and procedures. In that regard, the Security
Council's Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations,
which Cote d'Ivoire is honoured to chair, is tasked with
undertaking thematic reflections on reform initiatives
in conjunction with all stakeholders. Thus far this year,
the Working Group has served as a forum for discussion
on such relevant topics as peacekeeping reform,
enhanced triangular cooperation, the protection of
civilians, the role of women in peacekeeping, strategic
force generation and capacity planning.

Cote d'Ivoire remains convinced that progress in
peacekeeping reform depends on continued collective
mobilization and the consistent political support of
Member States. Peacekeeping reform must also give
prominence to the process of developing mandates,
cooperation among stakeholders, the role of regional
organizations, gender parity, training, capacity-
building and financing.

My country is also of the view that adequate
training and capacity-building in peacekeeping
operations - including their military, police and
civilian components - is essential to improve their
performance in key areas of peacekeeping, such as the
protection of civilians and the promotion of human
rights. We have acknowledged these requirements by
taking them into account in the constitution and training
of the combat-ready Ivorian battalion, soon to be
deployed within the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).

It is also important to forge a common and objective
perception of issues related to the performance of
peacekeeping operations. In this regard, efforts
to provide civilian and uniformed personnel with
the appropriate skills and training appropriate for
the asymmetric environments where peacekeeping
operations are deployed need to be strengthened.

One of the fundamental pillars of the ongoing
reform of United Nations peacekeeping operations is
the strengthening of partnerships with regional and
subregional organizations, particularly the African
Union, which has engaged in commendable cooperation
with the United Nations. This strategic partnership is
based on increasingly close collaboration and better
coordinated actions between the two organizations on
conflict prevention through joint field visits and more
in-depth consultations on the root causes of conflict
and their means of resolution.

In addition, as we approach the twentieth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
on the contribution ofwomen to peace and security, it is
more urgent than ever that the reform of peacekeeping
operations incorporate the gender dimension, pursuant
to resolutions 2242 (2015) and 2382 (2017).

Cote d'Ivoire takes this opportunity to welcome the
convergence of the views of Council members on the
need to increase the predictability and sustainability of
the financing ofAfrican Union peace support operations
authorized by the Security Council. Let us recall that,
in resolution 2378 (2017), the Council expressed its
intention to consider practical arrangements that can
be made and the necessary conditions for establishing
a mechanism to partly finance African Union peace
support operations through statutory contributions and
on a case-by-case basis. Since then, significant efforts
have been made to strengthen the mandate development,
management, oversight, accountability and conduct-
and-discipline mechanisms of African Union peace
support operations, as well as to finalize frameworks
for respect for human rights.

Cote d'Ivoire values dialogue as a critical
prerequisite for taking bold decisions on issues of
common interest and therefore believes it is time for
the Council to translate the intentions it expressed in
resolution 2378 (2017) into concrete action. We hope
that the momentum generated following the adoption of
resolutions 2320 (2016) and 2378 (2017) will continue,
in coordination with all stakeholders, with a view to
adopting a long-desired resolution on the funding of
African Union peace support operations.

