Mr. Radmanovie (spoke in Bosnian; English interpretation provided by the delegation): It is an
honour to address the Security Council in the debate on
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Today's debate will facilitate
a better understanding of the political situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the progress the country
has achieved in this last period.

Since the last report of the Secretary-General was
issued (see S/2010/235), many things have occurred in
Bosnia and Herzegovina that have changed the
situation in the country. There are many different
opinions and analyses among the political actors and
citizens regarding the progress achieved in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Until now, the Presidency has not had a
unified position on this issue. Allow me, as the
Chairman of the Presidency, to present the view agreed
upon with the other two members of the Presidency on
the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, along with
possible future developments.

Today, it is popular to talk about Bosnia and
Herzegovina predominantly in gloomy terms, as was
recently done in this Chamber. Bosnia and
Herzegovina is the ideal arena in which to test various
catastrophe theories. Unlike other, similar regions of
the world in which the international community is
engaged, Bosnia and Herzegovina on the whole
represents a positive example of the peacebuilding
efforts of the international community. This is
confirmed by numerous reports of relevant
international organizations, independent institutions
and non-governmental organizations. To be honest,
Bosnia and Herzegovina did experience a slight delay
in its reform and transition process in the past six
5
months. One reason is that this was an election year in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and that the political entities
were focused more on the election campaign and
attracting voters than on the real problems of the
country.

This year we mark the fifteenth anniversary of
the signing the Dayton Peace Agreement for Bosnia
and Herzegovina. Fifteen years ago, Bosnia and
Herzegovina emerged from a tragic conflict that had
destabilized the country and the entire region. Today,
15 years later, we wonder what and how much we have
achieved of all that was signed and agreed. Let me say
this: With the combined efforts of the international
community and local authorities, Bosnia and
Herzegovina has made significant progress in the post-
war period, which is a positive example compared to
many similar critical areas in the world. It would be
difficult to find an example of a peace agreement in
modern European or world history that was more
rapidly and successfully implemented. Those who are
dissatisfied with the pace of progress in Bosnia and
Herzegovina are seeking a remedy by challenging the
very foundations of the existing Peace Agreement,
which will only lead us to new conflicts and disputes.

Since the end of the war, Bosnia and Herzegovina
has implemented all key elements of the Dayton Peace
Agreement. A stable peace has been established; the
country has been functioning according to the
constitutional grounds set out in the Dayton Peace
Agreement; most refugees and displaced persons have
recuperated their property and many have returned to
their homes.

Consequently, Bosnia and Herzegovina is a
success story compared to other territories in the region.
Six general parliamentary elections have been held, the
last few of which were completely organized by local
authorities. Domestically, a single economic space has
emerged. The macroeconomic indicators of the
economy are stable, showing a slow but positive
upward trend. A value-added tax has been successfully
introduced. Reforms of the defence sector and the
armed forces have been successfully implemented.
Following the initial arrests of indicted war criminals
by international military forces, most of the others
have been arrested and extradited to the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia in The
Hague by the local authorities. War crimes trials have
been processed in the national courts.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has become a member of
the Council of Europe and other international
organizations, the country joined the NATO
Partnership for Peace and became a member of the
European Free Trade Association, leading to its signing
a Stabilization and Association Agreement with the
European Union (EU). The country has fulfilled 174
requirements for a visa-free regime with the EU and a
positive decision has already been made. Reforms are
ongoing in public administration, justice, higher
education, the public broadcasting system and the
harmonization of the Constitution with the European
Convention on Human Rights and the European Court
of Human Rights in Strasbourg.

I recall that, as a result of the favourable
development of the political and security situation in
Bosnia, NATO has reduced its troops in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and its presence to the headquarters in
Sarajevo. The European Union Force has also reduced
its forces in Bosnia and Herzegovina as a result of the
apparent progress in achieving a secure and stable
environment.

There are differing views in Bosnia and
Herzegovina regarding the role and future status of the
Office of the High Representative. The political
representatives of one people are of the opinion that
the Office of the High Representative should
permanently remain in Bosnia and Herzegovina, but
the representatives of the others believe that its closure
is necessary and that its functions should be transferred
to the EU Special Representative. While there may
have been reasons after the war for the Office of the
High Representative to exist, 15 years later they have
been significantly reduced.

The latest report of the European Commission on
Bosnia stated that Bosnia and Herzegovina cannot take
further steps in the process of European integration
until the transition of the Office of the High
Representative to the Special Representative of the
European Union is complete.

All the changes in Bosnia and Herzegovina must
be based on the rule of law. The full implementation of
the Dayton Peace Agreement is therefore imperative.
The Dayton accord is primarily an agreement, not a
framework from which one can pick and choose only
that which is agreeable while shirking one's other
obligations. In regard to the decisions of the Office of
the High Representative amending annex 4 of the
Accord, it is clear that legal agreements should be
changed only in respect to the way they were adopted,
if not otherwise agreed on. Discussions on these issues
will therefore continue.

The problem of building a functional State cannot
be solved merely by changing the constitutional and
legal procedures for promulgating decisions in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, aimed at greater or lesser
centralization or decentralization. This is a simplistic
and dangerous solution to the country's complex and
sensitive political problems. In a complex and
multi-ethnic country like Bosnia and Herzegovina,
such an approach would bring the Government's
legitimacy into question and disturb a region that is
still not fully stable.

National reconciliation and trust are basic
prerequisites for building a functional State, and that
cannot be achieved without prosecuting all war
criminals of all nations in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The Hague Tribunal has recognized Bosnia and
Herzegovina's cooperation in this matter, rendering any
other comments on it unnecessary.

There has been a lack of understanding of the
problem of the return of refugees on the part of local
politicians in Bosnia and Herzegovina and, partly, of
the international community. In reality, no country in
the world has done more for the return of refugees than
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Sustainable returns of
refugees remain a challenge, and in this area Bosnia
and Herzegovina needs the support of the international
community. In addition, the international community
needs to deal with the fact that within 500 kilometres
of the Western Balkans - encompassing Croatia,
Serbia, and Bosnia and Herzegovina - legal standards
on the right to return vary, resulting in further injustice
for the refugee population.

Every country in the Western Balkans is currently
progressing towards the status required for admission
to the European Union, and while Bosnia and
Herzegovina may lag behind its neighbours, it is not as
far behind as some contend.

All of these are reasons for encouraging Bosnia
and Herzegovina on its journey towards membership of
the European Union, to which it rightfully belongs;
towards the rapid transition of the Office of the High
Representative; and towards enabling Bosnia and
Herzegovina's leaders to negotiate and act in
accordance with their agreements without external
pressure. Agreement, understanding, equality and
tolerance are the essence of all reforms in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and should be encouraged, commended
and approved.

