Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to congratulate you, Sir, for
having organized this debate, which reflects the
commitment of France and the effort it continues to
devote to this topic.

I would like to thank Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for her
briefing. I also thank Ms. Yoka Brandt and Ms. Julie
Bodin, of UNICEF and Save the Children, respectively,
for their presentations. Lastly, I would like to thank
Mr. Junior Nzita for his testimony.

Today, too many children around the world are still
victims of emergency situations that seem to know no
end. We are faced with ever-more complex conflicts,
unprecedented forms of violence and challenges posed
by terrorists, such as violent extremist groups. Such
armed groups continue to count a large number of
children among their ranks.

The increase in acts ofextreme violence perpetrated
by groups with extremist ideologies, such as Boko
Haram and Daesh, have shocked the global conscience.
The exacerbation of tension and proliferation of
conflicts herald enormous challenges for the entire
international community, but it is on children that
their impact is most tragic and unacceptable. They are
tragic as children are those exposed most directly to
violence by conflicts and their collateral damage, and
their basic rights are violated. This is unacceptable
because children are at times exploited, brainwashed
or indoctrinated against their will by the parties to a
conflict, and used as child soldiers on the battlefield,
in clear violation of international law. Acts such as the
abduction by Boko Haram of hundreds of girls and boys
from their schools, and the targeting of children by
Daesh, among others, unfortunately Show that violence
against children knows no boundaries, and elicit in us a
sense of outrage and consternation.

The Kingdom of Morocco condemns all forms of
violence against children, their abduction by State or
non-State armed groups, their use as human shields
around arms stockpiles or barracks, or their abduction
as hostages or recruitment in refugee camps. Morocco
also condemns attacks against schools and hospitals
and their for military or tactical ends. While today's
debate will have a positive effect in remobilizing the
stakeholders among the international community, we
must, unfortunately, note that the efforts made to date
to end the involvement or use of children in armed
conflicts have been insufficient. Indeed, the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflict, the
various resolutions of the Security Council, and the
Paris Principles and guidelines on children associated
with armed forces or armed groups have fallen short
in achieving their noble objectives. My delegation
therefore believes that the efforts of the international
community to deal effectively with this problem would
benefit from a multidimensional approach, as follows.

It must be comprehensive, based on a thorough
understanding of the underlying and structural causes
of these conflicts, such as poverty, discrimination,
social exclusion, and economic and social inequalities.
It must be strategic, so as not only to deal with conflicts
under way, but also to focus on prevention, including
by sowing the seeds of democracy and human rights,
strengthening good governance and promoting
sustainable development. It must be crosscutting,
engaging and empowering all stakeholders,
including public institutions, civil society, the media,
non-governmental organizations and human rights
organizations. It must be modular so as to take into
account the diverse and changing nature of armed
conflict, as well as the specifics of each conflict, and
it must be pragmatic, combining both incentives and
coercive measures, in particularly when it comes to
accountability and the fight against impunity. It must
be integral, providing for reparations for the violations
committed and for the reintegration of child soldiers
into society in the context of appropriate reconciliation
processes.

As Ms. Zerrougui highlighted this morning, the
continued and increased recruitment of children into
armed conflicts, including by armedjihadist such as the
Islamic State, and the abduction of hundreds of girls by
the terrorist group Boko Haram, demands action from
us all and calls for coordination of the efforts of the
international community. Coordinating these efforts
among the various stakeholders of the United Nations
system will guarantee efficiency and success.

However, the primary responsibility lies with the
parties to the conflict, who must comply with their
international obligations under relevant Security
Council resolutions and international conventions. At
the same time, national child protection strategies remain
essential for building the capacity of Governments
and for material, financial and human resources to
ensure their sustainability. This is why a prompt and
generous response is so important to the call in the
Secretary-General's report (S/2014/339) on donors to
meet the funding requirements for the implementation
of national plans of action and programmes.

