Ms. Paik Ji-ah (Republic of Korea): I thank the
the French presidency for organizing today's debate.
On the tenth anniversary of resolution 1612 (2005),
this debate offers a valuable and timely opportunity
to strengthen our determination to end the recruitment
and use of children in armed conflicts and to prevent
the victimization of children in armed conflict. My
delegation appreciates the two-step initiative by the
two presidencies, France this month and Malaysia in
June, which allows for in-depth discussions on this
critical issue.

The number of child victims in conflict situations
never ceases to increase, in particular owing to the
ruthless violence by non-State armed groups. Under
those circumstances, the protection of children in
armed conflict demands our common and urgent
efforts. In that regard, it is encouraging that most
countries concerned by the "Children, Not Soldiers"
campaign have shown their commitment to ensuring
that Government forces are free of children. Through
that campaign, States Members of the United Nations
can clearly demonstrate their resolve to protect children
and take the moral high ground vis-a-vis non-State
armed groups. To make our resolve more effective
and binding, more Member States need to join child
protection-related legal and guidance frameworks,
including the Optional Protocol to the Convention on
the Rights of the Child as well as the various principles
and guidelines on children associated with armed forces
or armed groups. Such a drive will consolidate not only
our political commitment, but it will also uphold the
rule of law.

We are deeply concerned about the increasing
inhumane atrocities victimizing children, especially
by extremist non-State armed groups, such as the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and Boko Haram.
Abductions, maiming, sexual violence, attacks on
schools and the use of children as suicide bombers
are all unacceptable. We believe that none of us have
wavered in fighting against such war crimes and
crimes against humanity. In that regard, we support the
inclusion of abduction by armed groups as one of the
violations that could trigger a listing in the annexes to
the Secretary-General's report.

Changes on the ground, however, can come about
only with concrete actions. The more we act with
sincerety and resolution, the sooner this tragedy will
end. Impunity will not end when perpetrators go
unpunished. Appropriate punishment for perpetrators
serves as an effective way to prevent violations and
abuses against children. In that context, the International
Criminal Court's verdict on the Thomas Lubanga Dyilo
case in December is a wake-up call to perpetrators who
are committing violations against children. We also
believe that targeted sanctions by the Security Council
can act as an effective deterrent, raising awareness
about the consequences. We hope that the Council will
consider a resolution that includes serious violations
against children as a designated criterion for sanctions.

Lastly, we would like to recall that the best way
to protect children in devastating conflicts is to end
the conflicts themselves. That is why national and
regional leaders in conflict-ridden areas are strongly
urged to redouble their efforts for a peaceful solution.
In addressing how to properly protect a child victim,
we should not ignore the psychological effects conflicts
have on the victims. Children and youths are especially
vulnerable to politically distorted and misleading
propaganda. Community leaders therefore need to
do their utmost to warmly embrace and reintegrate
child victims into their communities. As a member
of the Peacebuilding Commission, which addresses a
wide range of post-conflict peacebuilding issues, the
Republic of Korea will pay particular attention to the
matter.

