Mr. Ke (Cambodia): At the outset, I would like
to congratulate Indonesia on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council this month and for organizing
this very important open debate. I would like to thank
the Secretary-General and the other briefers for their
informative and highly pertinent remarks.

My delegation associates itself with statements
delivered by the representative of Venezuela on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and by the
representative of Thailand on behalf of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations.

Sustaining global peace requires a focused, well-
coordinated approach, particularly as it relates to
post-conflict situations. Having been the recipient of a
United Nations peacekeeping mission, Cambodia knows
very well the difficulties that accompany a country's
transition from conflict to a stable and prosperous
society. Cambodia remains committed to international
peace and security through its participation in United
Nations peacekeeping efforts. Over the past decade,
Cambodia has contributed thousands of Blue Helmets
to United Nations peacekeeping operations worldwide.

We have deployed our peacekeepers in different
fields, ranging from engineering, demining and military
police to military observers and military officers. Our
peacekeepers have served across the world in some of
the most demanding situations, including the Central
African Republic, Syria, the Sudan, South Sudan,
Lebanon, Mali and Chad, among other missions.
Cambodian peacekeepers do their utmost to safeguard
and protect local populations. Peacekeeping duties
demand the highest sacrifice from those who serve.
Regrettably, nine Cambodian peacekeepers have lost
their lives. In that connection, greater efforts must be
made to prevent peacekeeper casualties, including by
providing increased training.

It is impossible to ignore that, as peacekeeping
operations are becoming increasingly complex,
peacekeepers are finding themselves in challenging
situations, in which they lack sufficient logistical
support and financing. To alleviate the risks posed
to our peacekeepers and ensure the effectiveness of
operations, peacekeeping missions must be accorded the
necessary resources and provided with access to modern
technology and information. Providing peacekeepers
with adequate resources, including through reliable
funding, is of paramount importance. For peacekeeping
missions to be successful, all peacekeeping operations
must have access to predictable, steady financing
streams. The human and economic cost of conflict is
enormous. After all, preserving peace for the future is
a much better deal than resolving conflicts without end.

To ensure the safety and security of United Nations
personnel and the people they serve, United Nations
peacekeepers must be adequately trained. Cambodia
fully supports the Secretary-General's Action for
Peacekeeping initiative and, having endorsed the
Declaration of Shared Commitments, is fully engaged
in the predeployment training of its personnel, which
focuses on developing the capabilities that are required
for them to effectively perform their duties.

My delegation considers the training of
peacekeepers as an integral part of mission success and
an investment in learning, improved performance and
the effective fulfilment of mandates. Cambodia has two
predeployment training facilities that are supported by
the United Nations, the United States, France, China,
Japan and India. I would like to take this opportunity
to express our appreciation to those countries for their
valuable support.

In that context, senior management training
should be strengthened to ensure that peacekeepers
are commanded by capable and competent leaders.
Such training should cover understanding mission
mandates, the United Nations system, international
humanitarian law, dispute resolution skills and strategic
analysis, particularly as it relates to challenges within
specific missions.

Peacekeepers should be provided with improved
training on communications, including courses in
English and French, as well as training on negotiation
and cultural sensitivity. The integration of training
efforts should be encouraged, while retaining a focus
on clearly defined strategic priorities in peacekeeping
operations. Such synergies will enhance learning
methods and promote the knowledge of those who serve.

In conclusion, Cambodia is committed to working
with the United Nations and its partners to ensure that
peacekeepers are provided with critical training and
development resources to enable them to perform their
tasks successfully in the future. Consistent financing
and capacity-building resources will promote further
positive change in peacekeeping operations, ensuring
the safety and security of those who serve and the
people they protect.

