Mr. Elaraby (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic): At
the outset, I should like to express the sincere appreciation
of the delegation of Egypt to the Secretary-General for his
most recent report, presented to both the General Assembly
and the Security Council, on developments in the situation
in Afghanistan over the past three months. I should also
like to express our appreciation for the sincere efforts being
made by the special representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Norbert Holl, which are aimed at achieving a
comprehensive settlement. It gives me pleasure to welcome
His Excellency the Acting Foreign Minister of Afghanistan,
to whose statement we listened with great care.

The Security Council's convening of a meeting today
to consider the deteriorating situation in Afghanistan clearly
reflects the profound and continued concern of the
international community over the tension and instability that
Afghanistan is experiencing for the seventeenth consecutive
year. That situation has exhausted the Afghan people,
devastated its capabilities and depleted its resources. It has
become a source of tension and concern not only for the
Central Asian region, but for numerous other regions of the
world, which are suffering from the negative repercussions
of the Afghan crisis. Such repercussions have taken the
form of terrorist activities, carried out by extremists of
various nationalities trained in Afghanistan. In this regard,
I should like to refer to reports on the reopening of two
camps for training terrorists in a city in southern
Afghanistan, as well as to press reports confirming the
presence of some of the individuals who lead and finance
terrorist movements in various countries.

The continued preference of some of the warring
Afghan parties for the military option, and their
intransigence and lack of responsiveness to the strenuous
efforts of the special representative to achieve a
comprehensive settlement, confirm the need to develop
the efforts currently being made by the United Nations
and to direct these efforts to more practical steps leading
to the creation of the climate necessary for the
implementation of the proposals made to date and of the
resolutions adopted by the General Assembly and the
Security Council on this subject.

The report of the Secretary-General contains a
reference to regional meetings held in an attempt to
achieve a solution to this crisis. The report refers to the
efforts of the Special Mission, which led to meetings of
the Intra-Afghan Working Group from 13 to 15 January
and 24 to 26 February in Islamabad, during which several
questions were discussed, including the ceasefire, the
exchange of the prisoners of war and other confidence-
building measures. Egypt believes that there is a great
need for the coordination of all efforts made by the
parties concerned under the supervision of the United
Nations Special Mission, as well as the expansion of
these efforts to include the ceasefire and other measures
that have been discussed. Such coordination would
undoubtedly lead to the success of these efforts. In this
regard, the elements that were discussed in the meetings
of the Working Group could serve as the nucleus of the
beginning of serious dialogue between the Afghan parties
under the supervision of the United Nations.

The proposal made by the Secretary-General in his
report to consider the holding of a meeting of the warring
Afghan parties outside Afghanistan under the supervision
of the United Nations, and with the cooperation of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference and other
organizations concerned, clearly constitutes basis for
future action. We hope that all outside parties concerned
with the problem of Afghanistan will support such a plan.
We also hope that the Secretary-General will, at the
earliest opportunity, provide a clear outline of this plan in
the light of his consultations with all the States concerned
that have influence in Afghanistan.

At another level, the Non-Aligned Movement
expressed its concern over the Afghan problem in the
final communique of the ministerial meeting held at New
Delhi earlier this month and expressed the need for the
Afghan parties to move towards national reconciliation, in
accordance with the relevant Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions. This concern of the non-
aligned countries - in addition to the increasing concern
of the States members of the European Union and its
communiques on this subject, and the concern evinced by

 

the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) - will
give the necessary impetus for a comprehensive movement
supported by all the members of the international
community.

On 9 April last year the delegation of Egypt pointed
out that the form of the proposed settlement is not the real
cause of the continuation of the current crisis. The essence
of the crisis is the lack of political will for peace on the
part of some parties. At that time, we reaffirmed that the
way out of this dark tunnel was through the mobilization of
political will on three levels: first, the political will for
peace on the part of the Afghan parties themselves, some
of which seem, as has been indicated in various reports of
the Secretary-General, still to prefer a military option;
secondly, the reaffirmation of the cessation of all outside
military assistance to the parties to the conflict as the point
of departure for any tangible efforts made by the United
Nations; and, thirdly, the political will of the international
community itself. Since the end of last year, the
international community has seemed ready to refocus on the
situation in Afghanistan. This has been seen in, among
other things, the formation of the group of interested
countries and countries with influence in Afghanistan,
which held its first meeting last November upon the
initiative of Mr. Boutros-Ghali, the former Secretary-
General of the Organization. We hope that this group will
be given the opportunity to discharge its necessary role.

What is necessary at this time is to highlight the
question of Afghanistan among the priorities of the work of
the United Nations, to give new momentum to the political
will of the Afghan parties and the countries with influence
and to direct them towards the establishment of peace in
Afghanistan.

Among the matters causing grave alarm are the
negative repercussions of the tense situation in Afghanistan
on the Afghan citizens, whose suffering continues as a
result of the absence of peace in their country. The
continued dangers of landmines, the dire nutritional
situation, and the growing problems of refugees and
displaced persons make a prompt settlement all the more
urgent.

All the rehabilitation activities carried out by the
United Nations in Afghanistan, the important and tangible
results of which started to appear after the consolidated
appeal made by the Secretary-General, which was followed
by the meeting at Ashgabat for assistance to Afghanistan,
constitute but a tiny fraction of the massive volume of
assistance needed by Afghanistan. The infrastructure is in
dire need of continued rehabilitation plans supported by
the international community.

In this regard, the delegation of Egypt would like to
reaffirm the importance of striking a balance and
establishing a link between the political side and the
economic side in the process of reaching a peaceful
settlement in Afghanistan. A link between those two
aspects constitutes one of the practical ways to encourage
or, if need be, deter the Afghan parties, linking economic
assistance to the degree of flexibility shown by each party
to the conflict in efforts for a political settlement.

Finally, the delegation of Egypt would like to
reaffirm that this open debate could promote a political
settlement of the question of Afghanistan. However, this
will require the beginning of a wide-based political
dialogue through which national reconciliation can be
achieved in a manner that will ensure the preservation of
the sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of
Afghanistan; promote the efforts for development,
rehabilitation and reconstruction; contribute to the prompt
return of refugees and displaced persons to their
countries; and achieve security and well-being for the
fraternal people of Afghanistan.

