Mr. Doutriaux (France) (spoke in French): I
should like to thank the High Commissioner for
Refugees for his briefing.

With respect to his opening remarks on the fight
against terrorism, which he said must in no way
compromise international protection of the right to
asylum, I have nothing to add. I believe that we agree
with them word for word. The international community
must actively combat terrorism, in accordance with
resolution 1373 (2001), but quite obviously that must
in no way mitigate international protection of the rights
of refugees.

Mr. Lubbers went on to refer to the situation in
Afghanistan and in other parts of the world.
Concerning the situation in Afghanistan, Mr. Lubbers
was right to emphasize the prerequisites for the return
of the many refugees now in Iran and Pakistan, one of
which is clearly that of safety. There is another
requirement, however, on which I know the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) is working assiduously: the conditions for
return. Before they can return to Afghanistan, refugees
must have a home, a job and a normal environment to
return to, enabling them to live normally in their own
country. I also know that UNHCR is negotiating
tripartite agreements with Afghanistan and the host
countries Iran and Pakistan precisely in order to plan
the return of refugees in due course so that they can
enjoy normal conditions in their country of origin.

I entirely agree with Mr. Lubbers' statement that
we must, of course, pay close attention to the Afghan
crisis, but there are many other crises, unfortunately,
involving a great many refugees that we must not lose
sight of. We must not fall victim to what is often called
the "CNN effect". Unfortunately, there are other crises
and, as Mr. Lubbers said, many other refugees, for
example, in Africa.

What is of interest to us in the Security Council is
to ensure that, when we adopt a peacekeeping
mandate-as in the cases of Sierra Leone or the
Democratic Republic of the Congo-we are able to
take fully into account, to the extent allowed by
available resources, the situation of refugees and
displaced persons. Mr. Lubbers referred, for instance,
to the mandate of the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone. That mandate provides for the assistance of the
Blue Helmets, to the extent possible in their area of
deployment, in the return of refugees and displaced
persons. I believe that, when the Security Council
adopts resolutions providing Blue Helmets to a
peacekeeping operation, we must take systematically
into account the problem of displaced persons and
refugees.

As Mr. Lubbers pointed out, the very fact that we
deploy observers to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo creates an environment favourable to the return
of displaced persons and refugees. Security Council
action, however, is unfortunately not sufficient in itself
to solve the problems of displaced persons and
refugees. Assistance is needed. The UNHCR is
providing it and donors should provide more of it,
including in association with UNHCR. I would draw
the Council's attention to a programme that France has
established with UNHCR for the return to Sierra Leone
of refugees now living in Guinea. We provide bilateral
assistance and contribute to bilateral and multilateral
assistance through UNHCR for the reintegration of
Sierra Leonean refugees.

I have a question for Mr. Lubbers. Every year, the
Economic and Social Council convenes a humanitarian
segment. I believe that it will be held this year in July
in New York. Member States are currently considering
the themes to be included on the agenda of the
humanitarian segment this year. Can Mr. Lubbers give
us his personal point of View, which might help
delegations in their thinking? One theme, clearly, is the
issue of access to vulnerable populations, but perhaps
Mr. Lubbers might be more specific about what the
Economic and Social Council can do at its
humanitarian segment this July.

