Mr. Adechi (Benin) (spoke in French): The vote
just taken by the Security Council is a major event in
the context of the tireless efforts of the international
community to promote the rule of law and to protect
humanity against the terrible events witnessed in recent
decades. The vote was also in keeping with action by
the Council to find a solution to the lethal conflict
under way in Darfur.

We regret the fact that the text we have adopted
contains a provision of immunity from jurisdiction,
which runs counter to the spirit of the Rome Statute.

However, Benin had four reasons for voting in
favour of the resolution. First, Benin is party to the
treaty establishing the International Criminal Court.
Secondly, the ongoing deterioration of the situation in
Darfur requires the Security Council to take urgent
action to end violations against civilians there. One
prerequisite of such action is to end the reign of
impunity by providing impartial justice. Thirdly,
referring the matter to the International Criminal Court
ensures that credible and timely action will be taken
against persons charged with atrocities and serious
crimes. Fourthly, Benin voted in support of the
resolution out of respect for human dignity and the
right to life that has been denied to thousands of people
in Darfur, to whom the international community owes
protection in view of their vulnerability. That
obligation has been recognized by the African Union in
the Ezulwini Consensus adopted by its Executive
Council, meeting in extraordinary session on 7 and
8March this year. In the Ezulwini Consensus, the
African Union recognizes the Security Council's right
to exercise its international responsibility to protect a
population when that population's Government either
cannot or will not do so. The rendering of justice is an
element of that obligation.

It is of the highest importance to provide reliable
and fair justice that offers equal respect for the rights
of victims and their victimizers. We can thereby help
the people of the Sudan to achieve their legitimate
dream of putting an end to the bloodthirsty conflict as
soon as possible and to look to the future with serenity
and hope. We can also thereby offer a good foundation
for national reconciliation, because the national
reconciliation we all wish to see in the Sudan can
succeed only if impartial justice is done. In that
respect, we agree with the Commission of Inquiry that
it will be up to the Sudanese parties themselves to
decide, after broad consultations, on the appropriate
mechanism to promote national reconciliation.

