Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank Under-Secretary-
General Jean-Pierre Lacroix and Assistant Secretary-
General Andrew Gilmour for their pertinent briefings.

The Government of the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea is extremely concerned about development of
events in the Sudan - a historic land to which we can
wish only peace and prosperity. We reiterate our strong
national belief in the position of the African Union with
respect to unconstitutional changes of Government. We
deplore the acts of violence that serve only to undermine
peace in the country, thereby endangering the lives of
the Sudanese people.

We commend the work that the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) has conducted since its deployment to date,
in an environment that bears no resemblance to the
one that existed when its mandate was established. In
particular, we are especially satisfied with the weapons-
collection programme. The full implementation of
that programme is essential not only for maintaining
the current peace in Darfur but also with a view to
establishing definitive and lasting peace, in particular
in the zone ofJebel Marra, where pacification is crucial.
We encourage UNAMID to extend the weapons-
collection campaign to rural areas.

Similarly, we deplore the slow progress of the
political process underway on the basis of the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur. We should encourage
greater support for the political process led by the
African Union High-level Implementation Panel.

Although today's meeting concerns Darfur, we
cannot ignore the events taking place in Khartoum.
My country welcomes and applauds the firm stance
taken by the African Union and its institutions, with
the ultimate aim of ensuring that the will of the noble
Sudanese people is carried out. My country, together
with its African brothers and colleagues, South Africa
and Cote d'Ivoire, already issued a joint communique
last week in which we made our position quite clear. We
will reiterate it here today.

Equatorial Guinea appeals to the sense of historic
responsibility of the Transitional Military Council
to rise to the occasion by facilitating a democratic
transition led by civilians. It is imperative not only
to put an end to the violence but also to ensure the
protection of civilians and their fundamental rights.
The disproportionate use of force, in particular when
it leads to indiscriminate deaths, is unacceptable
and cannot go unpunished. We call on the Sudanese
authorities to return to the road map outlined by the
African Union. Any course of action taken must fit
within the parameters set by that regional organization.
In that regard, we applaud the rapprochement between
the parties in conflict that has taken place in recent
days and hope that it will continue in the same vein.

In the light of the renewal of the UNAMID
mandate, which is due to expire shortly, my delegation,
like others, advocates treading cautiously. It would
be counterproductive to reconfigure the mission or
continue with plans previously made. Therefore we
support a technical extension of the mandate for a
few months until the dust settles, which we hope will
be soon.

We would like to conclude by demanding that the
international community refrain from interfering in the
political process taking place in the Sudan. Any action
by third parties, including this Council, must be in line
with the interests of the Sudanese people and within the
parameters set by the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union.

