Mr. Issoze-Ngondet (Gabon) (spoke in French): I
would first like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
the initiative to convene this debate on the

development of the political, security and humanitarian
situation in Haiti. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his detailed report on those
issues (S/2010/446), and, lastly, to express my
appreciation to the Permanent Representative of Haiti
for the particularly enlightening information and
analysis that he has shared with us.

Members will recall that at a number of
international conferences held on Haiti, including the
donor conference of 31 March 2010 and the conference
held in the Dominican Republic on 2 June 2010, the
Haitian Government committed, before the
international community, to organizing general
elections on 28 November 2010. In that regard, my
delegation welcomes the steps taken to date by the
Haitian Government to create conditions conducive to
organizing that vote.

Thus, Gabon urges the Government and the
parties engaged in meeting this timeline to become
fully involved in completing the constitutional reform
process under way. Given the impact that the holding
of these elections will have on the recovery and
reconstruction process of Haiti, Gabon supports the
current coordination among the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), the
Government and civil society in preparing those
elections.

Likewise, my country appreciates the efforts
made in that area by the international community. In
particular, we welcome the significant $390 million
contribution of the European Union and the
announcement of $200 million in financial assistance
made by the Union of South American Nations.

In terms of security, we are pleased that the
situation remains generally calm. However, my
delegation continues to be concerned about the sexual
and gender-based violence against women and children
and the resurgence of crime by organized gangs, linked
in part to the escape of prisoners. That is why we
support keeping MINUSTAH military and police
troops at their current level so as to ensure support for
the Haitian security and defence forces.

Regarding the humanitarian situation, in
particular that of displaced persons, we support the
Secretary-General's appeal for the establishment of a
comprehensive strategy to resettle the earthquake
victims.

With regard to the recovery and reconstruction of
Haiti, my delegation encourages donors to meet their
commitments. The development of a stable and
prosperous Haiti will depend to a large extent on
keeping the promises made by donors.

Without doubt, the reconstruction of this country
is a challenge for the international community. From
that standpoint, Gabon supports efforts seeking aimed
at the Government's effective implementation of the
Action Plan for National Recovery and Development
of Haiti.

Lastly, my delegation renews its support for the
action of the United Nations Special Envoy for Haiti,
President Bill Clinton, and that of MINUSTAH and its
head, Special Representative Edmond Mulet.

