Mr. Aldouri (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
you, Sir, and the Security Council for granting Iraq the
opportunity to participate in this meeting and to
address the Security Council within the time allotted to
us.

I listened very carefully to the presentations by
Mr. Blix, Executive Chairman of the United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
(UNMOVIC), and Mr. ElBaradei, Director General of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), as
well as to the statements of members of the Security
Council. I should like to make a number of
observations.

Iraq agreed to act on resolution 1441 (2002),
based on the fact that it provided a means to reach a
solution to the so-called issue of the disarmament of
Iraqi weapons of mass destruction. Following three
rounds of technical negotiations with the United
Nations and the return of inspectors to Iraq, Iraq
provided everything that might fall within the concept
of proactive Iraqi cooperation.

I should like to note that Iraq submitted the
declaration required under paragraph 3 of resolution
1441 (2002) in record time. The declaration contained
many documents on previous Iraqi programmes in the
nuclear, chemical, biological and ballistic fields. We
continue to believe that those documents require in-
depth study by the relevant authorities because they
contain updated information responding to many
questions. We have the right to wonder whether the
declaration has been studied with due diligence and
thoroughness, or should the declaration be reconsidered
as a whole by the relevant parties? We should like the
file to be reconsidered in its entirety.

Secondly, Iraq opened its doors to the inspection
teams without imposing restrictions or conditions. The
entire world was surprised at that unprecedented level
of cooperation. We know that some States were not
very happy about that cooperation. In fact, some would
have wished that Iraq had obstructed inspections or
locked some doors. However, that did not and will not
happen because Iraq has genuinely decided to prove
that it is free of weapons of mass destruction and to
dispel all doubts in that regard.

Let me recall what Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei
stated this morning. So far, 675 inspections have taken
place within Iraq in this short period of time. The
inspectors have found no evidence contradicting Iraq's
declarations or confirming the allegations made by the
United States and the United Kingdom on the presence
of proscribed weapons programmes or of the weapons
whose presence was alleged by the representative of
the United Kingdom this morning.

Thirdly, with respect to the interviews with Iraqi
scientists, the Government continues to encourage
scientists to agree to interviews. Lists of the names of
additional scientists have been submitted at the request
of Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei. Other lists are on the
way, as they know.

Fourthly, Iraq has agreed to overflights by U-2,
Mirage and Antonov 11 aircraft in Iraqi airspace for
surveillance purposes. While these aircraft are
undergoing their missions, it is logical and reasonable
for British and United States aeroplanes to cease air
strikes because these would affect the security of those
missions. Thus, inspectors have six levels of aerial
surveillance: satellites, high-altitude U-2 surveillance
aircraft, medium-level Mirage aircraft, low-level
Antonov 11 aircraft, and helicopters and other means of
aerial surveillance.

With respect to the Iraqi legislation that some
have considered to be among the important elements of
Iraq's cooperation, Iraq did not take a negative stance
in this regard. We had technical and legislative
considerations. At any rate, the decree was enacted
today in order to put an end to the controversy
surrounding this matter. I was surprised to hear some
say that the decree was unimportant or late in coming.

With respect to other issues, UNMOVIC,
following its establishment, adopted a process that
includes assimilating outstanding disarmament issues
into the reinforced monitoring system; this was
referred to in the organizational plan it submitted to the
Security Council in document S/2000/292. However, in
order to facilitate UNMOVIC's mission to identify and
resolve these issues, Iraq, in its full, comprehensive
and updated declaration of 7 December 2002, provided
full, important details on these outstanding issues and
on the means to resolve them.

Nevertheless, Iraq has begun to cooperate
proactively with UNMOVIC, which has recently
agreed to discuss these issues with Iraq; we have
provided 24 documents concerning many of the
outstanding issues. Two commissions of high-ranking
Iraqi officials and scientists have been created to
consider these issues and provide the information, as
requested by Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei on more than
one occasion.

After all that, we hear allegations by some not
only that has Iraq not cooperated, but that it is in
material breach of resolution 1441 (2002). Our
question is, where is this material breach? Does it lie in
the allegations made by the United States of America at
the previous meeting - with which many States
worldwide did not agree - or is the matter related to
the notion of the proactive cooperation required of
Iraq?

Many in this forum have called for proactive
cooperation. What is proactive cooperation? If it means
that Iraq must show weapons of mass destruction, we
would respond with the Arabic proverb that an empty
hand has nothing to give. You cannot give what you do
not have. If we do not possess such weapons, how can
we disarm ourselves? How can such weapons be
dismantled when they do not exist?

We agree with those who believe that the best
way to resolve these issues is through continuing
proactive cooperation with the inspectors. We do not
stand with those who want the inspections to fail. I
refer to an article The Washington Post quoting
members of the United States Senate as saying that
"We [the US. Government] have undermined the
inspectors."

With regard to the issue of missiles that has been
referred to by many speakers today, I would like to
note, for those who are unaware of it, that Iraq declared
those missiles in its biennial declaration as well as in
its full declaration to the Security Council. The
missiles were not discovered by the inspectors. Iraq
continues to stress that these missiles, delivered to our
armed forces, do not have a range exceeding 150
kilometres. The issue was recently discussed with
UNMOVIC experts. Iraq believes that this issue can be
resolved with a technical solution. It is therefore
illogical to accuse Iraq of having gone beyond the
permitted range, as long as Iraq is addressing the issue
in a completely transparent manner and as long as its
installations and test sites are open and subject to
monitoring. In this regard, Iraq would suggest that test
firings could be undertaken of a random choice of
missiles, in order to ascertain the range. There is ample
opportunity for open dialogue between technical
parties in Iraq and in UNMOVIC in order to reach a
satisfactory solution to this issue.

With regard to the subject of VX and anthrax,
which were also mentioned, Iraq has put forward
practical proposals to resolve these issues, among other
outstanding issues related to VX, anthrax and certain
chemical precursors, as well as to information on
growth media. Iraq has suggested that one could
ascertain the amount of VX and anthrax that has been
destroyed by measuring the dissolved quantities of VX
and anthrax at sites where unilateral destruction took
place at the beginning of 1991, and that it is possible to
extrapolate the quantity destroyed by scientific
investigation and by comparing the result with Iraq's
declaration. The issue, therefore, needs strenuous effort
and persistence, because this is a difficult subject.

At a time when voices worldwide are calling on
the United States and the United Kingdom to listen to
reason and respect international legitimacy and peace,
the United States of America and the United Kingdom
continue to mass forces against Iraq and to threaten
war in disregard of international law and human rights.

We stress that Iraq has chosen the path of peace.
We have opted for solutions that would satisfy the
international community. We are prepared to provide
all means to assist in making clear the true picture, in
order to avoid the objections of those who are ill-
intentioned, who wish to start a war in Iraq and the
region, and whose clear political and economic
objectives would result in incalculable consequences.

We hope that the Security Council will heed the
desire of the vast majority of States Members of the
United Nations, and allow the inspectors to fulfil their
role and carry out their tasks through dialogue and
proactive cooperation. That will certainly lead to peace
and not war. We also seriously call upon the Security
Council to consider lifting the unjust embargo imposed
on Iraq and to rise to its commitments by respecting
Iraq's sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity. We call upon the Council to continue to work
towards the elimination of all weapons of mass
destruction in the entire Middle East, in
implementation of paragraph 14 of resolution 687
(1991).

