Mr. Bu thair (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like to begin by expressing our gratitude and
appreciation to the presidency for convening this
important meeting to discuss the protection of civilians
in armed conflicts. This is taking place while many
civilians are continuing to suffer in several armed areas
and conflicts.

Our world today endeavours to establish the
values and principles of human rights. Any violations
of those rights, regardless of the colour, race, religion
or political affiliation of those who commit them, have
become absolutely unacceptable, particular during
armed conflict. The United Nations Charter, global
humanitarian laws and human rights laws, as well as
divine law, hold all Member States - particular States
members of the Security Council - responsible and
accountable to seek all possible means, and to seek
them in a permanent way, to grant the United Nations a
vital, important and tangible role on the ground in
protecting human beings, especially civilians.

The tragic circumstances faced by the unarmed
population of the occupied Gaza Strip, due to the
savage onslaught in which civilians are subjected to all
kinds of killings, horrors and expulsions, call for
urgent action and a firm stand to stop the aggression
immediately, with no delay, to protect the lives of
civilians. One and a half million people live in the
Gaza Strip, the majority of them civilians. A helpless
minority militia faces a professional military institution
that is using bombs that sow fear in the hearts of
children and kill them indiscriminately. That can only
lead to the creation of a generation that is more violent,
more extreme, and will engender more hatred and
resentment as the days go by. The same applies to
those who live under siege, who are denied food and
medicine, as we hear from the testimony of
international organizations working on the ground in
Gaza. It is as if the Israelis had not learned any lessons
from history.

The practice of the Israeli occupation army is a
clear violation of international laws and conventions,
and that must oblige us to take a very clear stand vis-a-
vis such inhumane practices and practices that do not
guarantee the safety of civilians. We must take a stand
against such practices. When arrogant countries allow
the voices of arms and bombs to prevail and think that
by killing, terrorizing and starving innocent civilians
they achieve their political goals or that that will bring
them peace, they are totally mistaken. That is a dead-
end road and will only bring more instability and
counter-violence, more pain and suffering, and will
transform those who are defenceless - civilians who
are seeking a better life for themselves - into
extremists who know only the language of violence,
blood-letting and extremism in all its forms.

Any life lost means that we have lost a human
being who could have made a positive contribution to a
better society. That is why we call on the Council to
take into consideration the Secretary-General's
proposal of 27 November 2007. His vision, which we
share, is a practical solution to ensure the commitment
of the Security Council to the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. The Security Council has established a
working group on the protection of civilians that will
assist it in moving effectively towards providing
genuine and appropriate protection for unarmed
civilians in armed conflict similar to the working group
established pursuant to resolution 1612 (2005) on
children and armed conflict.

The armed conflicts currently raging and their
psychological and physical harm to civilians in various
corners of the world - including Afghanistan, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Iraq, Somalia,
Chad, the Philippines, Nepal and elsewhere - should
compel Member States to draw on all proposals on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict made by the
United Nations, and the Secretary-General and his
representatives in particular, in order to draft effective
resolutions establishing investigative committees or
similar entities to protect civilians in a practical and
concrete manner.

My delegation invites all peace-loving Member
States to create a new and effective system or
methodology for taking serious action against any
country that undertakes the kind of military aggression
that Israel has unleashed on the Palestinians,
threatening the lives of civilians. No human logic or
conscience can accept a country that preaches
democracy, respect for human rights, especially those
of women and children, and love of peace using tanks
and bombs to kill, maim and terrorize civilians.

If the proposals presented by the United Nations
through its Secretary-General and his representatives
are not given due consideration, the Organization and
its main bodies, the Security Council in particular, will
lose all credibility in the eyes of unarmed civilians,
who call on us to assume our responsibility for
protecting them in armed conflict.

