Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): In accordance with
paragraph 24 (e) ofresolution 1970 (2011), of26 February
2011, l have the honour to report to the Security Council
on the work of its Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011), concerning Libya. My report
covers the period from 18 December 2014 to 4 March
2015, during which time the members of the Committee
met once in informal consultations.

At the outset, I would like to touch briefly on
the final report (8/2015/128) of the Panel of Experts
established pursuant to resolution 1973 (2011) and most
recently extended by resolution 2144 (2014), which the
Committee received on 4 February. As the report is
now publicly available, I will confine my remarks to a
few highlights from it. The Panel concluded that weak
implementation of the arms embargo, high demand
for arms, and the amount of resources available to
the fighting parties to procure materiel indicated that
large-scale trafficking was likely to continue and had
the potential to contribute to a lasting conflict with no
clear militarily dominant party. The Panel also reported
on the diversion of military materiel, including
materiel exempted by the Committee and non-lethal
military materiel, to armed groups on both sides of the
political divide. It also highlighted the difficulties in
differentiating between authorized and illicit transfers
of arms and related materiel. The Panel further reported
on significant security challenges, particularly in
relation to terrorism, Libya's neighbours and countries
in the Sahel, owing to arms proliferation. It concluded
that arms and related materiel originating from Libya
had also significantly reinforced the military capacity
of terrorist groups operating in those countries.

Concerning the travel ban, the Panel reported on
violations of the measure by two listed individuals.
With regard to the assets freeze, the Panel believes that
large amounts of assets are likely being held outside
Libya under false names and by front companies. It
also continued to identify Member States lacking the
capacity to implement the assets freeze, due to gaps
in domestic legislation and the relevant constitutional
framework, and cautioned that a number of fraudulent
attempts were being made to recover looted Libyan
assets. Concerning measures related to attempts to
illegally export crude oil from Libya, the Panel noted
that while exports of crude oil not under the control of
the Libyan Government had probably taken place, no
requests for designation of the transporting vessels had
been made by the Government. It further found that in
addition to crude oil, its derivatives and other natural
resources were also subject to illegal export.

The Committee discussed the report and
recommendations of the Panel of Experts in informal
consultations on 20 February. The report was generally
well received and lauded for its detailed information.
The main points that emerged from the discussion were
concern about the reported arms-embargo violations and
the Panel's lack of access to Libya and other countries
with pending requests, and how to carry the Panel's
recommendations forward. Of the 18 recommendations,
the Committee agreed to take follow-up action on six.
Of the remaining 12 recommendations, 1 pertaining
to the designation of individuals first requires action
on the part of the sponsoring Member State, while the
other 11 were addressed to the Security Council.

I would now like to provide a brief update on the
Committee's activities following up on its meeting
of 14 November 2014, with Libya and regional States
participating. On 4 February, the Committee wrote to
Mr. Bernardino Leon, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya, inviting him to brief it.
On 23 and 26 February, the Committee wrote to the
Permanent Representative of Libya to the United
Nations regarding access to the Panel's report, then still
unpublished.

During the reporting period the Committee also
dealt with various aspects of the arms embargo. In that
regard, it replied to a Member State concerning the
disposal of seized military materiel and received an
inspection report on a new seizure, provided guidance
to a Member State on proceeding with a previously
exempted arms transfer to Libya and sought additional
information from a Member State regarding an intended
transfer of non-lethal military materiel to Libya.

As anticipated in the last periodic report to the
Council, the Committee send a letter to the Permanent
Mission of Libya to the United Nations conveying
information it had received from a Member State on an
arms embargo matter in response to the Committee's
queries on the subject. The Committee further took
note of the change in the focal point authorized to
sign off on arms embargo exemption requests an end-
user certificates on behalf of the Libyan Government.
Such requests must now bear the signature of the
Chief of Staff of the Libyan Army and be certified by

the Permanent Representative of Libya to the United
Nations.

Lastly, since the last periodic report to the Council,
the Committee received one notification under
paragraph 19 (a) ofresolution 1970 (2011) in connection
with the basic expenses exemption to the assets freeze,
on which no negative position was taken.

