Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, for his comprehensive
analysis of the situation in Afghanistan. We listened
with interest to the statement made by the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, Mr. Mahmoud Saikal.
We agree with the assessments made in the report
(S/2017/508) of the Secretary-General on the situation
in Afghanistan. We support the personal efforts of
Secretary-General Guterres with regard to ensuring
a sustainable Afghan settlement. In that regard, we
echo the profound and far-reaching statement by the
representative of Kazakhstan.

Afghanistan needs to become an active participant
in future regional and integrational processes.
Afghanistan has always been and will remain a friend
of Russia. In that regard, the recent series of terrorist
attacks that recently swept the country have weighed
heavily on us. We extend our sincere condolences to
the Government and the people of Afghanistan for
the victims of those appalling crimes. We express our
solidarity with those from the diplomatic corps who
suffered from those attacks. We are seriously concerned
about the growing internal political and military
tension within the country. Afghanistan is seemingly
unable to break the vicious cycle of violence, and the
situation continues to grow worse, with low levels of
economic growth and the increasing terrorist threat.
This string ofproblems is a major burden for the people
of Afghanistan, including its selfless armed forces.

In that vein, what is increasingly important with
regard to stabilizing the situation in Afghanistan is the
task of achieving national reconciliation. We support
the corresponding efforts undertaken by Kabul in that
respect. We proceed from the premise that the process
must be guided and implemented by the Afghans
themselves. We are ready to provide assistance in
promoting that, including through flexibly approaching
issues that concern potentially loosening the sanctions
regime of the relevant Security Council committees. At
the same time, we note the decreasing effectiveness of
many of the international mechanisms for supporting
national reconciliation in Afghanistan, which seem to
involve too many actors. On the other hand, narrow
formats clearly do not take into account the interests
of many of the countries of the region, which also
negatively affects the results of their work.

In that regard, we are convinced that the launch of
the Moscow talks on Afghanistan at the beginning of
the year is an inclusive and the most promising method
for establishing direct and constructive dialogue
on issues concerning national reconciliation. The
refusal of certain States to participate in those talks
for no specific reason has left us perplexed. Given
that India and Pakistan have become full members
of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization and that
Afghanistan and Iran have applied, the prospects for
national reconciliation can only grow.

We must acknowledge that the main tasks facing
the international military presence in the country over
the past 15 years remain unrealized. In many cases, the
situation has actually gotten worse. We are not looking
to accuse anyone, as that is not our political practice.
Let me make it clear to everyone that that is not our
goal. The task of reaching a settlement in Afghanistan
requires a consolidation of international and regional
efforts. Only our collective joint efforts will allow us to
unravel the complex tangle of problems and move the
country towards stable development in an atmosphere
of cooperation and good neighbourliness. That is the
only way in which counter-terrorism efforts will yield
the necessary benefits. In that regard, we support the
arrangements reached between President Ahmadzai of
Afghanistan and Prime Minister Sharif of Pakistan at
the Astana meeting.

However, instead of making progress on a unification
agenda, some of our partners would appear to resort
to baseless allegations and rhetoric, including against
Russia. I would like to point out that many years ago
Russia was one ofthe first countries to draw the attention
of the international community and the Afghans to
the spike in terror activity in the northern part of the
country. Our country made a significant contribution
to counter-terrorism efforts in Afghanistan, including
in cooperation with the United States and NATO. We
are referring to the transit of military cargo, supplying
helicopters and the training of Afghan troops. We are
very troubled by the intensification of the capabilities
of Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham in Afghanistan.
The ranks of that group are being filled. Its devastating
potential is growing. The problem is dangerous and
must not be ignored or glossed over.

We have received reports of flights of unidentified
aircraft that have been observed providing assistance to
Afghan militants. The scale and scope of those flights
are expanding. They are already reaching the provinces

of Sari Pul, Farah Kandahar, Herat and Nangarhar.
The flights often end as soon as the Afghan authorities
publish the relevant information. We need to keep the
situation under close review and we need to clamp
down on that type of cove activities. We deem the
demand by Afghan members of Parliament to clarify
the situation well grounded, and we expect the United
Nations Mission to provide a comprehensive report on
those events.

Narcotics pose a serious threat to stability in
Afghanistan and its neighbours, and to our friends and
allies in Central Asia. We are troubled by data showing
that drug production and poppy crops are once again
expanding. The rise in income from drug trafficking
is inevitably spurring terrorist activity. In that regard,
we call for international efforts to be stepped up in
combating Afghan drug trafficking. We see good
potential for bolstering counter-narcotics cooperation
between Afghanistan and the Collective Security
Treaty Organization.

Once again we repeat that the complex problems
in Afghanistan can be solved only on the basis of
broad, sincere cooperation at international and regional
levels. The task of harmonizing the approaches of
external players is becoming more urgent. Addressing
that task with a view to achieving sustainable national
reconciliation in Afghanistan is the very purpose of the
Moscow negotiations.

