Mr. Nl'ifiez Mosquera (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for having
convened this very important meeting of the Security
Council. We also thank Mr. Fernandez-Taranco for his
briefing this morning.

We have to acknowledge the fact that little
progress has been made since the last time the Security
Council reviewed this question. The situation in the
Middle East, and particularly in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem,
continues to be a matter of great concern. The ongoing
illegal occupation by Israel of Palestinian and other
Arab territories remains the major obstacle to
achieving a just, lasting and comprehensive peace in
the region.

Cuba reiterates its deep regret over the continued
suffering of the Palestinian people under Israel's brutal
military occupation and colonization for more than 40
years, as well as the fact that they continue to be
denied their basic human rights, including the
inalienable right to self-determination and the right of
Palestinian refugees to return to their lands, in
accordance with international law and General
Assembly resolution 194 (III).

In flagrant violation of international law, and
contrary to the objectives of the peace process, the
occupying Power continues its illegal construction of
settlements and the wall throughout the West Bank and,
in particular in and around East Jerusalem. Cuba is
deeply concerned about Israel's continued demolition
of Palestinian homes and eviction of Palestinian
families in East Jerusalem, as well as other illegal acts
of incitement, provocation and aggression by extremist
settlers against the Palestinian population and holy
places, which have made the present situation very
unstable and dangerous.

The enormous physical, economic and social
devastation that these illegal and destructive practices
have wrought has a profound effect on the peace
process and could also prejudice the outcome of an
agreement on Jerusalem's final status. The situation in
East Jerusalem is increasingly difficult and perilous.
Israeli settlement activities are accelerating, and more
than 5,000 people have lost their homes. The
Palestinian population of East Jerusalem is growing,
but they are forbidden to build and are forced to live in
slum conditions, deprived of their most basic human
rights.

The situation in the Gaza Strip following Israel's
brutal attack a year ago continues to be of great
concern. Israel's imposition of closures and restrictions
to the free movement and access of people and goods,
including humanitarian and medical supplies, has made
the area's recovery and reconstruction practically
impossible, and has also aggravated already precarious
levels of unemployment and poverty. The ongoing
siege in the Gaza Strip has left a million and a half
people living under constant threat of death and
deprived of the most basic services. More than
20 civilians have died so far this year because of Israeli
10-22138
hostilities, while 11,000 homes have been destroyed
and hundreds of thousands are forced to live outdoors.

Cuba calls once again for Israel to lift its illegal
blockade and allow the entry of supplies of all kinds
into the Gaza Strip, enabling reconstruction to begin.
These measures and policies carried out by Israel are
serious, flagrant breaches of international law, the
Charter of the United Nations and numerous General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions, as well as
the Advisory Opinion of 9 July 2004 of the
International Court of Justice. Israel must forthwith
cease all its offences against the Palestinian people in
the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, and meet its obligations under international
law, particularly international humanitarian and human
rights law.

Cuba reaffirms that every measure or action taken
by Israel with the purpose of changing the legal,
physical or demographic condition and the institutional
structure of occupied Syrian Golan, as well as any
measure taken by Israel in order to impose its
jurisdiction and administration over that territory, are
null and void and carry no legal weight. We also
reaffirm that all those measures and actions, including
the illegal construction and expansion of Israel
settlements in the Syrian Golan since 1967, are
violations of international law, international agreements,
the Charter and resolutions of the United Nations,
including Security Council resolution 497 (1981), and
of the Fourth Geneva Convention, and are in defiance
of the international community. Cuba demands that
Israel withdraw completely from the occupied Syrian
Golan to the borders of4 June 1967.

Israel cannot be allowed to continue to act with
impunity. It is able to do so only because of the support
it receives from the super-Power. Cuba supports the
quest for a peaceful, just and lasting solution to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, and reiterates its hope that
the current efforts will put an end to the occupation of
all Arab territories occupied by Israel since 1967, and
enable the establishment of an independent State of
Palestine with East Jerusalem as its capital.

