Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive briefing and his report (S/2015/289),
of which we take note. I would also like to thank the
High Commissioner for Human Rights and commend
the work of his Office. I thank Mr. Diakite for his
briefing.

The growing illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons throughout the world, particularly in hotbeds
of tension, in addition to their inextricable link to
terrorist organizations and drug traffickers, requires
those of us concerned with maintaining international
peace and security to detect the signs of such activity
and to dismantle all illegal operations, even as we
work to halt the arms race among weapons-producing
States. Our firm belief in the need for States to use and
manufacture small arms and light weapons for self-
defence and to defend their citizens, as well as in the
legitimate right of all peoples to self-determination,
including those chafing under the yoke of occupation,
does not run counter to attempts to halt the illicit arms
trade. We are dutybound to pursue our efforts to control
and overcome a scourge that affects us all, in particular
societies suffering from the illicit proliferation of such
weapons. The illicit and illegitimate use of small arms
and light weapons can be traced to the growing trade in
such arms by untrustworthy groups that find it all too
easy to obtain them in some parts of the world.

We are well aware of the gravity and repercussions
of the problem. Terrorists and criminal organizations
View small arms and light weapons as a tool that enables
them to pursue their illegitimate goals in a number of
ways, often in the context of a culture that, in some
societies, as is well known, favours such possession. All
States and Governments must therefore try to change
the prevailing societal and cultural attitudes towards
such activities and promote the principle of the rule of
law so that State institutions will be able to effectively
protect their citizens societies.

The illicit trade in small arms and light weapons
has led to the proliferation of conflicts that have
been accompanied by an alarming number of civilian
casualties. The number of civilian victims of violence
in armed conflict represents the visible face of the
illicit market in small arms and light weapons and of
their abuse. Despite the dark, invisible side of the illicit
arms trade, its effects can be seen in its humanitarian
consequences, especially on young people, women
and children. It is vital to offer assistance to States
enduring the consequences and the medium- and long-
term effects of the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons, upon their request, and to assist them in
developing national strategies to control them, with the
participation of all sectors of society at the local level.
Civil society and mass media have a pivotal role to play
in addressing that phenomenon.

States must extend their authority across the full span
of their national territory and implement international
humanitarian law and human rights law with the aim of
curbing the proliferation of such weapons. Alongside
international efforts to curb the flow of small arms and
light weapons, decisive new laws aimed at punishing
the illegal acquisition of such weapons must be enacted.
We continue to emphasize the need to adopt further
controls to monitor the weapons market and to honestly
implement the relevant international treaties. At the
regional level, neighbouring States must continue
mutual cooperation and coordination to promote border
security.

In the various forums that address the illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons, Jordan has emphasized
its commitment to the United Nations Programme of
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects, and to pressing ahead with the development of
national legislation to combat such trade.

To conclude, the proliferation of small arms and
light weapons is not a cause but rather the result of
numerous factors. Conflicts must therefore be resolved
in a just manner. Many crucial issues demand to be
addressed. We will not reach our destination so long
as international peace and security continue to be
seriously and systematically threatened in many parts
of the world by the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons.

