Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I do not want to exchange polemics with my
Ukrainian colleagues and I do not think there is going
to be a lengthy discussion, but there are two comments
that I wish to make.

What is cynicism? Cynicism is attempting to
provoke a conflict by shooting both at one's own side
and the other side. Today, a number of my colleagues
referred to an alleged attack on a Ukrainian base. I can
tell the Council again that there has been no attack on any
base. There were not even any Russian soldiers present.
Those who were present were unarmed members of the
self-defence forces, wearing only bullet-proofjackets,
and a sniper posted on a nearby building shot, killed
and injured one person on each side. Immediately, the
leaders in Kyiv come out with a statement saying that
there is now a need to fire on Russian soldiers. Now
that is real cynicism.

Cynicism is what we saw in the Maidan, where
there was an attempt to provoke the violent overthrow
of the authorities by shooting at all sides and kill as
many protestors as possible, as Mr. Simonovic' said
today. A professional fired on the crowds, and everyone
saw where the shots came from. One well-equipped and
well-trained sniper came from the headquarters of the
so-called Maidan commandant. That is cynicism.

Finally, let me turn to the so-called ultimatum.
I do not know why our Ukrainian colleagues refer
to this as an ultimatum. Our Western partners have
started to consider how to extricate themselves from
the crisis in Ukraine and to come up with their own
recipes to do so. We in response provided them with
our vision of how we could extricate ourselves from the
crisis in Ukraine to ensure that all regions feel at rest
and secure. The very core of our proposal is entirely
in keeping with the agreement of 21 February. There
needs to be a constitutional process whereby all regions
would feel that their rights were being defended within
the framework of the Ukrainian State. That is not an
ultimatum to Kyiv, but something we have discussed
with our partners. In my statement today, I said that we
stand ready to continue such dialogue.

