Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
should like at the outset to thank Under-Secretary-
General Egeland for his briefing. I would also like to
thank him for the efforts that he has made over the past
three years in the area of humanitarian assistance. We
wish him every success. I also wish to commend
United Nations agencies for their significant efforts in
the field of protecting civilians in armed conflict over
the years.

The issue of the protection of civilians in armed
conflict is an old one. International humanitarian law,
including the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 and
its two Additional Protocols of 1977, sets out adequate
provisions in this regard. While the provisions of
international humanitarian law have been widely
accepted, many challenges remain in their
implementation. We are deeply concerned about the
fact that the lives and property of civilians are
threatened in armed conflict. We urge the relevant
parties to armed conflicts to abide by international
humanitarian law, provide adequate protection to
civilians and avoid threatening their lives and
damaging their property.

The important Security Council resolution 1674
(2006), adopted in April, which sets out comprehensive
provisions pertaining to the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, and a number of other relevant
resolutions and presidential statements adopted by the
Council on previous occasions, have established a legal
framework for the work of the Council on this issue.
What is needed now is the effective implementation of
those documents in order to improve the situation on
the ground. In that context, I would like to highlight
the following points.

First, in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations and international humanitarian law, the
responsibility to protect civilians lies primarily with
the Governments of the countries concerned. While the
international community and other external parties can
provide support and assistance and urge the parties
concerned seriously to implement the provisions of
humanitarian law and to avoid harming civilians, they
should not infringe upon the sovereignty and territorial

integrity of the countries concerned, nor should they
enforce intervention by circumventing the
Governments of such countries.

Secondly, it is imperative clearly to differentiate
between the protection of civilians and the provision of
humanitarian assistance. The efforts made by
humanitarian agencies in the spirit of humanitarianism
to provide assistance to civilians affected by armed
conflict, often under dangerous circumstances, should
be appreciated and commended. However, they should
also at all times abide by the principles of impartiality,
neutrality, objectivity and independence, in order to
maintain the humanitarian nature of their operation and
to avoid getting involved in local political disputes or
negatively affecting a peace process.

Thirdly, to protect civilians, greater emphasis
should be placed on prevention as well as on the need
to address both the symptoms and the root causes of a
conflict. If the Security Council, which bears the
primary responsibility for the maintenance of world
peace and security, can effectively prevent and resolve
various conflicts, that would successfully provide the
best protection possible to civilians. A number of
incidents that occurred this year have demonstrated
that failure effectively to respond to the outbreak of
conflict will render any ex-post-facto protective
measures, however ingenious, virtually ineffectual vis-
a-vis the sudden onslaught of violence and conflict.
The best way to protect civilians is to provide them
with safe and predictable living environments by
actively exploring ways of preventing conflicts and
effectively resolving ongoing conflicts.

In discussing the issue of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, the Security Council should
continue to approach with caution the concept of the
responsibility to protect. The World Summit Outcome
last year gave an extensive and very cautious
representation of the responsibility to protect
populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity, and went on to
request the General Assembly to continue to explore
this concept. As many Member States have expressed
their concern and misgivings in that regard, we believe
that it is not appropriate to expand, wilfully interpret or
even abuse this concept. Resolution 1674 (2006) only
reaffirmed in principle the relevant statement as
contained in the Summit Outcome, without any further
elaboration. All sides should continue to abide by the
relevant agreed elements of the Summit Outcome in

interpreting or applying this concept. In that context,
the Security Council cannot and should not take over
the role of the General Assembly or make any
prejudgment.

Finally, we hope that in the process of
implementing the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council, full consideration will be taken of the specific
characteristics and circumstances of each conflict, so
as to adopt appropriate measures aimed at effectively
achieving the objective of protecting civilians.

