Mr. Spatafora (Italy): I would like first of all to
thank the Special Coordinator and Personal
Representative, Alvaro De Soto, for his very interesting
and informative briefing. I would like to recall that he
said in his message that "reasons to sound more
hopeful" are stronger today that they were in the past.
This means that today there is a window of opportunity
that is more promising than ever before. We must
therefore make a concerted effort to prevent that
window of opportunity from closing, either partially or
entirely.

Italy fully associates itself with the statement to
be delivered later by Germany, which holds the
presidency of the European Union.

Italy welcomes the agreement reached by the
Palestinians to form a Government of national unity as
an important step forward in the start of a
reconciliation process between the various Palestinian
political forces. In that regard, we particularly
appreciated the role played by King Abdullah of Saudi
Arabia. He worked with patience and skill, alongside
other Arab leaders and the Arab League, and he
succeeded in creating conditions that pave the way for
the Palestinian parties to go back to the negotiating
table, thus facilitating the reaching of an agreement.
That confirms the important role that all the countries
in the region can and should play to restore peace and
stability in the Middle East.

While sharing the hopes expressed by the Quartet
in its statements of 2 and 9 February, Italy believes that
it is necessary carefully to assess the new
Government's programme. We hope that it will reflect
accurately the principles expressed by the Quartet -
an essential condition for the normalization of its
relations with the international community. We now
await the terms of the agreement to set up a Palestinian
Government of national unity, and we stand ready,
together with the other member States of the European
Union, to work with a legitimate Palestinian
Government that has adopted a platform reflecting the
Quartet principles.
While keeping to the results-based sequential
approach of the Road Map, Italy has consistently
underlined the urgent need to elaborate new strategies
that offer the parties clear negotiating prospects for
reaching a definitive solution to the crisis, as we
believe that the process has to be accelerated. In our
view, the parties must be offered a clear sense of the
endgame: a two-State solution leading to the creation
of a democratic, independent and viable Palestinian
State and providing precise guarantees of peace and
security to Israel and to the neighbouring countries.

We believe it crucial that Israel, at this sensitive
time, refrain from any action that could be
misunderstood by the Palestinians, particularly
regarding the status of Jerusalem, and which could
jeopardize the results achieved so far as a result of the
most strenuous efforts.

It is equally important that all forms of
provocation by the Palestinians towards Israel cease,
particularly the launching of Qassam rockets, and that
the Palestinian authorities do their utmost to prevent
any recurrence of terrorist acts such as the recent tragic
attack in Eilat - which we condemn once again in the
strongest possible terms.

Italy believes that it is time for negotiations to
start on the basis of effective mutual confidence-
building measures, including the full implementation
of the Agreement on Movement and Access,
particularly at Rafah, whose opening should be routine
rather than exceptional, as well as the implementation
of the Sharm el-Sheik Agreements, the release of
prisoners and the complete transfer of customs
revenues to the Palestinian Authority.

Above all, we believe that, in the long-awaited
new climate of dialogue that will emerge with the
formation of the new Government, the truce currently
in force in Gaza might be extended rapidly to the West
Bank as well.

Finally, Italy continues to believe that, once
direct negotiations between the parties have begun,
with clear prospects of a final result, a creative effort
should be made to involve in the process all those
regional actors that, as I said earlier, are able to make a
constructive and responsible contribution to the
dialogue.

Italy wishes to express its deep concern, as other
speakers have done, at the news coming from Lebanon.
We condemn today's attack in Bikfaya, as well as all
resort to violence, in the strongest possible terms and
express our heartfelt condolences to the relatives of the
victims.

Italy is also deeply concerned at the incident that
took place recently between the Israeli and Lebanese
armies. We praise UNIFIL's prompt and effective
intervention, which prevented the situation from
degenerating. We hope that the existing tripartite
mechanism, which has been working successfully so
far, will also be used to prevent similar episodes in the
future.

While we are equally concerned by the discovery
of a weapons lorry, which was promptly seized by the
Lebanese authorities, we appreciate the effective action
taken by those authorities to counter weapons
smuggling, and we hope that it will continue to be
strengthened, in compliance with resolution 1701
(2006). Italy considers that the full implementation of
that resolution is fundamental, in particular as concerns
the freeing of the two Israeli soldiers who were
kidnapped on 12 July and the resolution of the Sheba'a
Farms issue.

The international community has made a
substantial commitment to the stabilization and
reconstruction of Lebanon, both through the creation of
UNIFIL plus - to which, let me recall, 17 EU
countries contribute - and by making available
considerable financial resources on the occasion of the
Paris Conference of 25 January. In that respect, we
welcome the tangible commitment to Lebanon also
expressed in Paris by the Arab world.

Finally, we call on all Lebanese forces to keep in
mind that violence is not an option and immediately to
resume the dialogue in order to reach an agreed
solution to the various aspects of the crisis: the
formation of a Government of national unity; the
election of a new President of the Republic; the
approval of the Statute of the International Tribunal on
the murder of Rafik Hariri; a new elections law; and
early political elections.

