Mr. Martirosyan (Armenia): Since this is the
first time I have taken the floor this year, I should like
to congratulate the new non-permanent members of the
Security Council and to wish them success for the
whole period of their tenure.

The problem of combating the illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons has gained momentum
during the past several years. To address that and many
other issues generated by that illicit trade, a
Programme of Action was adopted in 2001. Member
States were requested to provide information on a
voluntary basis on the implementation of the
Programme of Action, and my country duly complied
with that request by presenting its national report in
2003.

Here, I should like to note that we view the
Programme of Action as the starting point of a long,
effort-driven process requiring implementation, review,
updating and follow-up. The open-ended working
group recently established pursuant to resolution
58/241 - adopted only a month ago by the General
Assembly - is a further step forward in mobilizing
international efforts to effectively curb this problem. In
that regard, we should like to express our
congratulations to Mr. Anton Thalmann on his
nomination as Chairman of the working group, and we
wish him and the group every success in carrying out
their duties to further this cause. I should like to assure
the Council that my country and our delegation stand
ready to assist the working group in its efforts in any
way possible.

As Ijust said, Armenia has presented its national
report on the implementation of the Programme of
Action in Armenia. Without going into much detail, I
should merely like to cite recent developments in that
field in my country. Combating all types of illicit
trade- including the trafficking in small arms and
light weapons - remains a priority for the Government
of Armenia.

We intend to further develop our national
legislation and its enforcement to increase the
effectiveness of our efforts towards this goal. To that
end, the decision of the Armenian Government on the
rules and procedures of the licensing of the production
of arms in the Republic of Armenia entered into force
in July 2003, adding to the existing laws and
regulations and enabling more complete and stricter
oversight in this field.

Additionally, the new criminal code, which
entered into force on 1 August 2003, has expanded the
scope of the existing legislation by directly addressing
criminal offences in the illegal manufacture,
possession, stockpiling, acquisition, sale, transportation
and theft of arms and ammunition or explosives and by
defining criminal offences relative to the inaccurate or
careless stockpiling of arms.

Notwithstanding all the aforementioned, it should
be noted that there are no potentially destabilizing
accumulations of small arms and light weapons in the
territory of Armenia, and the Government exercises
stringent control over the possession, manufacturing
and trading of small arms in the territory of the
country.

As is commonly recognized now, the issue of
small arms and light weapons is not merely an arms
control and disarmament issue. It has a human rights
dimension. It is linked to terrorism and organized
crime, to mention just a few. Henceforth, the problem
of small arms and light weapons should be dealt with
from an inclusive perspective of national, regional and
international security, conflict-prevention and post-
conflict peace-building. Therefore, we should maintain
a balanced and comprehensive approach to effectively
address this issue.

Nonetheless, it should be noted that while small
arms and light weapons play a significant role in
exacerbating conflicts, the roots of those conflicts lie in
political, economic, ethnic and cultural differences and
disparities. These are often aggravated by governance-
related deficiencies, weak democratic institutions or
lack thereof, non-observance of and disrespect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms, as well as
disregard of the right of peoples to self-determination.
We should be aware of the fact that the complex nature
of conflicts requires a comprehensive approach rather
than reducing it to the problem of small arms and light
weapons alone.

Armenia successfully cooperates in this field with
regional organizations, the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) in particular. We
welcome the adoption of the OSCE's best practice
guide, which marks further progress in this area.
However, further steps could be taken to enhance
cooperation by establishing a register of small arms
and light weapons, as well as other cooperation
mechanisms such as subregional transparency and
confidence-building measures with a view to
combating illicit trade. Harmonization of national
control laws and regulations, as well as the exchange of
national lists of registered brokers, can be carried our
within subregional and regional frameworks as well.
Such initiatives may run parallel to the conflict-

resolution efforts in regions such as ours by preventing
further arms races and serving as a significant
confidence-building measure.

