Mr. Radomski (Poland): Poland aligns itself with
the statement delivered by the European Union. We
would like to offer some additional remarks from our
national perspective.

First of all, I would like to thank Venezuela
for convening today's open debate. The seventieth
anniversary of the United Nations provided numerous
opportunities to look at the history of our Organization.
The importance of respecting the United Nations
Charter was emphasized on many occasions. As the
Security Council has the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security,
which was conferred on it by the States Members of the
United Nations, it is very appropriate to place this topic
on the Council's agenda.

The principles established by the Charter of the
United Nations, including respect for State sovereignty
and territorial integrity, the peaceful settlement of
international disputes and non-interference in other
countries' internal affairs, make up the foundations
of contemporary international law and international
relations. These principles should be fully respected by
all States. Any attempt to deviate from or deny them
would only result in threats to international peace and
security.

In this regard, we would like to underline once again
what was already said today by the representative of the
European Union: that the sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity okaraine, our neighbour,
must be fully respected, as reaffirmed by the General
Assembly in its resolution 68/262, of March 2014.

According to the United Nations Charter,
international disputes among countries should be
resolved in a peaceful way. The Security Council should
advocate peaceful solutions to disputes and support, as
a matter of priority, efforts to resolve disputes through
dialogue, negotiations, reconciliation, good offices and
other peaceful means. The role of regional organizations
and local actors is key in this context given the complex
nature of today's conflicts and the limited resources of
the United Nations. As proved by last year's agreement
with Iran, such an approach is not that of a dreamer
but can bring concrete benefits to the international
community.
As we reflect today on the application of the
principles of the United Nations Charter, it is important
to stress that there are significant new threats and
challenges to international peace and security that were
unknown to or underestimated by the founders of the
United Nations in 1945.

Terrorism and foreign fighters, violent extremism,
cyberattacks and uncontrolled migration, climate
change, information warfare, as well as transnational
organized crime have all undermined global stability.
While the Security Council strives to address these
challenges, we need more consistency to ensure the
successful completion of the tasks that arise from
the Council's effort to maintain international peace
and security. In that regard, we welcome the Plan of
Action to Prevent Violent Extremism presented by the
Secretary-General. It is important to bear in mind that
the scourge of violent extremism is not exclusive to any
religion or nationality.

Let me conclude by reaffirming that Poland, as
one of the original Members of the United Nations, is
fully committed to the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations. We believe that these
norms provide a firm foundation for the universal
application of international law to all countries and the
advance of the international rule of law. All countries
are equal members of the international community, and
all countries are entitled to participate in international
affairs on equal footing. Respect for democracy, human
rights and the rule of law in international relations is as
important as it is on a national level. It enhances trust
and faith among participants of international life.

