Mr. Tomka (Slovakia): I wish to begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for this
month. My delegation also wishes to join previous
speakers in thanking you, Mr. President, for convening
this important open debate on exit strategies for United
Nations peacekeeping operations, the timing of which
could, perhaps, not have be better. We commend the
delegation of the Netherlands for preparing a thought-
provoking paper for today's discussion.

We must recognize that, at the threshold of the
new millennium, a number of countries and regions
still remain afflicted and threatened by conflicts and
tensions. There are no more noble goals for the
international community and the United Nations than
the promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development. Timely and appropriate response to
conflict situations is essential in order to prevent the
deterioration of situations and achieve the noble goal of
durable peace. However, one must agree that a desired
outcome cannot be achieved without the right strategy.

We share the View - and recent experience has
confirmed it - that peacekeeping operations, as one of
the fundamental forms of international assistance in
today's conflict situations, can achieve a positive result
only if they are based on a clearly defined and
achievable mandate that reflects the requirements of
the situation under consideration. Only a well designed
and developed strategy for United Nations
peacekeeping involvement that includes the provision
of an adequate mandate and appropriate resources for
the operation can bring about success and strengthen
the credibility of the United Nations in its peace efforts
around the world.

We believe that establishing a clear mandate for
peacekeeping operations is the primary responsibility
of the Security Council, with the strong support of the
Secretariat. In this regard, the Secretariat and the
Security Council should effectively use the necessary
and appropriate means available to them. Those means
include, among other things, fact-finding missions,
missions by the Security Council, and special
representatives of the Secretary-General to obtain
proper and reliable information reflecting the real
situation on the ground. The information obtained
should be frankly discussed with the aim of candidly
and openly pointing out existing problems and seeking
out appropriate tools to address the problems and
resolve conflict situations. We believe that such an
approach could lead to a determination of the
objectives that are essential for the establishment of a
clear mandate for a proposed mission. At the same
time, this could avoid unnecessary problems and
diminish the need to change a mission's mandate or,
even, to withdraw the mission before it achieves its
goals.

It is evident that a mission should be given an
achievable mandate, together with sufficient resources
to be able to carry out its objectives. We are of the
view that the establishment of such a mandate should
be based on close and interactive cooperation between
the Security Council, as the decision maker, and the
troop contributing countries participating in the
implementation of the mandate of peacekeeping
operations. However, in order to proceed in that
fashion and to be able to support the good intentions
underlying the deployment of United Nations missions,
Member States must be able and willing to provide
troops that are adequately prepared for the tasks
assigned, thereby also supporting the ability of the
United Nations to carry out the tasks it is asked to
perform.

In that regard, we share and support the view that,
where feasible, Member States should enter into
effective mutual cooperation that will enable them to
form adequately trained and equipped troops. We also
encourage the Secretariat to assist Member States and
to facilitate such cooperation. With active participation
by the Secretariat, this concept should also be applied
to the pre-deployment training of potential troop
contributors, if necessary, as part of an overall strategy
for mission deployment.

There is no doubt that the peace process is not
complete and that the cooperation and assistance of the
international community cannot stop after peace is
restored. Durable results and lasting and self-sustaining
peace and development cannot be achieved and
maintained without adequate follow-up. This assumes
the clear and smooth transition of peacekeeping
operations to post-conflict peace-building that
addresses all factors and needs related to consolidation
and development and thereby maintains the momentum
developed by the peacekeeping operation. We share the
view that the Security Council must remain engaged
throughout all phases of this process.

The United Nations has a variety of tools at its
disposal for conflict prevention and resolution. While
we welcome and support every new and innovative
approach that can enhance our efforts towards peace, in
addressing the particular situation we should open the
existing tool box wide and take out all appropriate
tools as the situation requires.

