The President: We have come to the end of the
list of members of the Security Council. I will now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Belgium.

(spoke in French)

Like other members of the international
community, Belgium attempts to make its contribution
to the international response to the problem of the
exploitation of natural resources in a number of ways.
We were one of the pioneer members of the Kimberley
Process, and we participate actively in it. The last
meeting of the Process was held in Brussels just a few
weeks ago. Moreover, Belgium recently decided to
make an important contribution to the International
Tropical Timber Organization initiative, and a year ago
we set up a scientific task force, on Mineral Resources
in Central Africa, to study the feasibility of tracking
mechanisms for copper and cobalt in Katanga.

Last February, we organized an international
conference on the sustainable management of forests in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and we decided
to bring that matter to the agenda of the Council today.
In organizing the debate, Belgium hoped to achieve
two objectives. The first is that the Council should in
general recognize that natural resources can be a
destabilizing factor and reaffirm the central idea that
good governance of natural resources is important, not
only for development but also for peace and security.
That is particularly true in countries emerging from a
conflict in which natural resources were a factor.

In the Congo, it is essential that the exploitation
of the enormous natural wealth of the country benefit
the entire population, if we wish to see lasting stability
and avoid a relapse into civil war in the near future.
Liberia has understood that well and has made the
management of natural resources a central element of
its (GMAP) programme of assistance for rebuilding the
country. That is also true more generally in
institutionally fragile countries that are facing the need
to manage their wealth in natural resources, such as
Timor-Leste. Those countries need international
support to ensure that their natural resources will be an
opportunity for them, and not a curse.
Having said that, it is clear that I am not
advocating that the international community become
involved in the management of the natural resources of
each country. That, of course, remains the
responsibility of national authorities. On the contrary,
it is a question of strengthening that responsibility and
making sure that the exploitation of natural resources
does not escape State control nor be used against the
State. Setting up mechanisms for international
cooperation can help in achieving that objective.

We must also make accountable the various
actors involved in the exploitation of natural resources
accountable, in particular the private sector.
Cooperation and accountability are at the heart of the
initiatives I have already mentioned. In the same spirit,
it is necessary to give greater thought to mechanisms
for certification or for tracking certain commodities, as
Belgium is doing today for certain minerals in the
Congo. We must also promote the efforts of institutions
such as the World Bank to provide assistance and
targeted advice on the management of natural
resources.

Why do we wish to discuss the topic in the
Security Council? Once again, it is obvious that the
Council is not attempting to provide any kind of
guardianship over efforts not related to its
competencies and which are better placed with other
organs, national or international. But those initiatives
have an impact on international peace and security, and
that is the primary responsibility of the Council. The
Council has a duty to promote awareness of the fact
that security and development are linked, and to
encourage all actors involved in managing natural
resources to bear that in mind. It is therefore up to the
Security Council to highlight complementarity between
those initiatives and its own actions and to encourage
them so they can contribute to peace.

I now come to my second objective:
consideration of the Council's own actions. The
Council is no stranger to the question of the role of
natural resources in conflicts and in the past it has used
some of its instruments for responding to that issue.
However, such action can be reinforced and made more
systematic. In the management of conflicts, the
Council should examine earlier on whether or not the
dimension of natural resources needs to be taken into
account.
For example, groups of experts have proved to be
a useful instrument in shedding light on mechanisms
by which natural resources can be exploited in order to
fuel conflict, but the quality of their work is uneven. It
should be possible to build within the Secretariat a
more permanent centre of expertise to support their
work. That question must also be raised when drafting
the mandates of peacekeeping operations, which could
include a specific expertise component, when required.
Moreover, the Security Council could pay greater
attention to the complementarity between its actions
aimed at peace and security and the post-conflict
phase, where reconstruction and development become
the central objectives. We must consider further, in
particular, the conditions to be met for lifting a specific
embargo. Undoubtedly, there is still work to be done in
cooperation with the Peacebuilding Commission.

I am particularly pleased that this discussion has
taken place. It would be useful to pursue it in greater
depth in the future, not only in the Council but
elsewhere as well. Although we may have differences
of opinion on certain specific aspects of the problem, I
hope I can count on the support of all Council members
in that respect.

I now resume my functions as President.
I now call on the representative of Germany.

