Mr. Van Dunem "Mbinda" (Angola): The Vice-
Minister without Portfolio of Angola, Mr. Higino
Carneiro, cannot address the Council, and he has asked
me to do so in his stead. With his permission, therefore,
allow me to express our pleasure at addressing the
Security Council at a moment in which the peace process
in my country is reaching a decisive stage.

Allow me also to congratulate you, Mr. President, on
behalf of the Republic of Angola and my own, on your
election to preside over the activities of this body in the
month of December.

Allow me also to extend our congratulations to your
predecessor, His Excellency Nugroho Wisnumurti,
Permanent Representative of Indonesia, for the efficient
manner in which he presided over our activities last
month.

This meeting has been convened to review the
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol and to consider
measures that will lead to a successful conclusion of the
Angolan peace process within a reasonable period of
tlme.

Despite well-known difficulties, there has been
substantial progress in the implementation of key
provisions of the Lusaka Protocol. That leads the
Government of Angola to believe that we are now very
close to its conclusion.

Obviously, this step, as well as the incorporation of
UNITA generals into the Angolan Armed Forces, is
heavily dependent upon the statement expected from the
United Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM III).

We are now awaiting most sincerely and anxiously
this moment in the peace process. His Excellency the

 

President of Angola has instructed the Vice-Minister
without Portfolio to inform the members of the Security
Council that hours ago he signed the official appointment
orders of the nine UNITA generals, incorporating them into
the Armed Forces. The Security Council has received for its
consideration the communique of the coordination body of
the peace process.

We are all very concerned with the reintegration of the
demobilized soldiers into civilian society, and it could not
be otherwise, because the success of that task is essential to
the future stability of Angola.

On the basis of its present capabilities, the
Government of Angola is making an enormous financial
effort to ensure not only the reintegration of the
demobilized soldiers but also to finance the costs of
transporting them, their weapons and the UNITA soldiers
to the quartering areas.

On behalf of peace, we have been shouldering alone
these expenditures, which should be shared by UNITA
itself and by UNAVEM. III. We hereby appeal to all donor
nations to honour their commitments resulting from the
September 1995 Brussels Round Table Conference.

Please allow me again to thank the Governments,
United Nations organizations and governmental and non-
governmental humanitarian organizations for the assistance
they have provided to the Angolan people.

The Government of Angola also wishes to express its
gratitude to His Excellency Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, the
Secretary-General of the United Nations; to his Special
Representative in Angola, Mr. Beye; and to the troika of
observer States for the contributions they have made and
are making to the implementation of the Lusaka Protocol.

