Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Since
this is the first meeting of the Security Council under
the current presidency of the United Kingdom, allow
me to warmly congratulate you, Ambassador Sawers,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council
for the month of August. I am certain that you will have
09-43956
excellent memories of your time on the Security Council
in your future career. I would also like to express to
Ambassador Ruhakana Rugunda and his team from the
delegation of Uganda our thanks and recognition for
their excellent work during the month of July.

In my capacity as Chair of the Security Council
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict, and
in my national capacity, I am very pleased to be able to
take the floor now that the Security Council has
unanimously adopted resolution 1882 (2009), by which
it reaffirms its unequivocal commitment to the
protection of children in situations of armed conflict.
This is a new, significant step by the United Nations
for the protection of children.

With this resolution, the Security Council is
sending a very clear political signal that the obligations
imposed by international law on the parties to an armed
conflict with regard to the safety, security and well-
being of children must be respected, with no
exceptions whatsoever.

Resolution 1882 (2009) is a fundamental step
forward in the agenda for the protection of children. By
broadening the criteria whereby parties to an armed
conflict can be included in the reports that Secretary-
General presents annually on this issue. In this way, the
responsibility of the parties who, in contravention of
international law, commit murder and maiming as well
as rape and other forms of sexual violence against
children can be considered by the Security Council.

Closely linked to the previous point, the
resolution deals with major aspects inherent in the
broadening of criteria, especially for the preparation of
plans of action that are directed at putting an end to the
practices of recruitment, killing, maiming and sexual
violence. Likewise, in order to fight impunity, the
resolution calls on States to take action to bring to
national and international justice the perpetrators of
crimes against children in situations of armed conflict.

The resolution contributes to transparency by
asking the Secretary-General to make public the
criteria and procedures used for listing and de-listing in
his reports parties to conflicts that commit these crimes
and by asking that timely information be exchanged
with the Governments concerned through his Special
Representative.

For all these reasons, resolution 1882 (2009) is a
formidable tool for the Office of the Special
09-43956

Representative of the Secretary-General, UNICEF, the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the United
Nations monitoring teams and other actors, such as
non-governmental organizations, which, on a daily basis,
carry out their tireless work to improve the situation of
children in many regions of the world. All of this will
enhance the image and credibility of our Organization.

This resolution fulfils the commitment made by
the Security Council during the Mexican presidency in
April to take concrete action within three months to
address the killing and maiming as well as rape and
other forms of sexual violence committed against
children.

In that regard, we can say that resolution 1882
(2009) is the most relevant development in this area
since 2005, when the Security Council adopted
resolution 1612 (2005), which created the monitoring
and reporting mechanism and the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict.

It is clear that in the past few years the Security
Council has made substantial progress on this agenda.
Nevertheless, we must also recognize that there is still
much left to be done if we want children never again to
fall victim to the spiral of violence that armed conflicts
generate.

When assuming the great responsibility of
chairing the Working Group, Mexico knew that we
would need the will of all members of the Security
Council if we were to achieve the objective of
improving the protection of children in situations of
armed conflict. In this framework, the initiative
adopted today is a substantial contribution on which
Mexico had the privilege of leading the collective
effort of the members of this Council. I wish to express
my personal thanks to the group of experts that
undertook this task. I wish also to express my deep
appreciation to the Office of the Special
Representative, Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, and to
UNICEF, for their tireless support and counsel.

I wish to conclude by acknowledging, on behalf
of my delegation, the support given by all members of
the Security Council to this resolution, and by
acknowledging the large number of States Members of
the United Nations that joined in sponsoring it.

