Mr. Chkheidze (Georgia) (interpretation from Russian): I am gratified, Sir, to have the opportunity once
again to express to you our profound respect and to greet
you in your capacity as President of the Security Council.

Allow me, on behalf of my Government, to express
deep gratitude to the United Nations to the Security
Council and to the Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros
Boutros-Ghali, and his representatives for their assistance
to Georgia in its time of hardship.

We should like to extend our sincere gratitude to the
group of countries known as "Friends of Georgia" for
their attention and their tireless efforts aimed at a
comprehensive solution to the conflict. We also wish to
express our gratitude to Russia, as facilitator, for its
untiring peace-keeping efforts.

Our country has consistently been aware of the
support of the international community. Today, hundreds
of thousands of persecuted people see their prospects for
salvation as based on approaches elaborated by the
international community. Their hopes for the future are
linked to this. This faith is today a vital force for Georgia.
It is thanks to this faith that we can survive all the
festering wounds that the Abkhaz war has inflicted on
many families on both sides of the Inguri River.

Today, the origin and development of the
confrontation is no longer a secret. Also well-known are
how the conflict arose, fed by slogans of defence of the
communist empire; what the sources of weapons were;
and the mandate for impunity for aggressive separatism.

The development of democratic processes
condemned to failure the policy of force, which was
fighting to continue the conflict in Abkhazia and in other
regions of the former Soviet empire. Antagonism arose
between progressively developing democracy and
remaining revanchists, who stood on the sidelines; this
revanchism set its roots in such hotbeds as Abkhazia.

The development of the tragic events in that region
significantly promoted the process of the spread of large
quantities of weapons and drugs, as well as the formation
of illegal armed bands, which later became bandit units.

 

Abkhazia was transformed into a powerful force for
destabilization in the Caucasus, and, despite the efforts of
the international community, this negative trend continues
to intensify.

This conflict continues to impede the development of
sound political processes and is an insurmountable barrier
to economic and social progress. The Secretary-General's
latest report rightly takes note of the fact that the peace
process is at a standstill. The Gali region, on which
international efforts are currently focused, is engulfed by
lawlessness and chaos. Today the process of political
settlement has been essentially undermined. Negotiations
have broken off and the rare meetings merely create the
illusion that they are continuing. The small number of
refugees who have returned to their homes have become
hostages in the hands of bandit groups, and their lives and
dignity are humiliated.

The implementation of a policy of genocide and
"ethnic cleansing" towards Georgians in Abkhazia was
broadly recognized for the first time at the Budapest
Summit of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in
Europe (S/l994/l435). The Parliament of Georgia is
considering a wealth of information received by the
Prosecutor's office that bears witness to crimes against
humanity. The policy of violence has forced three quarters
of the Abkhazian population to leave their homes. The
physical and moral condition of these displaced persons,
who have been forced to remain without shelter, is
desperate, and their death rate has significantly increased.

These ethnically-motivated murders, abductions and
torture are compounded by a deterioration of the general
situation of crime throughout the territory of Abkhazia.
The targets of violence are no longer selected based on
ethnic criteria: Abkhazia has been transformed into a
sanctuary for local and foreign criminals.

In this situation, it seems cynical at the very least for
the separatists to assert that the obstacle to the return of
refugees is the will of the remaining local population and
that "some time" is required to change this. This issue is
addressed in paragraph 7 of the Secretary-General's report.
This is nothing but an attempt to create the impression that
genocide and the forcible takeover of territories as a result
of the allegedly provoked conflict should be taken for
granted and that the majority remaining in the territory is
concerned

"to heal [the] wounds and to change [the] outlooks"
(S/1996/507, para. 7)

of the minority inhabitants.

It is becoming clear that the breakdown in the
process of negotiating the return of refugees is linked to
the desire to legitimize lawlessness and play for time. The
houses of refugees who have been persecuted are
occupied by criminals as rewards for their crimes. At the
same time, a carefully planned and well organized
programme is being carried out to limit the international
presence in the region.

Things have reached the point where the lives not
only of the defenceless and humiliated Georgian
population deprived of its rights, but also of United
Nations military observers, are being threatened, not to
mention their inability to carry out their mandated tasks.

This calculation has turned out to be impeccable.
The mining of a great number of areas in the region has
provided to those interested in doing so the opportunity to
harass the international presence in areas they have
selected for terrorism. The population, in a state of
constant terror, has in fact lost all hope for or faith in
justice. The mining of the territory also has far-ranging
consequences, allowing those who are carrying it out to
create conditions in which international observers are
deprived of first-hand information and in which the
thwarting of the international community is planned and
premeditated.

We must assume that if, in the future, the
opportunity to receive objective information from the area
is not reestablished, the number of reports about the
Abkhaz militia's carrying out operations to quell
resistance, such as those noted in paragraph 32 of the
report, or about the banditry and carousal of criminal
groups in areas not controlled by the Abkhaz militia, as
described in paragraph 26, will continue to grow.

It is not surprising that such a description of the
situation leaves us unhappy. Meanwhile, individuals who
are well known to everyone are officially incorporated
into the law enforcement organs of Abkhazia and have
received numerous military decorations for valour, while
being officially acknowledged as executioners and
torturers of many innocent civilians included in the long
list of victims.

It is perfectly obvious that a peaceful settlement and
mutual compromise can be attained only on the basis of
the good will of both parties to the conflict, as noted in
paragraph 56 of the report. But was not this commitment

 

spelled out in Georgia's proposals on the status of Abkhazia
in document S/ 1996/ 165?

The guarantee of the implementation of these
proposals lies in the policy of the Government of Georgia
and the firm position of President Eduard Shevardnadze,
who has repeatedly reiterated it. His efforts constitute a
deterrent to the supporters of chaotic and radical actions.
When we speak of the prospects for achieving peace in the
region, we must take into account the historic traditions of
our peoples who, despite various political developments,
have never changed. Only its age-old coexistence with
Georgians has enabled the small Abkhaz nation to retain its
identity, culture, language and opportunities for
development.

The difficult but ultimately inevitable process of
Georgia's revival is ineluctably linked to the future of
Abkhazia. It is precisely in this connection that the
President of Georgia has come up with the idea of creating
a special fund to carry out the process of economic
reconstruction of the region's infrastructure once the
political negotiations are successfully concluded. The
Government of Georgia expresses its great hope that this
idea will receive broad international support and believes it
to be an important incentive for the evolution of the peace
process.

Georgia's Government is well aware that both sides
bear responsibility for maintaining peace and stability. It is
clear, on the other hand, that a true assessment of the
parties' positions as reflected in their actions cannot be
achieved on the basis of a balanced approach.

In these circumstances, in which the resolutions of the
Security Council are ignored and the efforts of international
organizations and individual States come to naught, events
threaten to take a tragic turn, and the international
community's determination will be able to triumph only
through enforcement.

My Government cherishes the hope that all possible
steps will be taken to expand the participation of the
international community in a settlement of the conflict. In
our view, it would be useful to send representatives of the
Security Council to Georgia to study the situation on the
ground. We also express the hope that the Security Council
will make use of all means available to it to convince the
separatists of the hopelessness of their destructive policy.
We also wish to express our certainty that the appropriate
international support for a settlement will also be given
through the peace-keeping activities of the regional
organizations of the CIS.

We believe that higher demands and expanded action
are necessary to prevent further escalation of tension and
bloodshed.

