Mr. Moustafa (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Egypt
voted in favour of resolution 2362 (2017). My delegation
would like to make the following comments.

First, in connection with enforcing the ban on
the illicit exports of oil and oil products, the parties
concerned should depend upon sound information
in order to avoid any diversion. That should be a
precondition before the Sanctions Committee takes
any measures.

Secondly, in relation to the breifing submitted by
the Libyan focal point regarding the arms embargo
according to paragraph 6 of resolution 2278 (2016),
we expect a response to the additional inquiries that
might be submitted by the Sanctions Committee on the
contents of that briefing.

Thirdly, with regard to the general political
and security situation in Libya, we welcome the
appointment of Mr. Ghassan Salame as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to Libya. We
are completely ready to cooperate closely with him for
the success of his mission. In that regard, we would
like to refer to the importance of sparing no effort and
quickly convening the meeting of the committee made
up of members of Parliament and the High Council of
the State to ammend the political framework, which
is the only way towards a settlement in Libya. In that
vein, Egypt emphasizes that, according to the Libyan
Political Agreement, the Parliament remains the only
body mandated to endorse any ammendments that are
to be introduced to the Agreement, and it is the body
that is in charge of adopting any new configurations of
the Government of National Accord.

Furthermore, I would like to reiterate that it is
important to lift the embargo imposed on the supply
of arms to the Libyan national army, as that is the only
entity with the mandate to counter terrorism in Libya. It
should serve as the nucleus for any Libyan armed forces
that are to be constituted in Libya in the future.

In conclusion, we hope that 2017 will be the year
of the restoration of peace and stability to our sisterly
country Libya.

