Mr. Rodriguez Parrilla (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): In recent months, another very dangerous and
unacceptable act - the construction of a wall of
separation on Palestinian land - has been added to a
long history of occupation, aggression, illegal
settlements, massive flagrant and systematic violations
of human rights, State terrorism and extrajudicial
killings, economic strangulation and physical and
moral harm caused by Israel's continuous refusal to
comply, for more than five decades, with the provisions
of numerous resolutions of this organ and the General
Assembly.

The Declaration on Principles of International
Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation
among States in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations, annexed to General Assembly
resolution 2625 (XXV), sets forth the inadmissibility of
the acquisition of territory by force, which is a
principle of international law. This is why the
international community has always refused to
recognize illegal Israeli settlements and Israel's
annexation of East Jerusalem and the Golan Heights, as
has been recognized in Security Council resolutions
465 (1980), 478 (1980) and 497 (1981). In those cases,
the reaction of the international community, expressed
through the United Nations, was clear and firm.
However, the underhanded annexation that Israel is
carrying out before our eyes has not been as roundly
condemned.

Israel presents the construction of the separation
wall between Israel and the occupied Palestinian
territory as a security measure. If the wall were built on
the so-called Green Line, which delineates the border
established in 1967 between Israel and the occupied
Palestinian territory, that would also be unacceptable.
But the wall is being built on Palestinian lands,
covering almost 7 per cent of its territory, including
farmland, water resources and villages.

The building of the separation wall, the expansion
of settlements and the construction of security routes
between the settlements and Israel constitute a clear
territorial expansion, to the detriment of the Palestinian
people and its alienable right to enjoy self-
determination and to establish its own independent and
sovereign State. The construction of the wall also
reveals Israel's true position, which runs counter to a
genuine peace process.

Building new physical divisions in the occupied
Palestinian territory makes the opportunities for a
lasting and just settlement to the conflict become even
more distant. "Bantustanization" of the occupied
Palestinian territories creates new changes in the field,
which further complicate any future negotiations on
permanent status and make it impossible to establish a
Palestinian State in which all its territory is contiguous.

Violence and the use of force cannot lead to a
solution to the conflict, a solution that the world seeks
and that would have come about many years ago had
the Security Council acted decisively, if double
standards had not held sway and if the paralysing
vetoes of the United States had not impeded the
adoption of appropriate measures to ensure the
withdrawal of Israel from all the occupied territories
and to achieve the much desired peace in the Middle
East region.

Cuba reiterates its unflagging support for the
cause of the Arab peoples, and expresses its deep
solidarity with their struggle and resistance against
foreign occupation.

Cuba hopes that the Security Council will take
the necessary steps to immediately halt the
construction of the separation wall; to restore all the
occupied Arab territories, including the Gaza Strip,
West Bank and Syrian Golan Heights; to stop Israeli
provocations and attacks against Lebanon and Syria; to
guarantee the return of all Palestinian refugees; to
eliminate the illegal Israeli settlements; and to ensure
that the Palestinian people can exercise their legitimate
right to establish an independent State, with its capital
in East Jerusalem.

