Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French): I would like to thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo and Ms. Ursula Mueller for their comprehensive briefings. Ms. Mueller's briefing, in particular, remind us that the humanitarian situation in occupied Palestinian territory requires our full attention. Belgium is especially concerned about the lack of funding of the humanitarian response plan and the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) and invites the international community to make a more active commitment in that area. I would like to underline the critical role of UNRWA in the absence of a lasting solution to the conflict. Belgium will continue to fully support its mandate. The two-State solution, to which we once again renew our commitment, will require acalm international and, above all, regional environment, quite unlike the developments of recent weeks. We firmly condemn all policies that jeopardize the two-State solution. As we heard, the settlement policy in the West Bank and East Jerusalem continues, along with measures such as forced displacements, evictions and demolitions. We call on the Israeli authorities to put an end to that settlement policy, which is illegal under international law, including resolution 2334 (2016). In 2019, 97 structures financed by the European Union were demolished - a 90 per cent increase compared to 2018. We urge the Israeli authorities to put an end to such demolitions and either restore the structures or compensate the Palestinian people for the damages incurred, in accordance with international humanitarian law. The continuation of the settlement policy is part of a rampant annexation, which is also marked by Israel's implementation of a dual legal system beyond the green line. The establishment of an Israeli interministerial committee tasked with making annexation proposals is also a troubling development in that regard. As we have already said on a number of occasions, all unilateral annexations undermine international order and are not recognized by Belgium. We are extremely concerned about increased settler- related violence and encourage the Israeli authorities to prevent such violence and to effectively combat impunity. In addition, the developments in the situation in Al-Issawiya and the marked increase in violence are also a source of great concern. The parties concerned on the ground must exercise calm and restraint so as to avert any escalation. Incursions by Israeli forces are on the rise and many of them take place close to schools. We remind Israel of its obligation to protect, respect and implement the rights of the child by ensuring that schools are inviolable safe spaces for children. The recurrent escalations of violence in Gaza also imperil the prospect of stable and lasting peace. All violence, regardless of its perpetrators, is unacceptable and impunity cannot be allowed to prevail. The rules of international human rights law and international humanitarian law must be observed. The decision taken by Israel to withhold part of the tax revenue due to the Palestinian Authority, under the Paris Protocol, risks increasing tensions. We encourage both parties to pursue negotiations in order to find a lasting solution. We stress the importance of setting a date for the holding of legislative and presidential elections throughout the Palestinian territory, the Gaza Strip and the West Bank, including East Jerusalem. In that regard, it is essential that all the parties concerned cooperate to ensure that elections are held in an inclusive environment conducive to the full, meaningful and active participation of all citizens, including women and young people.In conclusion, Belgium aligns itself with the statement to be delivered later on behalf of the European Union.
