Mr. Rajasingham: This month marks the eighth
year since the Syrian crisis began - eight years of
lives being uprooted; eight years of families being torn
apart; eight years of children being needlessly exposed
to traumatic violence.

Eight years on, the humanitarian crisis in Syria is
far from over. United Nations assessments indicate that
11.7 million people require humanitarian assistance
and protection inside the country in 2019. More than
5.6 million Syrians live as refugees across the region.
And while violence has decreased in many locations, in
others, recent weeks have seen increasing numbers of
civilians being killed and injured.
The situation in Idlib and surrounding areas in
the north-west of Syria remains of grave concern. The
agreement to establish a demilitarized zone, announced
by the Russian Federation and Turkey on 17 September
2018, was followed by a reduction in violence across
much of the north-west. But recent weeks have seen
an alarming spike in civilian casualties and new
displacement, with increased shelling along the front
lines, an intensification of air strikes and a growing
number of attacks involving improvised explosive
devices in urban areas, including Idlib city. Residential
areas in Aleppo city have also been targeted with mortar
and sniper fire. Last month alone, 90 people were killed,
of whom nearly half were children. At least 86,000
people have also reportedly been displaced by this
latest upsurge of violence. Health facilities, including
a hospital in Saraqib city, which had been deconflicted
with the parties through established procedures and
schools are reported to have been hit.

Last August, the Secretary-General spoke about
the "growing risks of a humanitarian catastrophe in the
event of a full-scale military operation in Idlib". Today,
those risks continue to loom large. Humanitarian
organizations continue to respond to needs in Idlib and
to prepare for the possibility of further deterioration,
but, as we have stated previously, a full-scale military
onslaught in the area would overwhelm humanitarian
response capacities. We therefore reiterate the
Secretary-General's call on all parties to exercise
restraint and to prioritize the protection of civilians. It
is critical that respect for international humanitarian
law and human rights be at the centre of the parties'
military efforts to address the challenging situation on
the ground in the north-west.

Tens of thousands of displaced people - the vast
majority of whom are women and children - have
continuedtoarriveatAl-HolcampinHasakahgovernorate
from south-east Deir ez-Zor governorate. Most new
arrivals are in extremely poor health, with many
showing signs of distress and suffering from trauma
injuries, malnutrition and fatigue. They have undergone
a gruelling journey of hundreds of kilometres in open
trucks, in many cases after an extended period of
exposure to intense hostilities and after years of living
in a situation of extreme deprivation and human rights
abuse under the rule of the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL). It is estimated that, since early
December, more than 140 people have died either on
the way to Al-Hol or shortly after arrival in the camp;
of those, some 80 per cent were children under the age
of five.
The population ofAl-Hol now exceeds 72,000 - an
increase ofmore than 25,000 over the past month - with
indications that more people could still be on the way.
The United Nations and its humanitarian partners have
rapidly mobilized a major relief operation and continue
to scale up the response, in many cases redirecting
capacities and stocks from other parts of the country.

Food, shelter, water, sanitation and hygiene,
non-food items and health and protection services
are now being provided for new arrivals. In line with
humanitarian principles, needs-based assistance is
also being provided to women and children from third
countries, including family members of suspected
foreign fighters. But the situation remains extremely
challenging, with the rate of new arrivals far exceeding
the capacity of the site. Expansion efforts are under way.
It is critical that Member States continue to support
humanitarian organizations impartially by providing
life-saving assistance in Al-Hol.

The situation in Al-Hol and south-east Deir ez-Zor
presents a number of complex protection challenges.
Among them is the notable absence of adult males
and adolescent boys over the age of 15 in the camp.
The parties have clear obligations under international
humanitarian and human rights law to treat all persons
within their power humanely and allow persons
deprived of their liberty to communicate with their
families. Special protections are also provided to all
children under the age of 18, including those affiliated
with fighters.

In Hajin, Baghouz and other areas most directly
affected by counter-ISIL operations, the extensive
destruction of homes and infrastructure is reported,
and high levels of explosive hazard contamination will
represent an additional serious obstacle to the safe return
of the tens of thousands of civilians displaced from
the area. The rapid mobilization of explosive hazard
clearance capacities is needed, in line with the parties'
obligations under international humanitarian law.

The United Nations welcomes efforts in support of
durable solutions for the more than 41,000 people who
remain stranded in the makeshift Rukban settlement.
Some 95 per cent of people surveyed by United Nations
and Syrian Arab Red Crescent teams last month
expressed a desire to leave the settlement, although

most also highlighted various protection concerns.

Movement out of Rukban has taken place in recent
days. Some 362 people left the settlement on 23 March,
passing through a Government checkpoint and transit
site and arriving, on 24 March, at a collective shelter
in Homs city, where they received humanitarian
assistance from the Syrian Arab Red Crescent, with
United Nations support. Further gradual movement
is expected in the coming weeks. Discussions are
ongoing with the main parties involved, including
the Government of Syria, the Russian Federation, the
United States and the Government of Jordan, to further
clarify the process and address the concerns that have
been raised by people in Rukban.

The United Nations continues to reiterate the
importance of a carefully planned, principled approach
that ensures respect for core protection standards
and does not expose vulnerable, and in many cases
traumatized, displaced people to additional harm. All
movements must be voluntary, safe, well-informed and
dignified, with humanitarian access assured throughout.

In parallel, the United Nations also continues to
strongly advocate for additional humanitarian assistance
for those who remain in Rukban. The deployment of
a third convoy has therefore been requested to allow
essential needs to be met ahead of the Ramadan period,
which begins in early May. Food, medicine and other
life-saving supplies delivered in February are already
running low, and the replenishment of stocks will
become increasingly urgent over the coming weeks.

Earlier this month, the Secretary-General noted
that "[a]s the conflict enters its ninth year, Syrians
continue to suffer from one of the worst conflicts of
our time". The Secretary-General appealed for the
protection of civilians in Idlib and broader respect for
international humanitarian and human rights law, and
highlighted the importance of continued improvements
in sustained humanitarian access. The scale of the
humanitarian challenges facing the people of Syria
remains staggering by any measure. International
support for efforts to respond to the needs of millions
of Syrians remains critical.

At the third Brussels Conference on Supporting
the Future of Syria and the Region, on 14 March,
international donors pledged a record $7 billion to meet
needs inside Syria and ensure support for refugees
and host communities in neighbouring countries. The
Conference was a resounding demonstration of the
international community's continued solidarity with the
people of Syria and Syria's neighbours, who continue to
host millions of refugees at great economic cost.

We reiterate our thanks to the donor community
for the new funding announced in Brussels and the
billions more that have been provided since the crisis
began, saving countless lives. Close to $2.2 billion
were provided against the 2018 humanitarian response
plan alone, covering 65 per cent of the requirements
requested for operations inside Syria. We appeal for the
pledges made in Brussels to be quickly converted into
contributions for 2019.

We commend the Government of Turkey for its
hospitality in hosting close to two-thirds of the total
number of registered Syrian refugees and facilitating
help to millions more inside Syria, including through
cross-border operations authorized by the Security
Council. In addition, we express our appreciation to the
Governments and people of Jordan and Lebanon, which
are hosting the highest numbers of refugees per capita
in the world, as well as those of Iraq and Egypt, where
efforts towards inclusive policies are making a huge
difference to refugees' lives.

Humanitarian organizations have shown that
they can deliver. An average of 5.5 million people
were reached with assistance inside Syria each month
last year, from Damascus and through cross-border
channels. Continued international engagement and
support will allow us to build on this in 2019, sustaining
and further strengthening what is one of the largest and
most complex aid operations ever implemented.

We remain firmly committed to implementing
principled, needs-based humanitarian action across all
areas of Syria, working with Syrian counterparts and
communities. Protection, saving lives and restoring
dignity will remain at the centre of our efforts.

