Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting on the
dire situation facing the people of South Sudan. I would
like to thank High Commissioner Pillay and Under-
Secretary-General Dieng for their timely Visit to South
Sudan and for their briefings to us today.

A million people have been displaced, and millions
more are in need of humanitarian relief because of
the unfolding conflict in South Sudan. Today, we
have heard about chilling human rights violations and
abuses, and the horrors go on. The South Sudanese
people are bearing the highest costs and now face the
risk of famine. Targeted attacks on civilians, including
the recent attacks in Bentiu on those in hospitals and
places of worship and targeting those under United
Nations protection in Bor, demonstrate the extreme
vulnerability of civilians in conflict.

The very clear ethnic dimension to the conflict in
South Sudan is particularly alarming. Just over two
weeks ago, the international community commemorated
the twentieth anniversary of the Rwandan genocide.
That meeting was a sober reminder of what can happen
when, faced with clear evidence of atrocities, we
collectively fail to act. The ethnic motivations behind
targeted attacks on civilians in South Sudan should
serve as a wake-up call to us all. The use of radio,
for example, in Bentiu to incite ethnically motivated
violence and sexual violence harkens back to the
tragic events in Rwanda two decades ago. We must get
better at using tools to counter that practice, including
the United Nations own use of public information
broadcasts in the country.

On human rights, it is clear that serious abuses and
violations have taken place and continue to take place
as the conflict drags on. The use of sexual violence
as a weapon of war and the recruitment of children as
combatants by both sides in the conflict are particularly
concerning. UNICEF estimates that more than 9,000
children have now been recruited by both sides.

I thank High Commissioner Pillay and Under-
Secretary-General Dieng for delivering the urgent
concerns of the international community to the leaders
ofboth sides in the conflict. We expect President Kiir and
former Vice-President Riek Machar to act immediately

on those concerns. All political leaders must take full
personal responsibility for continued fighting and the
plight of the people. They must take immediate action
to curb violations and abuses of human rights, engage
seriously in peace talks, and enable full humanitarian
access. We have said that before, but those steps have
not been taken, and the needs become ever more urgent.

Looking forward, we need to focus on three areas
of activity.

First, we must end impunity. Accountability
and justice are essential to national healing and
reconciliation. Allegations of violations and abuse
must be thoroughly and impartially investigated. Those
responsible must be held to account. We support the
African Union commission of inquiry and look forward
to the outcome of its investigations. But with different
domestic, African Union and United Nations work under
way in the area, it would be helpful for the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR) to set out the different available tracks for
accountability in South Sudan. In addition, we request
OHCHR to consider a thorough investigation and to
report on the atrocities recently committed in Bentiu
and Bor. We also look to the Human Rights Council to
take appropriate action in response to the human rights
situation in South Sudan.

Secondly, we must increase political support to
the mediation effort. The international community,
including the Security Council, must consider all
available levers and tools in the effort to deter a
devastating slide towards repeated mass atrocities
and protracted conflict. The focus, responsibility
and priorities we give the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan are only part of the answer. The ultimate
responsibility lies with those leading the war effort. We
must continue to send strong and clear messages that
the international community cannot accept the current
situation. We support the tireless mediation efforts of
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development in
the search for lasting peace in South Sudan. Women
and civil society must play a role in that. But those
mediation efforts may need to be complemented by
targeted sanctions against those who obstruct peace
and by reducing the arms available to those involved in
the conflict.

Thirdly, the safety of millions of innocent civilians
in South Sudan must remain paramount. With the
continued fighting and the impending rains, the
already acute humanitarian situation could become a
humanitarian disaster. Famine lies around the corner.
Millions could be condemned to untold suffering that
would take decades to rectify. The needs are urgent
and clear. The onus is on the international community
to help meet those needs. We must increase the
humanitarian response as quickly as possible. The
British Government will do its part and has released an
additional amount of approximately $65 million for the
humanitarian response.

The situation in South Sudan is urgent. The South
Sudanese people have suffered far too long. The
international community has the tools to alleviate that
suffering. We must act and we must do so quickly.
