Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Ladsous for his briefing
and welcome all the Police Commissioners. We thank
them above all for their service, often in very difficult
environments and for being here to brief us.

We wish to express our special thanks to the United
Kingdom for convening this important briefing. It is
extremely important that this become an annual event,
not only because of what happens in the briefing itself
but for all of the side meetings that take place where
we get to hear directly from the Police Commissioners,
who offer a perspective that we do not get day to day,
which I will come back to shortly.

The world of United Nations policing is changing
rapidly. Just three years ago, there were 52 formed
police units (FPUs) participating in United Nations
peacekeeping missions around the world. There are
64 today, and at the Leaders' Summit on Peacekeeping
six weeks ago, Member States pledged an additional
15. Earlier this year, just to give one telling example,
we authorized the deployment of more United Nations
police to just one Mission - in the Central African
Republic - than were stationed globally 21 years ago.
That is just one reflection of the large numbers, but it is
the incredible relevance of these police in post-conflict
societies and in societies that are still experiencing
conflict and in weak States. This is an extremely
important function, and as the Security Council we
need to reflect that in our engagement with and support
for the United Nations Police Division.
It is not just about numbers. As we deploy more
police, we are asking more of them, and we now
recognize that effective policing is critical to achieving
one of peacekeeping's most important and challenging
mandates, namely, the protection of civilians. The
Commanders with us today know this better than
anyone. The individual officers on the streets represent
the first line of defence and the first point of assistance
for civilians in need. This work equips officers with
the kind of invaluable local knowledge, insight and
relationships that can help Mission leaders refine
strategies and tactics to more effectively address
potential threats to civilians. So the work that the
United Nations police do can inform the entire mission
and the way those missions are calibrated to serve their
foundational function.

In the longer term, of course, even more
foundationally and more fundamentally, United
Nations police contribute to the sustained protection of
civilians and to freedom from fear in the country by
training their local counterparts and building lasting
institutions that uphold the rights of civilians. Their
job is to try to put themselves out of business so that
we do not need United Nations police or peacekeepers,
and that is about building local security institutions and
particularly police forces.

From conducting daily patrols to formulating
multi-year programmes, it is evident that the growing
number of United Nations police can and must play
a leading role in protecting civilians, and we in the
Council must do all we can to position them for success.
I would like to briefly highlight four ways in which we
can do that.

First, we must ensure that the United Nations
approach to peacekeeping fully reflects the importance
of the police. As others have said, that means
supporting continuing reforms, including through the
external review proposed by the Secretary-General
to examine how United Nations policing is equipped
to carry out those enormous responsibilities. I know
there is a sense among many of those here that there
are deficiencies in how police are coming into mission
areas and in the kind of training and equipment they
have for doing their jobs. It also means supporting the
Police Division's efforts to develop a strategic guidance
framework for United Nations policing, which many
have been hungering for.

Secondly, we must ensure that all United Nations
police are properly trained and equipped, and we in
the United States have sought to address those needs.
Since 2010, we have trained more than 5,000 police
peacekeepers, and next year we plan to conduct
training sessions across seven police-contributing
countries, enhancing pre-deployment preparation for
up to 14 units. We also continue to provide technical,
financial and material support to the United Nations
Police Division's efforts to improve FPU standards,
training and curricula. And because well-trained police
can have an impact only once they are on the ground,
we are also working through the African Peacekeeping
Rapid Response Partnership to ensure that those
units can deploy quickly. Here, in a very important
point, by procuring and delivering the equipment an
FPU requires, the United States intends to shorten
deployment times from many months to as little as 30
days after the adoption ofa Security Council resolution.
We know that is going to hard to deliver on, but it is an
extremely important ambition.

Thirdly, I would simply like to second everything

that the representatives of Chad and Chile have just said
about the importance of increasing the number of women
police. However, I think we also have to acknowledge
that part of the challenge is that our own nations' police
forces - whether city, state or national - themselves
have a deficit of women police, which gets replicated
in United Nations missions. So as Member States, we
have to deal with that challenge in our domestic law-
enforcement branches, and the United Nations system
itself must get involved and ensure that when there is
a pool of women who can be deployed that a special
effort is made to bring them into its missions.

Lastly, we must improve the channels of
communication so as to ensure that the Council has
insight into the critical work that police units are doing
and into their perspective, which is a distinct one. We
need the benefit ofreports from police in order to ensure
that our missions are achieving their mandates. That
is why, as I said earlier, we must make this meeting
an annual one. It is also why Police Commissioners
should increasingly participate in our country-specific
briefings alongside Force Commanders and the Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General. They have an
extremely important perspective and it will enable us to
ask questions of them beyond the kind of tour d'horizon
that we are doing today.

In the spirit of this free flow of information, I
will conclude today by asking a couple of questions.
I would like to ask Deputy Commissioner Bent about
the police contingent of the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS), which is now charged
with protecting more than 180,000 civilians living in
six designated locations. That was never the way the
Mission was supposed to be configured, and that kind
of deterioration was never what anyone expected to see
in South Sudan. I gather that the Deputy Commissioner
has around 1,170 police officers for accomplishing that
task, which has now sadly had to become a central part
of UNMISS's mandate. But then there is also the fact
that those 180,000 are just the ones in the camps, and
that the rest of the country is filled with civilians in
desperate need of protection as well, at a very difficult
time. I would like to ask the Deputy Commissioner
to speak to the resources, capabilities and mandate
adjustments he needs in order to be able to walk and
chew gum at the same time, both in terms ofpolice and,
as the police are integrated into the larger peacekeeping
Mission, where civilians outside the protection-of-
civilian sites are also crying out for protection. What
is the division of labour between police and troops in
that regard?

Finally, as someone who Visited Commissioner
Hinds in Liberia at the height of the Ebola epidemic
when everybody else was racing for the exits, I would
first like to underscore how impressive was the

leadership that he and the police under his command in
the United Nations Mission in Liberia showed. I think
they are owed the gratitude of the Liberian people and
the entire international community for staying the
course and being there for those people in their hour
of most desperate need-something that I think will
never be forgotten, as I hope the Commissioner and the
officers who work with him are aware.

Of course, the big challenge for him as he faces
a drawdown is building up the local Liberian police,
and that has been a challenge for a very long time. I
would like him to speak a little more on the extent to
which having an exit strategy is helping to focus minds,
and whether he has seen concrete improvements in the
training and its results for Liberian police capacity. I
am interested particularly in how that applies outside
Monrovia, where much of the effort over time has been
focused because that is where the central Government
authorities are. How can the Liberian National Police
begin to make strides, particularly, as I said, with the
drawdown looming over the Mission, so that police
outside Monrovia have the capabilities they need in
order to keep the Liberian people safe?

