Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are pleased to welcome you, Mr. Minister,
as President ofthe Security Council. We thank Secretary-
General Antonio Guterres and Mr. Carlos Trujillo
Garcia, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia, in
his capacity as Chair ofthe Peacebuilding Commission,
for their briefings. We thank Mr. Bousquet of the World
Bank and Mr. Baldeh of the African Development Bank
for their detailed briefings, which served as a good
basis for today's discussion.

The issue before us today, ensuring the continuity
of international assistance in the event of the drawdown
or closure of United Nations peacekeeping missions, is
clearly important in order to prevent the recurrence of
conflicts in the transition period, when the long-term
success of collective efforts is not yet guaranteed.
Indeed, maintaining and, in particular, improving
results is at times far more difficult than the initial
attainment of those results. In order to ensure lasting
peace in countries from which peacekeeping operations
are being withdrawn, it is important that the post-
conflict reconstruction phase be duly prepared. In
some instances, it is wise to launch peacebuilding
efforts before the peacekeeping presence is withdrawn.
Otherwise, there is the risk that the decline in the
level of international attention to a particular situation
may be interpreted by some players as a green light to
resume their destructive activities.

A mission's withdrawal and the transfer of its
residual functions to other United Nations entities
should be borne in mind both initially and at all
stages of the lifespan of a peacekeeping mission. At
the same time, it is also important to have a holistic
view of the political settlement being promoted by the
mission, since it is not possible to build and maintain
peace without national reconciliation. Therefore,
when considering the mandates of missions, including
existing peacebuilding objectives, the views of the host
State must be taken fully into account.

Where necessary, the Security Council may
mandate a mission to assist the host State in
addressing peacebuilding issues, such as disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, as well as security
sector reform. At the same time, the provision of
assistance to States in the area of peacebuilding and
peacekeeping in the United Nations system requires
both proper coordination of efforts and an appropriate
division of labour that does not create a conflict of
authority. The inclusion in mandates of generic tasks,
such as human rights monitoring, sexual and gender
issues, environmental protection, development and
other issues, may well prove to be an unreasonable
waste of resources. Specialized United Nations bodies
and international mechanisms already exist to meet
those objectives.

When addressing the theoretical nexus among
human rights, development and peace and security,
we must acknowledge the fact that development alone
cannot guarantee peace and that peaceful conditions
do not necessarily guarantee development. Therefore,
it is important not only to take into account the nexus
but also to clearly and fully understand the difference
in those processes, as well as which specific United
Nations body or structure is responsible for promoting
each of those areas.

In the concept note for today's meeting (S/2019/540, annex), you, Mr. President, quite rightly emphasize the
leading role of States themselves in transitions, in line
with the principle of national ownership. Indeed, it is
the host State that has the primary responsibility for
the development and implementation of peacebuilding
strategies and programmes, while taking into account
the needs of its society. In that regard, it is important
that enhanced cooperation between the United Nations,
regional and subregional organizations, as well as
international financial institutions, in the area of
peacebuilding be accompanied by improved relations
with host States. Cooperation with local population
groups and non-governmental organizations can
be complementary and should be coordinated by
the authorities.

The Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) plays an
important role in the United Nations system by providing
peacebuilding assistance to States, serving as both
an intergovernmental advisory body and a platform
linking a wide spectrum of stakeholders. We believe
that the PBC has the potential to improve the quality of
recommendations provided to the Security Council on
country-specific issues on the agendas of both bodies.
They can be provided to the Council upon request. We
believe that the value of the Commission is that it can
convey to the Council the peacebuilding priorities of
the host country. That is particularly relevant in the
final transition phase of a peacekeeping operation's
efforts and can help to contribute meaningfully to the
relevant reports of the Secretary-General.

The added value and relevance of the PBC's
recommendations are crucial for their possible inclusion
in the work of the Security Council, the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council. It
should also be recalled that Council members are
invariably represented in and actively engaged in
discussions of the PBC, its Organizational Committee
and country configurations. In order to improve the
quality of interaction between the Council and the
Commission, it is important to make effective use of
the ample opportunities already available, as outlined
in resolutions 1645 (2005) and 2282 (2016), which, in
our view, are sufficient.

