Mr. Guehenno (spoke in French): We are at a
crossroads in the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) deployment process.
Many of the issues are familiar, and they continue to be
extremely sensitive. First among them is of course the
security and humanitarian situation on the ground,
which remains very worrying, as was just described by
Mr. Eliasson. Joint Special Representative Adada and
Force Commander General Agwai are involved in
intensive discussions with the Government to address
the situation in the Kalma camp. It is critical to ensure
that the disarmament of that camp complies with
international humanitarian standards since it will set a
precedent for securing other camps in Darfur.
Secondly, the deployment of UNAMID is facing
fundamental challenges in the areas of force
generation, the final identification of the force
composition and a number of bureaucratic
impediments.

I would like to focus my remarks today on the
ongoing actions to address these issues and to highlight
the implications of any failure to address them in a
timely fashion. I would also like to apprise the Council
of the challenges we must address in our discussions
with the Government of the Sudan on the negotiations
of the UNAMID status-of-forces agreement.

A summary of preparations for the transfer of
authority from the African Union Mission in the Sudan
(AMIS) to UNAMID was presented in the Secretary-
General's most recent monthly report (S/2007/653),
which reflects our efforts in a number of areas,
including the establishment of initial operating
capability for UNAMID headquarters, completion of
staffing for the Interim Force and Police Headquarters,
the shift to a three-sector structure, the appointment
and deployment of senior leadership and the ongoing
logistical arrangements required to support UNAMID
personnel.

Since the report was submitted, the first elements
of the heavy support package for AMIS have been
deployed to Darfur: the l40-strong Formed Police Unit
from Bangladesh arrived in Nyala on 21 November and
an advance party of 135 personnel from the Chinese
engineering unit arrived in Nyala on 24 November.
These deployments are encouraging and we expect the
advance party of a second Formed Police Unit from
Nepal to arrive in the mission area on 15 December,
followed by its main body on 7 January. Approximately
100 individual police officers will arrive in December,
in addition to the 56 already deployed.

We also expect the Police Commissioner and one
of his Deputies, the Military Chief of Staff of General
Agwai, all Sector Commanders and Deputy Sector
Commanders, the Deputy Chief of the Joint Mission
Analysis Centre (JMAC), as well as some 75 per cent
of all staff officer positions serving in the Force and
Sector headquarters to be deployed by the end of
December. Finally, and pending the provision of the
final load lists that accompany the deployments,
including logistics and airlift preparations, the
deployment of the following heavy support package
units is scheduled to commence in January 2008: the
main body of the Chinese engineering unit, the Multi-
6
Role Logistics Unit and Sector Reserve Company from
Bangladesh and the Level II hospital from Nigeria.

(spoke in English)

Nevertheless, we are facing serious gaps in
UNAMID force requirements in spite of our best
efforts, including by the Secretary-General himself.
Five weeks before the transfer of authority, UNAMID
is still short of critical mobility capabilities: one heavy
and one medium transport unit, three military utility
aviation units - that is 18 helicopters - and one light
tactical helicopter unit - that is six helicopters. In
addition, as a result of pre-deployment visits, pledges
for one reconnaissance company were withdrawn;
consequently, the gap in capability has grown since my
last briefing.

If no appropriate offers for those missing units
are identified by early 2008, it may become necessary
to revert to the Council to consider options to mitigate
the lack of air mobility. That may require an increase in
troops. But more troops will not replace military
aviation, and they would also require more logistic
support, more land and more water and would likely
not appear in Darfur until late 2008. Another
suboptimal last-resort measure would be - if I may
use the word - to "borrow" those capabilities from
other missions. While we are taking all options into
account in making contingency plans, it is important to
stress that our initial plans reflected minimum
requirements and do not allow for such flexibility.

As the Council is aware, it has been our highest
priority to assemble a force which is able to implement
the mission's mandate and in so doing to protect the
people of Darfur and indeed to protect itself. In
identifying troop contributors we have therefore
focused on ensuring that they have the required
capabilities and are able to deploy in a timely manner.
We have also sought to assemble a balanced force,
which would unquestionably meet the African
character criterion referred to in resolution 1769 (2007)
and whose impartiality would be beyond reproach,
whether it is from the rebels' perspective or that of the
Government of the Sudan.

From among the pledges we have received, the
African Union and the United Nations put together a
list in accordance with those priorities and transmitted
it to the Government of the Sudan on 2 October. We
believe that the troop-contributing countries which
have been identified and the package transmitted to the
Government of the Sudan are, under the political
constraints we have had to address, best positioned to
undertake the arduous peacekeeping work which lies
ahead in Darfur.

While we have not received a direct response, the
Government has made clear, and made public, its
reluctance to accept certain non-African units in the
force, citing concerns regarding the maintenance of
public perceptions of the African character of the force
as well as an inability to provide security guarantees to
certain non-African elements. Three units in particular
have been singled out: the infantry battalion from
Thailand, the force reserve/special forces and sector
reserve companies from Nepal and the Nordic
engineering company.

As I informed the Council in my briefing on
14 November, there are no alternatives for the
inclusion of the non-African units. First, the Thai
battalion - well-trained and fully equipped - was
selected based on its readiness to deploy to Darfur in
early January. It will be essential for UNAMID to have
an effective deterrent and self-defence capacity as
close to the transfer of authority as possible. On that
basis, the battalion must absolutely be retained.
Secondly, Nepal is the only country to have offered a
special forces company for the overall UNAMID force
reserve, a vital element which allows a robust reserve
response to threats against the mission. The Haskanita
incident highlights that need.

And finally, the Nordic offer of a composite
engineering unit gives UNAMID critical capabilities to
set up the mission logistically and enable other units to
come in, particularly those with less than ideal self-
sustainability. We had planned for the unit to deploy as
early as possible in January, and, once it provides this
early impact, it will be drawn down over the latter part
of 2008. It is a surge-enabling capacity to launch the
mission effectively. Its exclusion would present a
serious loss for UNAMID's ability to establish and
consolidate its presence quickly in an area as vast as
Darfur.

That said, together with the African Union, we
have made a sincere effort to address the Sudanese
concerns related to the perception of the force.

Following my discussions with the Government,
a special task force, led by the DPKO Military Adviser,
travelled to Cairo and Addis Ababa from 19 to
22 November to ascertain the possibility of

accelerating the deployment of the Egyptian and
Ethiopian battalions selected for UNAMID. We were
pleased to receive the confirmation of the Governments
of Egypt and Ethiopia as to the availability and
readiness of their respective battalions to deploy as
early as possible following the transfer of authority,
beginning with the deployment of advance elements in
January 2008. Reconnaissance operations by both
countries will take place in the first half of December:
Ethiopia from 1 to 6 December, Egypt from 8 to
13 December. Their actual deployment, however, will
also require accelerated logistics and airlift
preparations.

In the meantime, all other ongoing preparations
continue, including pre-deployment visits. As Council
members are aware, it is critical that, once identified,
all troop-contributing countries initiate preparations for
deployment as rapidly as possible. Every delay or
suspension of pre-deployment activity will have a
direct and negative impact on the readiness of troops to
deploy to UNAMID in the early stages of 2008.

It is in that context that we are deeply concerned
by public remarks being made by Sudanese
Government officials calling into question the African
Union-United Nations approach in finalizing force
composition. Those remarks, particularly in the
absence of a formal response from the Government on
this issue, create serious uncertainty with regard to the
Government's commitment to the deployment of
UNAMID.

The speedy and effective deployment of
UNAMID also depends on the Government's
cooperation with regard to facilitating the acquisition
of land and flight operations rights for United Nations
aircraft. Joint Special Representative Adada has
informed us that he has still not been able to obtain the
authorization of the Sudanese Civil Aviation Authority
for the deployment of six helicopters to El Fasher.
UNAMID has also not been given permission to fly at
night. But the mandate to protect civilians does not end
at sunset. The mission has still not received land in El
Geneina and Zalingei, and the Government has
impounded UNAMID communications equipment at
the El Fasher airport for weeks. The land issue is
particularly critical, since units are beginning to
deploy. If the Government does not immediately give
us the land we need, we will have to hold back some
units. Moreover, local authorities in El Obeid have
asked UNAMID to stop using the El Obeid logistics

base because "it was created to serve the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan".

As the Council is also aware, we are in the
process of negotiating a status-of-forces agreement
with the Sudan. On 2 November, we transmitted to the
Government a draft agreement that had been agreed
with the African Union and was based on the model
status-of-forces agreement approved by the General
Assembly. On 13 November, we received an alternative
text from the Government. The Government's text
includes proposals that, our experience has shown us,
would make it impossible for the mission to operate, in
particular with regard to freedom of movement of
personnel and the integrity of its communications.

While this is not the forum for a detailed
discussion of the document, it is useful to note that the
Sudanese text includes a provision for the Government
to "temporarily disable the communications network"
in case of security operations by the Government in
exercise of its sovereign rights. There is also a proposal
requiring UNAMID to provide "advance notification to
the Government for all staff, troop and asset
movements related to UNAMID". The Council will
appreciate what such provisions would do to the ability
of a force commander to respond to an unforeseen
crisis that required rapid and robust action in defence
of civilians.

We were also surprised to see remarks in the
media in which the Sudanese Government revisited the
question of UNAMID accoutrement. That issue was
discussed with the Sudanese Foreign Minister when the
Council visited the Sudan in June 2006, with the clear
request that the Mission's accoutrement would be
determined on the basis of the 5 June 2007 joint
AU-UN report on the Hybrid Operation. On that basis,
we have been making preparations for United Nations
personnel to wear a blue beret with a United Nations
insignia and an AU patch on their sleeve to reflect the
joint nature of the operation. There are privileges and
immunities associated with the wearing of the blue
beret and United Nations insignia that are simply
non-negotiable to troop-contributing countries.

In order to overcome the current uncertainty, the
Secretary-General is discussing with Chairperson
Konare how to further engage the Sudanese authorities
at the strategic level. Extensive and detailed technical
explanations have been provided repeatedly, including
at a high level, to the Government of the Sudan, and

the remaining - and fundamental - differences
cannot be attributed to a lack of consultations. That is
why the Secretary-General is also reiterating his appeal
to Council members and key regional leaders to make
additional concerted efforts to persuade the Sudanese
authorities to support the deployment of an effective
UNAMID force. Ultimately, a strategic decision on the
part of the Government of the Sudan is necessary if we
are to achieve our common goal: peace and security in
Darfur and, indeed, in all of the Sudan.

Should the anticipated discussions fail to clear
the path for the deployment of an effective force, the
international community will be confronted with hard
choices: do we move ahead with the deployment of a
force that will not make a difference, that will not have
the capability to defend itself and that carries the risk
of humiliation of the Security Council and the United
Nations and tragic failure for the people of Darfur?

Five months ago in Khartoum, the Council
received President Bashir's agreement on African
Union-United Nations plans for a peacekeeping
operation in Darfur without preconditions. During the
Secretary-General's visit to the Sudan in September,
President Bashir gave him personal assurances that his
Government would facilitate the deployment of
UNAMID. Over the past few weeks, the Government's
reluctance to facilitate the practical preparations for
UNAMID, as well as the public statements made by its
senior officials, call that commitment into question.
The Government of the Sudan has an important
responsibility to positively influence the public's
attitudes towards UNAMID and the United Nations.
We also believe that troop contributors require and
deserve unequivocal assurances that their efforts to
contribute to the implementation of resolution 1769
(2007) are welcome.

Finally, in a new and disturbing development,
two rebel movements, the Justice and Equality
Movement and a grouping of factions of the Sudan
Liberation Army, have made threats against the
Chinese elements of the peacekeeping force. That is
totally unacceptable, and it is being addressed with the
utmost seriousness by the Secretariat and by the
African Union Mission in the Sudan, which will be
dedicating additional force protection to the area where
the Chinese unit is deployed.
Our ability to end the suffering in Darfur is,
indeed, ultimately linked to the political process. While
the African Union and the United Nations will continue
to press the parties to make progress in their
negotiations, our efforts to deploy a capable
peacekeeping operation that is able to fulfil its mandate
and to help the parties implement the outcome of their
negotiations require the Security Council's continued
engagement, as well as the active support of the
Government of the Sudan.

