Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to welcome you, Mr. President, to the
Council and to congratulate Guatemala on presiding
over the Council for the month of October. I would also
like to wish our colleague, Mr. Rosenthal, and his team
every success and to assure them of our support.

(spoke in French)

I would like thank Mr. Mariano Fernandez
Amunategui for his introduction of the excellent report
(S/2012/678), which gives us a clear idea ofthe situation
in Haiti and the progress that has been made but,
above all, of the enormous scope of the work still to be
done. We also welcome the presence of our colleague
Ambassador Jean Cazeau.

We of course align ourselves with the statement to
be made later by the observer of the European Union.

Today, with significant support from the
international community in general and the United
Nations in particular, Haitians have embarked upon the
long and difficult process of rebuilding their country,
a process that has a wider and more coherent goal
that goes beyond repairing the terrible earthquake's
material damage and aiding its victims, namely, to give
the country stable and democratic institutions founded
on the rule of law, ensure respect for human rights and
guarantee security for the people, as well as economic
and social development and prosperity for the country.

I will not dwell on the close interdependence of
those three elements, but it is clear that, without security
and good governance, founded on a solid democratic
base, and without stable, functioning institutions,
there can be no improvement in economic conditions
or reconstruction. Similarly, without an economic and
employment recovery it will be extremely difficult to
strengthen security in the country.

I would like to briefly discuss two of those issues.
First, concerning the area of politics and the rule of
law, there is no doubt that progress has been made. The
country has a new Government that has the support
of the people. It also appears that the instability that
characterized Haitian political life for several months
has been overcome. The new political situation
translates into growing demands on the Haitian
authorities to make progress with essential democratic
reforms. In that context, the entry into force of various
constitutional amendments, the establishment of the
Superior Council of the Judiciary and the creation of
the Permanent Electoral Council - even if the latter
is still incomplete - are all significant examples of
progress.

We encourage the Haitian authorities to continue
in that direction: consolidating democratic institutions
and practices, political transparency and credibility of
the rule of law and the administration of justice - above
all, ensuring, when Haitians are ultimately summoned
to the polls, the fairness, transparency and credibility
of those elections, and thus avoiding betrayal of the
Haitian people's legitimate aspirations and damaging
the confidence of the international community.

The humanitarian situation and the protection of
human rights are also matters for serious concern. The
marginalization of especially vulnerable groups, the
still large numbers of displaced persons and incidents
of gender violence are a major worry and require an
effective response.

My second point is about security and the role
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH). While we are pleased with the progress
made in improving the capacity of the Haitian National
Police, we are compelled to conclude that they have a
long way to go before they will be able to assume full
responsibility for providing security in the country,
fighting the criminal activity that is, sadly, growing,
and protecting their borders. As a result, for the time
being, MINUSTAH's presence is essential. In that
regard, we support the Secretary-General's proposal
for a renewal of the Mission's mandate for a new term
of 12 months and for its reconfiguration and gradual
drawdown. That drawdown must of necessity go hand
in hand with the parallel strengthening of the capacity
of the national police, particularly aimed at enabling
it to gradually take on the responsibilities currently
assigned to MINUSTAH. We also believe that, in terms
of humanitarian and financial security, priority must
be given to strengthening the National police and not to
other structures that are draining limited resources and
could also become new sources of instability for Haiti.

We continue to fully support the Haitian people
on its difficult road to reconstruction, democracy and
development. We are convinced that they can overcome
the current challenges with the solidarity and active
support of the international community.

In conclusion, I would like to express my sincere
recognition of the extraordinary work under what are
often difficult conditions accomplished by the men and
women of MINUSTAH over the last eight years.

