Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): Deputy
Secretary-General Migiro told the Security Council
three days ago (see S/PV.5929) that the situation in
Zimbabwe was a challenge to the world, and today the
Security Council has failed to rise to that challenge.
Ms. Migiro said that this was a moment of truth for
democracy in Africa. The Security Council has failed
to shoulder its responsibility to do what it can to
prevent a national tragedy deepening and spreading its
effects across Southern Africa.

I would like to be very clear about the draft
resolution we have just voted on, a draft resolution
sponsored by a range of countries, including African
countries. It has been widely misrepresented by some
members of the Council and by the representative of
Zimbabwe just now. This draft resolution did not
represent a new judgement by the Security Council on
the recent elections in Zimbabwe. The Council
unanimously made that judgement on 23 June through
its presidential statement (S/PRST/2008/23). Our
collective assessment was that free and fair elections
were impossible under the prevailing conditions of a
campaign of violence against the political opposition
and the denial of the opposition's right to campaign
freely. Regrettably, that proved to be the case when
President Mugabe went ahead anyway. Local and
regional observers, and many African leaders, made
clear that the outcome was not free and fair and could
not be considered legitimate. We also agreed on
23 June that the results of the 29 March elections must
be respected.

Secondly, the draft resolution was not an attempt
to undermine ongoing mediations efforts; precisely the
opposite. The draft resolution would have required the
Government of Zimbabwe to engage with those efforts,
and it would have put some countervailing pressure on
the ruling regime to balance the appalling pressure and
intimidation that they continue to exert on the political
opposition. We have supported President Mbeki's
mediation efforts, but we have to be realistic: those
efforts have so far come to naught. The only one who
has benefited to date is Mr. Mugabe.

Thirdly, this draft resolution was not a foray into
the internal affairs of an African country. The Security
Council has often determined - for example, in Sierra
Leone, Sudan and Somalia - that political instability
and violence in one country has consequences for
wider peace and stability, requiring the Council to act.
That remains true in Zimbabwe today. The African
Union has already acknowledged, in its resolution of
1July, the risk that the conflict in Zimbabwe may
spread across the subregion.

We should reflect on the opportunities we have
lost today.

We have missed the opportunity to impose a legal
obligation on Mr. Mugabe's Government to end the
violence and intimidation which have scarred
Zimbabwe and made normal politics impossible and
which are destabilizing the region. The millions of
refugees - a quarter of Zimbabwe's population -
constitute a stark demonstration of this.

We have missed the opportunity to strengthen the
mediation efforts, giving them the full weight of the
international community by the addition of a United
Nations envoy. We look to the Secretary-General to
appoint such an envoy anyway, on his own authority.

We have missed the opportunity to back up South
Africa's mediation efforts with something more than
words. That is why the draft resolution included
carefully targeted sanctions aimed at those who have
brought about the current crisis, with a clear message
that they would be lifted once an inclusive political
settlement is reached.

And finally, we have lost an opportunity to
impose an arms embargo. The last thing Zimbabwe
needs now is more arms. We hope that Government and
civil society in Southern Africa will continue to ensure
that arms do not get through to the Mugabe
Government.

This draft resolution only failed because it has
been vetoed by the Russian Federation and China.
Russia's action is, frankly, inexplicable. Only three
days ago, the meeting of Group of Eight leaders, which
of course includes President Medvedev of Russia,
adopted a statement on Zimbabwe that recommended
the appointment of a United Nations special envoy and
went on to say, "We will take further steps, inter alia
introducing financial and other measures against those
individuals responsible for violence".

The draft resolution that Russia and China have
just vetoed was precisely to implement those two
decisions. We View their decision as deeply damaging
to the long-term interests of Zimbabwe's people. It has
in our view harmed the prospects for bringing to an
early end the violence and the oppression in
Zimbabwe. Zimbabwe faces not only a political crisis.
It also faces a grave humanitarian crisis for which the
Government of Zimbabwe bears full responsibility. The
Zimbabwean authorities have ignored every single
appeal for the restrictions on humanitarian supplies to
be lifted. Again, the Council failed today by vetoing
this draft resolution to require Mr. Mugabe's
Government to allow humanitarian aid to be delivered.

Many times during our discussions of this issue,
Council members have said that the people of
Zimbabwe must be allowed to find their own way
forward. Of course, they must; that is what they tried to
do when they voted on 29 March. We must respect the
outcome of the elections on that day. If we are not to
see more violence, more economic chaos, more
refugees and a greater threat to regional peace and
stability, then we, the international community, have to
do what we can to create the conditions for a real
political process that some chance of success. At
present, such a process does not exist.

With the vetoing of this draft resolution, we now
need to look for a new way forward. We will discuss
this with our partners in Europe and with our friends in
the African Union and across the world. The people of
Zimbabwe need to be given hope that there is an end in
sight to their suffering. The Security Council today has
failed to offer them that hope.

