Mr. Kasse (Mali) (spoke in French): Over recent
years armed conflict has claimed millions of victims,
the majority of them civilians, and most of them have
been killed by small arms and light weapons. The trade
in these weapons is a genuine threat to peace and
security, in particular in Africa.

Norway has cooperated with Mali on concrete
and practical methods to reduce this threat in our
region. Norway and Mali attach high priority to the
question of small arms on their foreign policy agendas.
Thus, our two countries share the same positions on
critical issues linked to the problem of small arms, as
was made clear during the recent United Nations
Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects. This is the first time,
to my knowledge, that such a procedure is being
applied in the Security Council, and it is my honour
today to speak also on behalf of Norway.

Allow me to express to you, Mr. Minister, our
great satisfaction at seeing you preside over our
meeting today, and to hail the initiative that you have
undertaken of holding this meeting on a subject to
which our Governments attach high priority. In the
light of the recent United Nations Conference, this
initiative is indeed most timely. I would like to take
this opportunity to pay tribute to your compatriot,
Mr. Reyes, the Ambassador of Colombia, for the
impressive work that he achieved as the President of
that Conference. Those of us who were there in the
meeting rooms during the long nights of the
Conference know that it required all his skill and
insight. Otherwise, we would never have reached
agreement on a final document. Allow me also to thank
the Secretary-General for the statement he made this
morning.

Mali and Norway hope that the Programme of
Action of the Conference will provide an impetus to
international work aimed at putting an end to the illicit
trade and excessive and destabilizing accumulation of
small arms. Although the Conference was a step in the
right direction, we will not hide the fact that our
Governments would have preferred to see the adoption
of a more ambitious plan of action. We share this
opinion with numerous countries of Africa, which is
the continent that is the most severely affected by the
proliferation of small arms. Mali and Norway believe
that there is an urgent need for an international
agreement on explicit export criteria that can be
effectively implemented. We also need to continue to
draw up international legal instruments on marking and
tracing small arms and on brokering operations. We
regret that the Conference was not able to achieve
agreement on wording recognizing the need to
establish and maintain control of the possession by
individual persons of this type of lethal weapons.

At the regional and subregional level, we should
emphasize that the African countries have taken
important measures to reduce the illicit trade in small
arms. The recent initiatives of the Organization of
African Unity, the Southern African Development
Community and the countries of East Africa are
examples. Norway supported the pioneering work
undertaken by Mali and other countries of West Africa
to establish the moratorium of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) on
small arms and light weapons. The ECOWAS
moratorium has just been extended for a three-year
period beginning 5 July 2001. In addition, the measures
of the Programme of Action dealing with the
moratorium are now incorporated as provisions of the
ECOWAS protocol relating to the mechanism for
conflict prevention and management. The African
countries have taken a step against the trade in small
arms, which usually originate outside their continent.
Today it is more necessary than ever before to reinforce
the initiatives taken by Africa and to embark on a
decisive stage in the prevention of conflicts through
effective international regulations for the control and
collection of small arms and the management of
stockpiles. Mali and Norway call on the donor
community to provide more substantial support to these
initiatives, which represent specific measures for
conflict prevention.

In this respect, the programmes for disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) of former
combatants are one of the most important instruments
available to the Security Council. In West Africa, DDR
in Sierra Leone is an example of how crucial these
measures are in United Nations peacekeeping
operations. This is why we need to seriously assess
how to integrate this type of programme appropriately
into future peacekeeping operations. As a result, Mali
and Norway propose that the Secretary-General submit
to the Council a report on the lessons to be drawn from
DDR programmes.

As reflected in our recent debate on peace-
building and conflict prevention, one of the lessons that
reality has taught us up to now is that the collection of
small arms alone is not sufficient. The establishment of
a neutral security zone and judicial machinery is
important to create a safe environment conducive to
development. "Security first" is a motto that has
already been used during actions for peace and
reconciliation in Mali and for the establishment of the
ECOWAS moratorium.

Practical disarmament measures must be put in a
broader context and accompanied by targeted
development programmes in order to provide better
prospects for former combatants. In this respect, Mali
and Norway are above all concerned by the situation of
child soldiers, to whom particular attention must be
paid within the framework of programmes of this type.

As is the case in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, we are now confronted with an important
challenge, because of which we are likely to be called
upon to support programmes of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, which must also
include measures for repatriation and resettlement. The
organization and coordination of such a comprehensive
programme will test the United Nations family's
capacity to have all its institutions work together, along
with other organizations such as the World Bank, to
build a lasting peace. Of course, this will also be a test
as to the extent to which long-term, sufficient and
predictable financing can be established for the
execution of that task. Mali and Norway would like to
state their preference for a system in which DDR
programmes, as a rule, would be financed through
contributions of Member States.
Arms embargoes are another major instrument
available to the Security Council. The Programme of
Action clearly indicates that States have a
responsibility to cooperate with the United Nations for
the implementation of such sanctions. Small arms are
often financed by conflict diamonds and other raw
materials of great value, as the conflicts in Angola and
Sierra Leone attest. Mali and Norway believe that the
permanent monitoring mechanism for sanctions, which
is now under consideration by the Security Council,
will form a valuable instrument for the strengthening of
sanctions and will thus contribute to our efforts to
counter the illicit trade in small arms.

Mali and Norway see the Programme of Action
that emerged from the United Nations Conference as
the beginning of a process, and not as the end. The
just-concluded, long and difficult negotiations to reach
agreement on this Programme of Action taught us that
numerous challenges await us in the work to come,
particular regarding measures that fall within the
competence of the Security Council. By our joint
statement to the Council today, Mali and Norway wish
to highlight the need to work together to address these
challenges.

