Mr. Fall (Guinea) (spoke in French): I too would
like to thank Ms. Catherine Bertini and congratulate
her on the work she has done as the head of the World
Food Programme (WFP). In these 10 years under her
dynamic leadership, we have seen the emergence of a
new approach towards food assistance. It is indeed
fortunate that the Russian presidency agreed to
organize this dialogue with Ms. Bertini today, at a time
when she is preparing to leave her post.

Today the link between food assistance and the
settlement of conflict at all stages appears obvious.
Had time allowed, we would have hoped to have more
time with Ms. Bertini to deal not only with
Afghanistan, but also with the subject in general
throughout the world - a subject that is totally in sync
with our work in the Council. For we are sure that
today's meeting and the lessons we can learn from this
dialogue will allow us to improve our approach in the
area of the comprehensive settlement of conflicts.

There is no need to emphasize the fact that food
assistance is a fundamental element in the prevention
and settlement of conflicts, as well as in peace-
building. It is also an effective component of
preventive diplomacy. It has been demonstrated on
many occasions that meeting the food needs of certain
populations - and for the most disadvantaged in
particular - is an important element of prevention.
Food assistance is also an important element in the
stabilization of States.

The role of the United Nations in the area of
assistance to the victims of conflict should be lauded,
as it has made it possible to reduce delays in rendering
assistance, increase the efficiency of international food
aid and strengthen the means available to countries to
avert or cope with emergency situations.

We appreciate the role that Ms. Bertini and the
World Food Programme have played in the work of the
Inter-Agency Standing Committee. We also appreciate
the cooperation established with other humanitarian
institutions in the areas of alleviating crises,
rehabilitation and community stability.

Coming from Africa, a continent that
unfortunately continues to suffer from hunger and the
consequences of numerous conflicts, and specifically
from Guinea, which aside from its geographic situation
has experienced a massive inflow of refugees and is
therefore a major host country for refugees, I would
like to make a few comments on the basis of
Ms. Bertini's briefing to the Council today and on the
basis of my own country's experience.

First, food assistance and the physical protection
of disaster victims are two high-priority and
inseparable elements of relief and assistance
programmes.

Secondly, aid should take into account the eating
habits of recipients. My delegation would encourage
the WFP to buy more local products when providing
such assistance. That would generate funds on the local
level, foster the recovery and stabilization of local
communities and reduce delivery delays.

Thirdly, the use of local personnel and local
services would also generate additional value in terms
ofthe recovery and development of communities.

My delegation places great value on the food aid
provided by the World Food Programme, which,
through its various projects, is effectively contributing
to the recovery and development of communities. With
that objective in mind, we stress the need to strengthen
international coordination within the United Nations
system and between it and other actors.

In the light of the magnitude and urgency of this
task, everything possible must be done to promote the
growth and effective mobilization of the financial
resources that are required. Every step should also be
taken to ensure the security of humanitarian personnel
and the protection of United Nations personnel. We
saw what happened in the case of the humanitarian
personnel in Guinea who were affected during the rebel
attacks in Masanta, which were universally deplored.

Finally, my delegation once again emphasizes
that conflict prevention and peace-building efforts are
the best means of resolving crises and helping in the
recovery and stabilization of communities, and food
aid plays a major role in that regard.

I would like to conclude by once again expressing
our gratitude to Ms. Bertini for the work that she has
done at the head of the World Food Programme and for
her vision of the role of that body in general, and of
food aid in particular, as an effective means of
preventing and resolving conflict. I would like to
convey our best wishes to her for continuing success in
her career.

