Mr. Ben Yahia (Tunisia) (interpretation from Arabic): At the outset, I am pleased to extend to you, Sir,
our sincerest congratulations on your assumption of the

 

presidency of the Council for this month. I am certain that,
with your diplomatic skill and wide experience, you will
guide our deliberations with success.

The Council is meeting today in an emergency
situation to consider the volatile situation in the occupied
Arab territories in Jerusalem and a number of Palestinian
cities, where bloody events have erupted, killing and
wounding a large number of civilians. The situation is still
escalating and widening and, ominously, may lead to the
worst possible circumstances.

The Israeli authorities opened a tunnel under the
western wall of the Al-Aqsa Mosque in East Jerusalem.
That action provoked the feelings of the Palestinian people
as well as the Arab and Islamic worlds. This represents a
menace, as the Mosque is the first of the two kiblahs and
the third holy shrine, and it is a step in the direction of
undermining all the Islamic sites and represents the
judaization of the Holy City.

This measure attempts to change the legal status of
Jerusalem, in violation of the Fourth Geneva Convention,
flouts the resolutions of the Security Council and ignores
the agreements concluded between Israel and the Palestinian
authority, agreements that stipulated that the status of
Jerusalem would be the subject of final-status negotiations.

If Israel were to persist in changing the demographic
composition of the city and in demolishing Palestinian
houses under flimsy pretexts - it even went so far as to
discourage visitors from seeing Orient House - this would
be another attempt to impose a fait accompli, which would
render any negotiation meaningless. Opening the tunnel is,
as a matter of fact, a link in a series of decisions whose
objectives are well known. It is a part of a comprehensive
policy that has become very clear in the few months since
the new Israeli Government took office. In this very short
time, the Israeli authorities have embarked on the expansion
of settlements and made arrangements to build a number of
housing compounds in the western Strip. They have also
persisted in the siege of Palestinian cities and the starvation
of the Palestinian people, as well as in cutting off their
livelihoods.

Can these practices be considered reflections of a
genuine desire to turn over a new leaf and start a new
relationship between the Palestinian and the Israeli peoples
that is based on a mutual recognition of the right of each to
independence, dignity and security? What we have
witnessed today is a return to the logic of brute force and
a retreat from the spirit of peace. It is a return to
intransigence in imposing a fait accompli without any
regard for the resolutions of this body or for public
opinion. All our expectations are being fulfilled now. The
Israelis are reneging on all their security commitments.

In the absence of security, there can be no justice.
Security without peace is false and impossible. Security
is the result of justice and equity, not of tyranny and the
usurping of the rights of people. The world was heartened
by the launching of the peace process and applauded the
agreements of Oslo, Washington and Cairo as steps on
the right path to restore the legitimate national rights of
the Palestinians, to recognize their right to self-
determination, and to permit the establishment of an
independent Palestinian state in accordance with the
resolutions of international law.

Tunisia is a peace-loving country. It supported the
peace process, which was based on land for peace. We
are expressing today our full solidarity with the brotherly
Palestinian people. We would draw attention to the danger
of the current developments, as they will jeopardize the
peace process. We call upon the Council - in particular
the sponsors of the peace process - swiftly to move to
put an end to any Israeli practices that run counter to the
spirit and the letter of all the agreements that have been
reached within the framework of this process in order to
avert any escalation of this crisis, which might have a
negative impact on all the countries and peoples of the
region, as well as on the peace and security of the entire
world.

We call upon Israel today to reconsider its practices
and its arbitrary policies, and to renounce any actions that
could impede efforts towards peace. Israel must cease all
interference with the holy sites and put an end to the
establishment of settlements and the siege of Palestinian
towns. We also call upon Israel to honour its
commitments within the framework of the agreements, to
return to the negotiating table with the serious political
will to implement a settlement that accords with the
principles of international law, and to completely
withdraw from the occupied Palestinian territories, the
Syrian Golan and southern Lebanon as part of
establishing a just, lasting and comprehensive peace.

The gravity of the situation in the Palestinian
territories requires rapid and decisive intervention by the
Council in order to force Israel to take immediate
measures to rectify the situation before it is too late. This
means Israel must close the tunnel forever, immediately
halt all aggression against civilians, and respect its

 

commitments in a way that guarantees progress towards the
peace to which we all aspire.

