Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): I should first like
to associate my delegation with the statement that will
be made on behalf of the European Union by the
representative of Belgium later in the debate.

The United Kingdom is gravely concerned at the
continuing violence in Israel and the occupied
territories and the blockage of progress on Israeli-
Palestinian peace negotiations.

The core problem is characterized by a loss of the
trust that previously existed between the parties. We
have heard them both this morning. Israelis doubt that
the Palestinian Authority is a true partner for peace.
Equally, Palestinians doubt that Israel is willing to
move forward to negotiations that stand a real chance
of meeting their legitimate aspirations.

In these circumstances, the Council must
demonstrate its unity and encourage the parties to focus
on their clear obligations to move the process forward.
Our debate today should not divide the Council. To the
contrary, it is our responsibility today to send a crystal
clear message to the parties of our common
commitment to support efforts to achieve a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the region.
That message must also emphasize our total
condemnation of extremism and violence as a means to
achieve political ends. For it is only through dialogue
that Israelis and Palestinians can achieve security and
peace.

The first priority for all involved must be the
implementation, as others have said, without further
delay of the recommendations of the Sharm el-Sheikh
Fact-finding Committee, the Mitchell Committee. This
integral package offers a road map, endorsed by the
international community and accepted by both parties,
for Israel and the Palestinian Authority to move from
this crisis, through the ceasefire and confidence-
building measures set out in the Committee's report, to
a return to negotiations. Those negotiations should, as
before, aim for a permanent settlement based on the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council,
particularly Security Council resolutions 242 (1967)
and 338 (1973), and the principle of "land for peace".

We call on both parties to take immediate action
to de-escalate the current crisis. They can achieve this
by fulfilling the obligations they accepted when they
accepted the Mitchell Committee's report. Both parties
must tackle incitement to violence and both parties
must bring to justice those who commit violent acts.

I have already spoken of our concern at the
continuing violence in the Middle East. The United
Kingdom condemns utterly all terrorist acts, including
suicide bombings against Israeli civilians. There can be
no excuse for targeting civilians going about their
ordinary business on the streets of Israeli cities. These
actions are abhorrent and, ultimately, futile. The
Palestinian Authority must make a 100 per cent effort
to reduce violence. That should include sustained and
greater efforts to pre-empt bombings by extremists and
bringing those responsible to justice.

Israel has unfulfilled obligations too. We call on
the Government of Israel to show the utmost restraint
in its use of force. We call for lifting the closures that
cripple the Palestinian economy and prevent
Palestinians in the occupied West Bank, the Gaza Strip
and East Jerusalem from going about their daily lives,
from working and from receiving an education. These
restrictions achieve only resentment and anger, which
will not help achieve a settlement. We call on Israel to
transfer to the Palestinian Authority all revenues owed,
to freeze all settlement activity and to fulfil its other
obligations under Mitchell, without delay. We have
also repeatedly called for an end to the Israeli policy of
assassination of suspected Palestinian militants. That
only fuels further violence and hatred.

We are concerned at the continuing closure of
Orient House and other institutions in Jerusalem. We
call on Israel to reverse the closure and to return the
archives of Orient House without delay. It is a further
setback to the prospects for peace that Orient House -
which has never been a centre of terrorism and
extremism, but always a resource for Palestinian
engagement in negotiations - should be prevented
from operating.

We call on Israel to refrain from the demolition of
Palestinian houses, which risks inflaming an already
volatile situation.

Finally, I want to underline that the international
community has a responsibility to help the parties
return to a political process to resolve their differences.
We in the Council should not complicate that process,
but assist it. In our discussion today, we should
recognize the suffering of civilians - Israelis and
Palestinians alike - and send a clear message to the
parties. The basis for a settlement has eroded in the last
11 months. The parties now have a responsibility,
through their words and actions, to rebuild it.

