Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Bedializoun Moussa Nebie, Special Representative
of the African Union to the Central African Republic,
Mr. Koen Vervaeke, Managing Director for Africa of
the European External Action Service, and Ambassador
Leon Adom of Cote d'Ivoire for their briefings.

We share the concern expressed in the Secretary-
General's report on the Central African Republic
(S/20l8/922) about the continuing unstable situation
in the country, especially on the security front. A
significant part of its territory is still controlled by
armed groups. Despite some positive improvements
regarding the issue of expanding State authority,
the local Government bodies cannot fully carry out
their functions.

We would like to express our sincere condolences
for the peacekeepers who lost their lives this year. The
courage of the Blue Helmets in the Central African
Republic cannot be overestimated. We want to express
our support for the efforts of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) and of
Mr. Onanga-Anyanga personally. We realize that the
Mission's task is not an easy one, considering the size
of the country and the presence there of a large number
of armed groups.

Russia, as a permanent member of the Security
Council and a member of the International Support
Group for the Central African Republic, intends to
continue its full support to the process of national
reconciliation that has begun there, acting in
coordination with the authorities in Bangui, the African
Union, the leadership of the Republic of the Sudan
and the other stakeholders involved in the quest for
ways to normalize the situation in the Central African
Republic. We agree with the Secretary-General that
the African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation in
the Central African Republic is vital as a pathway to
a political settlement. We support the comprehensive
implementation of the road map for a Central African
settlement adopted in Libreville on 17 July 2017 through
the mediation of the African Union.

The progress made in implementing the African
Initiative is a positive step, and we particularly
welcome the talks held in the city of Bouar from 28 to
30 August by the Initiative's panel of facilitators with
the representatives of 14 armed groups. We hope that
the consolidated document that resulted will lead to an
early start to a direct dialogue between the Government
and the armed groups. We believe that the talks held on
28 August in Khartoum under the auspices of President
Bashir of the Sudan between the leaders of the largest
armed groups, including some formerly allied with the
Seleka and anti-balaka, represent an important step
within the framework of the general African effort to
find ways to help the Central African Republic emerge
from conflict.

The declaration signed at the conclusion of the
meeting in Khartoum announced the creation of a
united Central African opposition with the aim of

achieving a lasting and sustainable peace in the Central
African Republic, recording their commitment to the
African Union Initiative, their willingness to start a
peace process with the central Government and their
obligation to respect human rights and ensure the free
and safe movement of representatives of humanitarian
and other non-governmental organizations throughout
the country. We presume that such an association will
enable them to reach concrete agreements with the
Government of the Central African Republic.

As we have repeatedly emphasized, Russia
supports harmonizing the various Central African
Republic peace initiatives to help advance the
negotiation process, which will help to prevent them
from competing with one another, as the Secretary-
General's report cautions against. Russia's assistance
in organizing the contacts in Khartoum is in line with
the efforts of the African community, which is making
a decisive contribution to ending the stalemate in crisis
situations on the African continent in accordance with
the African Union's principle of African solutions to
African problems. We consistently advocate for the
backing of the international community and especially
the Security Council for agreements that are being
developed through the mediation of the African Union
and other African bodies, and for providing them with
political, moral and material support.

We note the steps that Bangui has taken in reforming
the security sector with a view to regaining control
over the entire country. Together with the support of
the international community, they are designed to help
normalize the situation in the Central African Republic
and to implement the national defence plan approved
by President Touadera with the aim of gradually
transferring responsibility for the country's affairs
to its lawful authorities. For our part, we affirm that
Russia will continue to support the Central African
Republic's authorities in reforming the national security
sector, including in the area of strengthening the armed
forces' combat capability and staff potential. Russian
military specialists managed to achieve significant
results in a short space of time in training more than
1,000 Central African troops. We also intend to
continue to increase our assistance on the humanitarian
front, particularly through the provision of medical
services to the population. Our collaboration with the
Central African Republic's legitimate authorities in
rebuilding its national security forces is constructive
and transparent, as testified to by the latest report of
the Panel of Experts of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2127 (2013) concerning the
Central African Republic and by the results of recent
thorough inspections by United Nations representatives
ofa first batch of military equipment donated by Russia
to the Central African Republic's Ministry of Defence
at the beginning of this year. Besides that, we hope that
our military and technical assistance to Bangui will
cease to provoke what might be termed jealousy among
our Council colleagues. We believe that in the current
circumstances on the ground in the Central African
Republic, constructive collaboration on the part of all
international stakeholders is urgently needed.

