Mr. Duale (Somalia): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, on behalf of the Somali Government and
the people of Somalia, for convening this open debate
on Somalia, the first general open debate of your
presidency. This debate follows the successful
international conference of 23 February 2012 in
London, the outcome of which was applauded by most
well-meaning Somalis, both inside and outside the
country.

I also thank His Excellency Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon for his comprehensive special report on
Somalia (S/2012/74), and Mr. Augustine Mahiga, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Somalia, for his thorough briefing on the situation in
Somalia. The Prime Minister of the Transitional
Federal Government (TFG) of Somalia, in his
statement at Chatham House in London on
24 February, expressed his appreciation and thanks, on
behalf of Somalia and its citizens, to the United
Kingdom for holding the London international
conference on Somalia, in which all of the Somali
regional authorities and other stakeholders were
represented.

It is worthwhile to note, in that connection, that
there have been 20 international conferences on
Somalia since the collapse of the central Government
in 1991 - all attempting to shape a viable Government
and a semblance of peace and security in the country. It
is true that commendable efforts were made during
those conferences, and in good faith, especially by
neighbouring countries hosting these conferences,
including Ethiopia, Djibouti, and Kenya. The last such
conference resulted in the creation of the Transitional
Federal Government.

The tangible difference of the London
international conference is that, first, it was attended
by 55 international leaders and all the Somali leaders
from across the regions of Somalia, as well as by the
Secretary-General and his top aides, and by
multilateral and regional leaders and organizations. It
focused on the most critical issues, such as the political
process, governance, security, justice, piracy and
terrorism, stability and recovery issues, international
cooperation, effective coordination and humanitarian
issues.

Furthermore, what was unprecedented was the
moral commitment and expressed will of both the
international community and the Somali
representatives to achieve fundamental change through
a new approach, and to become engaged in Somalia,
and not business as usual. In addition, Somalia
welcomes with appreciation the planned meeting in
Istanbul in June to further discuss vital issues,
including recovery and maintaining recovery. Most of
the issues have already been mentioned by members of
the Security Council, and we appreciate and endorse
the statements made by the Security Council members,
including your good self, Sir.

Today, Somalia is at a crossroads. The Somali
leaders have agreed and committed themselves to
delivering on schedule, as was stated, on the
Transitional Federal Charter, the Djibouti Agreement,
the Kampala Accord, the road map and the Garowe
Principles, just as they are all fully committed to
ending the protracted transition period by 20 August
2012. However, one remains a bit worried, given the
past experiences of conferences on Somalia, at which
good intentions were expressed and generous
commitments were made that have not been seen
through nor delivered in a timely as a result.

Allow me to conclude my remarks by quoting
two very brief paragraphs from the statement of His
Excellency the Prime Minister of the Transitional
Federal Government at Chatham House in London on
24 February:

"The conference has created substantial
expectations for all Somali stakeholders. The next
stage is a long journey for Somalia, but I believe
that we have embarked on this journey, and my
Government is committed to putting in place the
foundations needed to deepen peace, stability and
development.

"As a result of the conference, I expect
there will be a noticeable change in enhanced
international coordination for key sectors,
improved financial management of Somalia's
public assets, an increased African Union troop
presence and enhanced support of the road map."
Somalia's problems are long-standing and
complicated; solving them will require serious, honest,

coordinated and consensus-based partnership between
the Transitional Federal Institutions, the Somali
stakeholders, the African Union, the United Nations
and the broader international community. More funding
for local stability initiatives, including counter-piracy,
security, justice and counter-terrorism, as well as
funding for Somalia's productive sector and for youth
employment.

Mr. President, finally, while reiterating my
Government's appreciation and thanks to you, may I
seize this opportunity also to extend through you our
thanks and appreciation to the members of the Security
Council for the consensus on the presidential statement
that you have read today, and for their positive and
very supportive statements.

