Mrs. Cordova Soria (Plurinational State ofBolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We appreciate the report presented
by Mr. Ghassan Salame, Special Representative of the
Secretary General and Head of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), and we would
like to take this opportunity to reiterate our full support
to him in his ongoing efforts.

We want to emphasize the point he made about
the fact that violence has come to a halt in Libya, as
well as UNSMIL's role in achieving that. However, we
are deeply concerned about the deteriorating security
situation in Libya and the surge in violence that occurred
in August. Unfortunately, as a result of armed clashes,
bombings and the detonation of explosive remnants of
war, more than 140 people lost their lives during the
first halfofthe year. That is on top ofDa'esh's continued
attacks, the most recent of which targeted the residents
of Al-Fuqaha on 28 October and in which four people
were killed.

We also want to express our concern about the wave
of violence on 1 November, when illegal armed groups
tried to seize control of public and private institutions
in Tripoli by force, and on 5 November, when armed
militias attacked the Al-Jalaa maternity hospital in
Tripoli, shooting a doctor and causing the hospital
to shut down for three days. Such attacks on civilian
and medical facilities, and the looting of medicines
and equipment and partial or total destruction of
medical infrastructure, are violations of international
humanitarian law, and we therefore reiterate to the
parties and stakeholders involved that they are obliged to
guarantee the safety and integrity of civilians and their
spaces and infrastructure, and to apply the principles
of distinction and proportionality. Otherwise, these
deliberate attacks may constitute war crimes, which
would fall under the jurisdiction of the International
Criminal Court for investigation and prosecution.

In that regard, we call on the parties to respect and
comply with the ceasefire consolidation agreement
signed on 9 September, and to join the de-escalation
efforts being promoted by the Special Representative.
It is also important to take action to guarantee security
in southern Libya, which is seeing an increase in the
fighting as a result of the involvement of foreign armed
groups, worsening an already fragile situation. These
groups are seeking personal gain at the expense of
the security and integrity of the Libyan people and
further undermining the country's independence and
territorial integrity.

Another situation of concern to my delegation is
the continued reports of widespread violations of the
rights of the nearly 8,000 migrants and refugees being
held in Government-operated detention centres and
others under the control of various armed groups. It is
important to note that the great majority of detainees
are being held in pretrial detention and incommunicado,
without information about the charges against them
or any access to legal defence or representation.
Their situation is critical, as their defencelessness
is compounded by detention conditions that include
degrading treatment, torture, sexual violence against
both women and men, forced labour and the denial of
medical assistance. We reiterate our call to the parties to
prevent abuses and violations of migrants and refugees'
rights and remind them that they must comply with
their obligations under international law. In that regard,
we appeal urgently to the Libyan authorities to initiate
appropriate investigations in order to prevent impunity
for those atrocities.

We want to emphasize the importance of the full
implementation of the Libyan Political Agreement in
order to definitively complete and finalize the transition
period. Bearing in mind the parties' commitment to
holding parliamentary and presidential elections at the
end of the year, it is therefore essential that they hold
the necessary consultations on the new Constitution
and develop the legislation needed to clearly and
concretely establish the elements and prerequisites for
advancing the electoral process inclusively and with the
participation of the entire population, especially women
and young people. We also support the upcoming
conference to be hosted by Italy in Palermo. We hope
that that space for dialogue will bring together all
sectors of society, especially women and young people.

We reiterate that there can be no alternative or
military solution to the conflict, and we therefore
call on all the parties to comply with the Council's
relevant decisions, particularly resolution 2259 (2015)
and the presidential statement of 14 December 2017
(S/PRST/2017/26), and to join the ongoing efforts to
maintain a continuing dialogue aimed at achieving a
peaceful, orderly and inclusive political transition that
addresses the interests of the Libyan people and enables
them to determine their future freely and by consensus.

Clearing anti-personnel mines planted on Libyan
territory by militias and combatant groups, especially
in Benghazi, is particularly important for ensuring the
people's safety and facilitating the return of the more
than 190,000 internally displaced persons and refugees.
In that regard, we want to highlight the work that the
United Nations Mine Action Service has been doing to
assist and collaborate with Libya's mine action centre.

Finally, it is important to underscore and bear in
mind that the impact of the Libyan conflict on the
security situation in the region is a direct consequence
of interventionist practices and regime-change policies,
which have had collateral-damage effects in the Sahel
that have led to the emergence of chaos, terrorism and
militarization, with terrible results that continue to
proliferate to this day.

