Mr. Al-Hussein (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): May
I offer our congratulations to you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. We wish also to thank your predecessor,
who presided over the Council last month.

The Government of Jordan strongly condemns the
aggression committed by Israel against the Palestinian
people and its continued military operations in the
Gaza Strip, which have recently caused numerous
Palestinian victims.

Jordan condemns the horrendous crime
committed by Israel in Beit Hanoun on 8 November
2006. We also condemn the policy of collective
punishment carried out by Israel against the
Palestinians. The Government of Jordan calls on the
Security Council to shoulder its responsibilities in
order to put an immediate end to all forms of Israeli
aggression and to the suffering of the Palestinian
people.

Israeli military operations against the Palestinian
people will only heighten tensions and hinder current
efforts to lend assistance and end the human suffering
being endured by the Palestinian people. We also
emphasize the need for urgent action by the
international community and influential global Powers
so that the peace process can resume and be put back
on track. There is a dire need to resume that process as
soon as possible.

The deterioration of the current situation in the
occupied Palestinian territories and its continued
downward spiral threatens more than ever before
prospects for the establishment of a Palestinian State as
well as security and stability in the region. Israel
persists in the commission of heinous acts such as the
killing of Palestinians and the occupation of
Palestinian territory, the building of settlements,
flagrant violations of international law and the
continued denial of all Palestinian rights for many
decades now. All of these are very serious issues that
intensify the suffering of the Palestinian people, fuel
forces of extremism and fan the flames of hatred.

The events clearly demonstrate that there will be
no unilateral solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
The only viable route to a fair resolution is through
direct and early negotiations between the two sides to
ensure the implementation of United Nations
resolutions and of the basic principles of the Road Map
and the Arab Peace Initiative, with a view to
establishing an independent, sovereign Palestinian
State. All of us, therefore, are duty-bound to continue
to support President Abbas and to ensure that
international assistance is provided to the Palestinian
side.

Furthermore, Israel, for its part, should take
immediate steps to put an end to its military operations,
keep the Gaza Strip crossing points open, remove
restrictions on freedom of movement and release tax
revenue owed to the Palestinian side.

We would also like to underscore the need to find
a solution to the question of prisoners and abductees,
which would help to defuse the tense situation. Israel
should show the flexibility that is needed to help revive
the political process so that negotiations can be
resumed between the two sides. Israel should also take
specific, concrete steps to put an end to the occupation.
Once again, we urge all the parties concerned to make
every possible effort to that end. Bringing about peace
and ensuring the establishment of a Palestinian State
should remain our basic priority.

