Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome the briefing
by Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, the Secretary-General's
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process.

We are currently attending a further meeting to
address the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question. Over the course of this meeting,
we have not been given very encouraging news, and the
persistent and challenging attitudes of the Government
of Israel towards the international community remain.

For my delegation, it is disheartening that, a little
more than 11 months after the adoption of resolution
2334 (2016), none of the mandates set out therein
have been fulfilled; on the contrary, according to
the statement of the Permanent Observer Mission of
Palestine in its letter to the presidency of the Council,
dated 14 November, earlier this month the Israeli
occupation forces issued demolition orders against 60
homes or infrastructure that are owned by Palestinians
in Palestinian territory.

Those arbitrary measures that Israel intends to
impose on Palestinian territory, which it has also
forcefully occupied for more than 50 years ago, would
result in the forced dispossession and displacement
of 300 Palestinian civilians from the villages of Am
al-Hilweh and Um al-Jamal. In that regard, if Israel
achieves its wish, the number of settlers in that region
would increase from 6,000 to at least 12,000, which
would be in direct and repeated violation of Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions.

We note with deep concern the persistent inhuman
blockade that is inflicted by the Government of Israel
against the Palestinian people. We wish to remind that
occupying Power that, since the adoption of resolution
242 (1967), of 22 November, it has acted in contempt of
the primary principles of Article 2 of the Charter of the
United Nations.

With that in mind, we urgently call on all members
of the Security Council to take immediate action,
without further delay, to ensure that Israel ends what was
described in the latest report ofthe Special Rapporteur on
the situation of human rights in the Palestinian Territory
occupied since 1967 as "the longest-running military
occupation in the modern world". The occupation
violates the fundamental right of the Palestinian people
to self-determination and undermines the possibility of
a two-State solution.

Bolivia is obliged to recall that, as a result of the
Israeli blockade of the Gaza Strip, an energy crisis
is forcing the Palestinian inhabitants of the region
to live with only four hours of electricity per day.
Due to interruptions in the provision of electricity, a
humanitarian crisis has erupted in the form of an attack
on the human right to health. Hospitals and medical
centres are severely affected as they are forced to
discharge patients prematurely, to mention but one of
the many serious consequences affecting the population.
For example, in August, five cancer patients died while
waiting for permits to be issued by Israel in order to
travel to receive the necessary treatment. Similarly,
according to the aforementioned report, the supply
of water to the Gaza Strip is limited to a few hours
every four to five days, while the desalination plants
operate at just 15 per cent of their capacity. Bolivia
urges Israel to put an immediate and complete end to
the illegal blockade of the Gaza Strip and immediately
allow an ongoing and unconditional opening of the
crossing points in order to allow humanitarian aid and
commercial goods to enter and people to leave.

On the other hand, we take this opportunity to
welcome with great optimism the fact that, as a result
of the agreement reached between the parties on
12 October in Cairo, a solution to the intra-Palestinian
conflict has been reached, allowing the Palestinian
Authority to resume full functionality in the territories
of the Gaza Strip. We are pleased that the world is able
to witness this true expression of Palestinian unity. In
this regard, we express our satisfaction and appreciation
to the Government of Egypt and other countries of the
region that are supporting this process to strengthen the
legitimate presence of the democratic and legitimately
Palestinian National Authority in the Gaza Strip so that,
to the extent possible, it may overcome the devastating
humanitarian crisis that persists in the region.

Bolivia, as a pacifist State, believes that the only
way to achieve just and lasting peace in the conflict
between Israel and Palestine is through sincere
dialogue and clear expressions of political will on the
part of both sides to achieve the two-State solution.
To that end, we reiterate our full commitment to
multilateralism within the framework of respect for
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States. We
condemn violence, regardless of its origin, and call on
the parties to renounce it.

As on previous occasions, we reiterate our
expectation that the quarterly report of the Secretary-
General on the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016)
will be provided to us in writing, which would allow us
to see in detail the progress made in its implementation.
We would also like to see updated maps of all the
settlements in occupied Palestinian territories.

Finally, Bolivia reaffirms its support for the self-
determination of the Palestinian people and their right
to live in a free, sovereign and independent State within
its pre-1967 international borders, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, in accordance with the relevant resolutions
of the Security Council and the General Assembly.

