Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like at the outset to thank Under-
Secretary-General Stephen O'Brien for his very
comprehensive and objective briefing on the results
of his recent visit to a number of countries that find
themselves in a very difficult humanitarian situation.
In calling for this meeting, we were motivated first
and foremost by the need to obtain first-hand evidence
about what is taking place in the countries affected by
the humanitarian disaster, including as concerns the
situation in the Republic of Yemen.

A major part of the population of this country,
which is historically friendly to Russia, requires
humanitarian assistance. The country is on the verge of
famine. Civilian infrastructure lies in ruins, and many
businesses and facilities have been destroyed. First and
foremost I Wish to commend the selfless, brave work
of United Nations humanitarian personnel in Yemen,
including Humanitarian Coordinator McGoldrick.
They continue to deal with the most practical tasks in
helping the population of the country.

Our country, through its embassy in Sana'a, has
contributed to establishing a secretariat to contribute to
cooperation among the humanitarian structures of the
United Nations and the local authorities of the Republic
of Yemen in the capital. The secretariat will be tasked
with solving problems related to the distribution of
assistance among those in need . We call on all parties
to refrain from any efforts to find a military solution
to the situation. Such an approach will not bring about
effective and long-term results. This would lead only to
increasing misunderstanding and mistrust between the
Yemeni parties and undermine prospects for a return
to peace. We are convinced that resolving the conflict
in Yemen can be done only through political means,
through negotiations based on a balanced road map
leading to a solution.

Although past efforts of the international
community to bring Yemenis to agreement have not
been successful, this does not mean that we should
simply abandon this undertaking. We are continuing
to work through our embassy in the country with all
parties to the conflict, urging them to refrain from
unilateral decisions that only block the launching of
a negotiating process. As Mr. O'Brien rightly said,
solutions to all problems in this connection should be
sought only through political means.

Obviously, the winners of the Yemeni conflict are
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and Al-Qaida
in the Arabian Peninsula. With respect to Somalia, only
Al-Shabaab is a winner there. Also winning are other
the terrorist and extremist groups that control entire
regions in the south and east of Yemen. We know from
the experience that we should not put off starting to
fight terrorists. Postponing this will only complicate
the situation.
We cannot but be concerned by the humanitarian
situation in African countries Visited by Mr. O'Brien.
Many challenges remain in Somalia, where the terrorist
group Al-Shabaab has been sowing terror. South Sudan
faces equally urgent problems. We also need to unite
our efforts at the regional and international levels.
It is only through collective efforts that we will find
appropriate solutions.

