Mr. Safaei (Islamic Republic of Iran): I asked for
the floor in exercise of the right of reply, but allow
me first to express my Permanent Mission's gratitude
to His Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
New Zealand and the New Zealand presidency of the
Council and those ambassadors of Member States who
have spoken in this meeting of the Council in favour of
the deal concluded between Iran and the E3/EU+3, and
for their positive and encouraging approach adopted
with regard to this important event.

Once more, the representative of the Israeli regime
raised some baseless allegations against my country,
which I categorically and systematically reject.

The Israeli regime would have liked very much
to see the controversy over Iran's nuclear energy
programme continue forever. That regime looked at
the controversy and the effective threat, which it touted
as a golden opportunity and smokescreen to hide its
criminal policy against the Palestinian people. It also
loved to keep the international community busy with
the issue in such a way that major countries have failed
to address the prolonged occupation of the Palestinian
territory, the criminal blockade of Gaza and the type
of atrocities that it committed in Gaza last summer and
which it continues to commit.

Therefore we will not be surprised to see, from now
on, the Israeli regime increase its baseless accusations
against us and against those who concluded the nuclear
deal. With this deal at hand, it will be much more
difficult for them to cheat and deceive people and
Governments as to what the international community
expects to be done in the Middle East. That regime
will find it much more difficult to turn a deaf car on
the demands of the international community to end the
occupation. It will also be much more difficult for them
to stand as the only obstacle against the establishment
of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East. We
and many others in the region and beyond believe that
the nuclear warheads stockpiled by the Israeli regime
constitute a grave threat to peace and security in our
volatile region and that the Security Council should
live up to its primary responsibility under the United
Nations Charter and take the actions necessary to
neutralize that threat.

