Mr. Locsin (Philippines): Humankind is facing
the ultimate challenge to the life of the planet and
the penultimate challenge to its own survival - the
imminent prospect of ecological collapse. That will
not be another ice age in the course of nature, but a
deadly certainty generated entirely by human activity
and inaction. Science proves it. Experience shows it.
The increasing ferocity of storms demonstrates its
certain advent. Only mumbo jumbo disputes it. The
devastating effects of climate change are suffered the
most severely in especially vulnerable countries like
mine. Sea levels have risen 60 centimetres, more than
three times the global average of 19 centimetres. We
have 7,107 beautiful islands. We will have much fewer.

Not all those losses will be regretted. We have
so many islands and maritime features that they defy
effective patrolling. They are havens for massive drug
trafficking - the scourge of humankind and the death
of nations - as evidenced by the desperate flight of
populations from narcoStates. Should global warming
not be arrested, 98 per cent of our coral reefs - rich
fields for fisheries - will die out by mid-century and
becoming extinct by century's end. To be sure, we
would welcome the evaporation of territorial disputes
when the reefs they concern vanish completely beneath
the rising sea, along with the structures built on them.
Every cloud has a silver lining. As Typhoon Haiyan
powerfully showed, storm surges wipe out coastal
communities in a matter of minutes, erasing decades
of economic progress and social improvement and
leaving perdurable misery in their wake. The 2018
Global Climate Risk Index shows that our country lost
an annual average of 1 per cent of our gross domestic
product over the past two decades. Climate change
has generated civil strife and foreign wars. It will get
worse, and there will be more. A new Dark Age will
descend on most of the planet never before seen in
breadth. Unlike in the past, the darkness will never be
lifted. No age of enlightenment will follow. Human life
will not be worth living except for brutes, and there
are quite a few of those already in countries denying
climate change and refusing its challenges.

For less developed countries that trace their
privations to the depredations of developed ones, it will
be self-destructive retribution. If all humankind cannot
have this planet on the same terms, no part of humankind
should. Misery quite rightly craves company. It is a
kind ofjustice. We must develop better risk assessment
and mitigation strategies for climate-related disasters.
Although we emit less than half of 1 per cent of global
emissions, the Philippines has put itself firmly on the
path to low-carbon development. Far better-off societies
will not do so out of greed and self-serving ignorance,
but Filipinos are different. Whatever is the right thing
for everyone to do, Filipinos will do it, even if no one
else does. We have adopted, continued to improve and
are actually implementing a comprehensive national
disaster risk-reduction and management plan, but
climate change knows no boundaries. And every one
of us is at the mercy of actions and inaction beyond
our borders.

Therefore, stronger synergies among States and
deeper international cooperation are imperative. The
Humanitarian Assistance Centre of Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) has strengthened
its cooperation in line with the approach of the One
ASEAN, One Response. Globally, we are committed to
the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction and,
above all, to the Paris Agreement on Climate Change.
We will never see a reason to abandon the latter. In
that regard, we share the intelligence of everyone who
continues to adhere to it.

The climate-driven conflicts and desperate mass
population movements that we see today are what
we will see more of tomorrow. No country will be
safe. Some can retreat behind walls, but they will
not be subsequently able to venture beyond them.
Sooner or later, chaos will scale any wall. Countries
of wealth and power may have a brief respite from
the final catastrophe, but their lives will be extremely
diminished. But those with the intelligence and caring
to do something about climate change should not beg
for cooperation from those who lack both. In the end,
we shall have the sad but real satisfaction ofa common
fate. We might suggest, however, that the Security
Council chisel the climate-change challenge on granite
as its first, foremost and last security concern. When
the end finally comes and all social bonds are severed,
all the conflicts of the past will seem like sports
competitions by comparison, and that includes the far-
more horrendous first two decades of the twenty-first
century, which cannot plead ignorance as an excuse,
with the horrors of the twentieth still fresh in mind.

