Mr. Adom (cote d'lvoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes your presence, Madam President,
as well as that of the Secretary-General and the high-
level representatives of some States members of the
Security Council at this open debate on the training
and capacity-building of United Nations peacekeeping
operations. That high-level participation enhances the
prestige of this debate and demonstrates once again
that the quest for appropriate approaches to improving
the effectiveness of the United Nations peacekeeping
missions remains our common concern.

Cote d'Ivoire welcomes Indonesia's efforts leading
to the adoption of presidential statement S/PRST/2019/4
on that issue. We also commend Lieutenant General
Elias Rodrigues Martins Filho and Mr. Bjorn Holmberg
for their timely briefings.

I would like to highlight that Cote d'Ivoire endorses
the statement to be delivered by Ambassador Fatima
Kyari Mohammed, Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations on behalf of the Group of
African States.

Despite the criticism that they sometimes receive,
United Nations peacekeeping operations are one of the
most effective tools for the promotion and maintenance
of peace and international security. While the basic
principles and doctrine underlying peacekeeping
operations have remained unchanged, the conflict
typology and deployment environments of United
Nations missions have undergone profound changes.
Those transformations, which impact the security of
military and civilian personnel and the effectiveness
of peacekeeping operations, raise new issues to which
the international community will have to provide
appropriate and innovative responses.

For cote d'Ivoire, the training and capacity-
building of peacekeeping operations in the current
context must be seen as a shared responsibility requiring
the collective efforts of all peacekeeping partners.
To that end, the Secretariat, the Security Council and
the troop- and police-contributing countries have a
prominent role to play in the framework of a concerted
and coordinated approach.

One objective of training and capacity-building
for peacekeeping operations is to improve their
operational effectiveness and performance culture
in the implementation of their mandates. In that
regard, my country welcomes the convergence of
Views among peacekeeping actors on the importance
of training in the predeployment phase of troops and
other components of United Nations missions, as well
as the strengthening of their capacities throughout a
mission's life cycle. Indeed, predeployment training
makes it possible to prepare the mindset of the military
and civilian personnel for prior understanding of the
existing challenges in the sociopolitical and cultural
environments of their areas of deployment, as well as
the security risks that arise there.

With regard to military components in particular,
training should essentially take into account the
knowledge and perfect mastery of the equipment made
available to them, especially those relating to transport
and communication. It should also focus on strategies
for combat and the protection of troops, including
medical evacuations. It is therefore incumbent on the
troop-contributing countries, with the support of the
United Nations and all technical and financial partners,
to provide their respective contingents with equipment
conforming to accepted standards in order to enable
them to deal effectively with recurrent attacks by
asymmetrical forces.

In addition, if it is to be complete, the training
provided to the staff of the United Nations missions
must focus on the protection of civilians and respect
for human rights and international humanitarian law.
It should also take into account the role of women in
peacekeeping missions and the added value they bring
to mediation, the prevention of community tensions and
the fight against sexual violence in conflict.

For 13 years, my country hosted the United Nations
Operation in C6te d'Ivoire, which, through exemplary
cooperation with the Government of C6te d'Ivoire,
contributed to the early restoration of peace, stability
and prosperity. Building on that experience and driven
by the desire to play its full part in the maintenance
of international peace and security, my country seeks
to contribute through its forthcoming deployment,
without operational restrictions, of a contingent of 650
troops within the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali. The
preparation of that contingent, in accordance with the
provisions of the Declaration of Shared Commitments
on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations that it has
endorsed, is nearing completion. Cote d'Ivoire takes
this opportunity to commend the invaluable support
of the Secretariat on the training of the future Ivorian
peacekeepers who will join the 150-strong protection
battalion already deployed in Gao.
It is undeniable that the success of peacekeeping
operations is the collective responsibility of all
peacekeeping actors. It is therefore incumbent on us all
to work harder to improve the coordination of efforts,
in particular by creating synergies between the supply
and demand of training, identifying best practices
and sharing lessons learned from ongoing missions to
inform the deployment of future missions.

In conclusion, I reiterate cote d'Ivoire's ongoing
support for the Secretary-General's Action for
Peacekeeping initiative and the Declaration of Shared
Commitments, which is the crucible ofbroad consensus
on the need to work together to improve the effectiveness
of peacekeeping operations, whose crucial role in the
preservation of international peace and security needs
no further demonstration.

