Mr. Yap (Singapore): We welcome the Secretary-
General's presence at this meeting. It shows the
importance that he and the United Nations attach to
East Timor. We would also like to thank Under-
Secretary-General Guehenno for his detailed and
comprehensive briefing.

We are pleased to note that the Constituent
Assembly elections were a smooth and peaceful affair,
as we had hoped. It was also heartening to us that there
was such a large turnout at the polls. These are
encouraging signs for East Timor's democratic
transition.
The people of East Timor must be congratulated.
Also, the United Nations and the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET)
must be commended for the good work they are doing
in East Timor, which has been valuable in East Timor's
transition.

The election results show that no political party
has an outright, controlling two-thirds majority in the
Constituent Assembly. There were also sharp
differences in the voting in the various districts.
Therefore, as the Constituent Assembly and the new
Cabinet are being formed and the constitution is being
worked out, we urge continued concord and tolerance
among the political parties and the East Timorese
people. The strong support of the political parties and
the population for the Pact of National Unity must
continue.

It cannot be overemphasized that the potential for
instability and a certain level of vulnerability remain
even after the elections. The elections, therefore,
should not signal the end of UNTAET and the United
Nations considerable engagement in East Timor. On the
contrary, the United Nations must continue to keep
vigilant watch over East Timor. It should especially not
be making plans for its early exit or substantial
withdrawal from East Timor at this juncture. Besides
potentially unravelling all the good that the United
Nations has done in East Timor, this could also send
the wrong signal to the East Timorese people. The
United Nations should instead studiously work out how
it can and should prevent worse-case scenarios from
happening. The key to this is a continued, substantial
United Nations and international presence in East
Timor, even after its independence.

We look forward to the Secretary-General's report
on the successor mission to UNTAET post
independence and we fully support the presidential
statement to be adopted at the conclusion of this
meeting.

