Mr. Mutaboba (Rwanda): As this is the first time
I have taken the floor since the most recent open
meeting of the Security Council, I wish to express my
delegation's delight at seeing you, Sir, in the
presidency. We also wish to congratulate your
predecessor, Ambassador Fowler, for a job well done,
and the same appreciation goes to the whole
membership around this table for a sustained effort in
the search for peace and security in the world. We can
only express a strong wish to see you, Mr. President,
redoubling your efforts and vigilance to avoid such
surprises as we have encountered before.

The Government of Rwanda is very grateful to
the Security Council for the mission led by the very
able Ambassador Holbrooke. It was my pleasure to
welcome the delegation to Kigali, and its members are
right to say that we had frank discussions. What they
forgot to say is that we were sometimes brutally frank
in order to make sure that telling the truth should
supersede the speeches we often hear from those trying
to conceal it in order to feel good.

President Kagame asked me to thank all members
of the mission, bearing in mind that he was able to
share and to make concrete proposals that led to
solving the tragic and regrettable incidents we did not
start in Kisangani. None of us had the deliberate
intention of getting local civilians hurt in the first
place, nor has that ever been our Government's
intention at all.

Rwanda is still committed to the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement. We believe it is the sole viable
framework for achieving peace and security in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and in the region.
Reference to the incident in Kisangani as a deliberate
violation by some of the Lusaka Agreement is totally
wrong and should not be used as yet another delaying
tactic from some parties to slow momentum. We need
ever more pragmatic progressive approaches, such as
those proposed by President Kagame and agreed to by
President Museveni and the Security Council mission. I
am happy to provide the members of the Council with a
copy of the latest joint statement on the
demilitarization of Kisangani and, on the instructions
of my Government, it may be circulated as a document
of the Security Council at members' earliest
convenience.

Peace and security in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and in the region cannot come our way as
long as we fix our eyes on the Democratic Republic of
the Congo alone. We need to see the Democratic
Republic of the Congo as part of a region in crisis,
address the root causes and do this individually and
collectively. That is why we still believe that there can
be no peace and security in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and in the region until evil armed forces are
disarmed, demobilized, demilitarized, rehabilitated and
reintegrated into their respective societies. We have
been hearing some rumours leading us to believe that
some countries may be planning to take our citizens to
their respective countries. We appreciate their
hospitality, but none of them likes our people better
than we do. Experience shows that those already
repatriated, rehabilitated and reintegrated are happy to
be home, sweet home. They themselves have had a
chance to say that killing is wrong and should be
punished. If you take them to your countries, they will
miss this opportunity forever to repent and to reconcile
themselves with their society. Those trying to take
them should think about that. It is imperative that we
find a durable solution to the problem of these armed
groups.

Demilitarization and demobilization can be done
peacefully and voluntarily, we agree. However, there is
a blatant need for those forces and their supporters to
cooperate for it to be done peacefully and voluntarily.
Otherwise it will be a mere contradiction. The
experience of refugee camps in the then eastern Zaire
is still vivid in our memories: the international
community had failed in the name of an idealistic,
peaceful and voluntary process. We should learn from
that, and from the success of the repatriation of over 2
million refugees who were then costing the
international community over $1 million a day.

The demobilization and repatriation of members
of the Interahamwe, the ex-Rwandan Armed Forces
and other similar forces is a prerequisite to a successful
return of peace and security in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and in the region. Once this is
seriously considered, and in the spirit of Lusaka, then
the inter-Congolese dialogue may be a factor for
overall lasting peace and security within and across the
Democratic Republic of the Congo's borders. Law and
order are necessary for political dialogue. The political
dialogue itself brings respect for human and citizen's
rights. That is why MONUC needs to be deployed
without further ado. That is why we strongly believe
that President Sir Ketumile Masire needs to be
supported both politically and financially.

Peace is not a one-way business. You have peace
and you give it to your family, your neighbours, your
nation and the whole world. It is returned to you, and
the cycle continues. Sovereignty is a two-way business,
too. You cannot scream for your national sovereignty
while blasting your neighbours. You do not solve
matters by singing the same old tune all the time: you
use your imagination and become creative; you
compose songs expressing the mood of the time and
you keep the momentum going all the way through.
This is what is needed today in search for peace and
security in the world. It is the United Nations duty as
the world body, and it is ours as Members who support
our Organization.

