Mr. Vilovie (Croatia): In my capacity as
Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), I have
the honour to brief the Council on the work of the
Committee since the previous briefing, provided on
26 May 2009.

During the past six months, the Committee has
pursued its activities in accordance with its programme
of work. Last June, the Committee adopted and
submitted to the Council an interim review of the
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED), in
which it assessed the assistance received from CTED
in its efforts to promote and monitor the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001), with special
emphasis on the areas identified in resolution 1805
(2008). The Committee also included recommendations
on the future work of CTED.

Regarding the fundamental part of the
Committee's mandate, I am pleased to report to the
Council and to the wider membership that the
Committee has finalized the analysis and adoption of
the preliminary implementation assessments of all
Member States except one, whose assessment should
be adopted in the near future. This stocktaking exercise
is a multi-year process that has required the continuous
engagement of the Committee, in its various
compositions, and the continuous expert support of
CTED. I should like to commend all those involved in
this effort. The cooperation of Member States has also
been instrumental, and I call on them to remain
committed to the dialogue with the Committee and
CTED in this ongoing exercise.

In this context, let me remind the Council that
stocktaking is carried out in stages, both at the level of
three subcommittees chaired by France, the Russian
Federation and Viet Nam, respectively - and at the
level of the Committee as a whole. The Committee
deliberates upon the recommendations prepared by
CTED with respect to every Member State. The
Committee may then request additional information on
identified shortfalls in a particular Member State's
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) or invite the
Permanent Representative to a meeting of the relevant
subcommittee, at which the Member State may be
reminded of its obligation to implement the resolution.
Alternatively, the relevant subcommittee may ask why
a particular Member State has been unable to respond
to the Committee's communications, or it may
encourage the Permanent Representative to explore
avenues for CTED to acquire new updates or additional
information. The Committee has already finalized 46
files within the framework of the current stocktaking
exercise. More will be completed this year, and the
current exercise will be completed in 2010. In this
regard, I wish to stress that the Committee and CTED
stand ready to assist Member States, wherever
possible, in the preparation and submission of their
responses and further information on their efforts to
implement the resolution.

CTED has also prepared and submitted to the
Committee an updated version of its annual survey on
the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) by
Member States. This global survey is an assessment of
the implementation of the resolution by Member
States, broken down by region and subregion. It also
draws conclusions about progress made in this regard
and about any possible gaps in implementation in key
areas, notably counter-terrorism legislation, counter-
financing of terrorism, law enforcement, border
control, international cooperation and human rights.
09-60612
The global survey also contains priority
recommendations, with respect to each region, for
future action by the Committee. It is currently before
the Committee and should be submitted to the Council
before the end of 2009.

The Committee has continued to organize and
conduct an intensive schedule of visits to Member
States, with their consent. These country visits are a
fundamental component of the Committee's efforts to
monitor and promote implementation of resolution
1373 (2001). In accordance with the more flexible
approach introduced under its revised organizational
plan, CTED, acting on the Committee's behalf,
conducts not only comprehensive visits aimed at
analysing all aspects of a Member State's
implementation efforts, but also shorter, more targeted
visits that focus on one or two specific aspects of the
resolution. The revised plan also calls upon CTED to
conduct regional Visits and missions aimed at analysing
examples of good practice or addressing regional
vulnerabilities.

Pursuant to this more flexible approach, the rate
of visits has increased significantly, thereby enabling
the Committee to engage more deeply with a wider
range of States from all regions of the world. Over the
past six months, for example, the Committee has
concluded successful full-fledged or focused on-site
visits to Australia, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Ghana, the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, New Zealand, Oman and
Uzbekistan.

In September, the Committee initiated, on the
basis of a CTED proposal, a series of thematic
discussions of all major areas of implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001). Background documentation for
those discussions was prepared by CTED. The
Committee has already held in-depth discussions on
technical assistance and on international legal
cooperation. Before the end of 2009, the Committee
will discuss issues related to border security, arms
trafficking, law enforcement and best practices in the
implementation of resolution 1624 (2005).

The Committee and CTED have also worked to
enhance their ongoing dialogue with Member States,
donors and beneficiaries on the facilitation of technical
assistance. In this context, the Committee continues to
look for opportunities to match current and potential
donors with recipients in order to enhance the dialogue
between the donor community and recipient States and
09-60612

to further the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001). The Committee has, in particular, enhanced its
cooperation with the Counter-Terrorism Action Group
of the Group of Eight (CTAG) by meeting with local
CTAG representatives within the framework of most
visits and by promoting a broader overall dialogue
between CTED and CTAG.

The Committee also maintains on its website a
technical assistance matrix and a directory of
assistance programmes. Corresponding to the
Committee's request that CTED work to strengthen
regional cooperation on counter-terrorism in South
Asia, the Executive Directorate recently held two
workshops in this region. First, acting jointly with the
World Bank, it held a workshop for parliamentarians in
Pakistan on the importance of legislation on combating
the financing of terrorism. Secondly, acting together
with donors and other relevant partner organizations, it
facilitated a regional workshop for police and
prosecutors on cross-border cooperation, held in
Bangladesh.

In its dialogue with Member States, the
Committee has continued to remind them that any
measures taken to combat terrorism must comply with
all their obligations under international law, in
particular international human rights, refugee and
humanitarian law. In this regard, CTED ensures that
there are relevant human rights references in all PIAs,
that relevant issues are raised in the course of the
country visits, and that outreach activities are
undertaken with potential donors - including donors
already engaged in capacity-building activities on a
broader basis - to help them focus their work on
enhancing institution-building and strengthening the
rule of law.

The Committee has also continued to include in
its dialogue with Member States discussion of their
efforts to implement resolution 1624 (2005). Thus far,
a total of 104 States have submitted reports to the
Committee on their implementation of the resolution.
This represents an increase since our previous report to
the Security Council. The Committee will continue to
encourage those States that have not yet done so to
submit the relevant information to the Committee as
soon as possible. The Committee also continues to
encourage Member States to become parties to and
implement the 16 international counter-terrorism
instruments.
5

With respect to the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, the Committee and CTED
continue to participate actively in and support all
relevant activities of the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force (CTITF). CTED co-chairs
the Working Group on Integrated Assistance for
Countering Terrorism and also participates in the work
of two other CTITF working groups, which deal with
countering-financing of terrorism and with human
rights and counter-terrorism. In view of the close
coordination between the staffs of CTITF and CTED,
the Committee supports the co-location of the CTITF
secretariat and CTED an a permanent basis. This would
promote closer collaboration between the two bodies
within the framework of their respective mandates,
save resources, and ensure greater efficiency and
effectiveness in their common work.

The Committee and CTED continue to engage
actively with the other Security Council subsidiary
bodies working on counter-terrorism issues, namely,
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) and its Monitoring Team, and the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and its
Group of Experts. As a result of two recent workshops
for non- or late-reporting States, organized by the
Terrorism Prevention Branch of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, four States were able to
provide updates to the Committee on their
implementation efforts, and two visited States were
better prepared to receive the Committee's on-site
visits. CTED has also continued to invite experts of the
other two bodies, as well as other relevant United
Nations entities and international and regional
organizations, to join its visits to Member States. This
practice continues to be highly valuable with respect to
overall cooperation between the Committee and other
counter-terrorism bodies, whether inside or outside the
United Nations system.

The Committee, through CTED, has also been
intensifying its work with international, regional and
subregional organizations in an effort to broaden and
deepen its constructive dialogue with those
organizations and to enhance cooperation, information-
sharing and exchanges of expertise. In the reporting
period, the Committee has heard briefings by
representatives of several relevant organizations and
United Nations bodies, including the Director-General
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons, the President of the Financial Action Task
Force and the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights.

Terrorism remains one of the major threats to
international peace and security, and the Committee is
a crucial instrument of the international community in
its efforts to address this scourge. The work of the
Committee greatly benefits from the constructive
engagement of its members. Support from and
cooperation with Member States remain a vital part of
the Committee's work, with respect in particular to the
stocktaking exercise, and notably the identification of
the challenges faced by Member States in combating
terrorism and of areas in which the Committee can help
strengthen their capacities. I should therefore like to
thank all Member States for their willingness to engage
in constructive dialogue and for their essential
contributions, which enable the Committee to support
the Security Council in its efforts to respond to the
threat of terrorism.

Finally, I should like to express the Committee's
gratitude to Mr. Mike Smith, Executive Director of
CTED, and his team for their invaluable assistance. I
also greatly appreciate the continuous support provided
by the Secretariat.

