Mr. Goledzinowski (Australia): Thank you, Sir,
for convening this open discussion by the Security
Council on Afghanistan. We welcome the regular
briefings provided by Special Representative Staffan
de Mistura and we are very pleased to welcome the
Foreign Minister, Mr. Rassoul, back to New York.

These discussions highlight the real stake that
we - the international community - has in
Afghanistan's stability and our commitment through
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and the International Security Assistance
Force (ISAF) to help Afghanistan address its many
challenges.

Over the past year, Australia has built up its
civilian engagement in that country. Since the London
Conference in January, we have delivered a 50 per cent
increase in our civilian commitment. We now have
over 50 civilian personnel, including in Uruzgan
Province, where we head the Provisional
Reconstruction Team.

We have also increased our development
assistance to Afghanistan by 50 per cent this year, to
around $106 million and I think that brings us to about
$700 million delivered in development assistance since
2001. In doing this, we are aligning ourselves with the
priorities outlined by the Afghan Government itself
under its national development strategy and we are
channelling at least half of our development assistance
through Afghan Government systems, consistent with
the undertakings we made at the Kabul Conference in
July.

These civilian enhancements are very important,
but they build also on Australia's military contribution
to Afghanistan which, as the Council knows, now
consists of something over 1,500 Australian Defence
Force personnel.

Australia strongly supports the Afghan
Government's goals and planning for the assumption of
full authority for security and also Afghanistan's plans
on the transition process. I will not go through all of
my talking points because I think we are all in
agreement on those points. We note, however, that
transition is not just about security. It is also about
improving governance capacity and the development of
conditions necessary for stability. We recognize that
military efforts alone will not end the conflict and that
a long-term solution requires political effort and
ultimately reconciliation between the Afghan
Government and the insurgents. We therefore welcome
the Afghan-led process on reconciliation and
reintegration, aimed at winning over marginal
supporters of the insurgency through targeted
programmes.

In that respect, Australia also welcomes the
Afghan Government's announcement of the
appointment of almost 70 people, including women, to
the new High Peace Council and its Special Peace and
Reintegration Sub-Committee.

While Australia, like others, is naturally
concerned that the recent parliamentary elections were
affected by violence and fraud, the fact that so many
ordinary Afghans had the courage to cast a vote in the
face of threats and intimidation - and I note the dark
ink on the fingers of both the Foreign Minister and
Mr. De Mistura - clearly shows how much they value
a better future for their country. This was an Afghan-
led and Afghan-managed process; Afghan security
forces provided the security for polling places and did
an effective job; and, as pointed out by Mr. De Mistura
elsewhere, they had the courage to acknowledge where
their limitations were and to accept that not all polling
places would be open. So we have a balance of
optimism and honesty in this process.

In due course it will also be important, however,
that the allegations of misconduct are investigated by
Afghan authorities in accordance with Afghan law. And
the Afghan Government knows that, in the medium to
long term, it needs to make progress in meeting its
commitments to electoral reform to provide for fair and
transparent elections in the future.

All of Afghanistan's neighbours share critical
interests in Afghanistan's security and long-term
stability and can play a constructive role in promoting
Afghanistan's social and economic development. I
therefore listened with great interest to some of the
speakers on that subject late this morning. In this
regard, UNAMA's efforts to encourage regional
countries to cooperate in halting the narcotics trade and
the illegal movement of people as well as to support
Afghanistan in its efforts to achieve security and
stability are very much welcome.

There have been setbacks and there will be more,
but we are also seeing real progress. In 2002, 9 per
cent of Afghans had access to health care; today that
figure is 65 per cent. Afghan women hold almost a
quarter of all seats in Afghanistan's National Assembly,
a stark contrast to conditions under the oppressive
Taliban rule. The number of teachers has almost
doubled since 2002, and access to education has grown
dramatically.

We need to build on this progress. It is important
that the Afghan Government and its international
partners, including Australia, remain committed to and
focused on the tasks at hand: combating the
insurgency, fighting corruption, and improving
governance and the delivery of essential services to the
Afghan people.

