Mr. Ntsoane (South Africa): Allow me to begin
by thanking Ms. Ursula Mueller, Assistant Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs, and Mr. Martin
Griffiths, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Yemen, for their briefings. South Africa wishes to
express its support for Special Envoy Griffiths and for
all his efforts to find a peaceful solution to the situation
in Yemen. We would like to address the following two
issues in our statement: first, the political situation and,
secondly, the humanitarian situation.

First, on the political situation, South Africa
welcomes the signing of the Riyadh agreement between
the Government of Yemen and the Southern Transitional
Council. We also note some of the key points in the
Riyadh agreement, which include activating the role
of all the Yemeni State authorities and institutions,
upholding the full rights of all Yemeni people, and the
participation of the Southern Transitional Council in
the Government delegation to consultations on the final
political solution to the conflict in Yemen. It is hoped
that the agreement will be the first step towards creating
a broader and more comprehensive political settlement
for ending the war in Yemen. We also commend the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia for its role in facilitating the
signing of the agreement.

We further welcome the encouraging signs
of dialogue between the parties, with a view to
de-escalating tensions. We call on all the parties to
urgently engage in talks aimed at alleviating the dire
humanitarian situation in Yemen. It should be possible
for all parties to engage and agree on alleviating the
plight of the people of Yemen caught up in this violent
armed conflict.

We further remind the parties to implement some
key elements of the Stockholm agreements, including
the prisoner swap and resolving outstanding issues
related to the status of local security forces. We hope
that the various ongoing dialogue efforts feed into a
broader United Nations-led process that is inclusive.
Without a concerted effort towards a political solution
to the conflict, the humanitarian disaster in Yemen will
continue to worsen and remain a source of instability
not only for the parties involved in the conflict but for
the entire region.
Secondly, on the humanitarian situation, according
to the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, the humanitarian crisis in Yemen remains
the worst in the world. Nearly four years of conflict
and the resultant severe economic decline have
driven the country to the brink of famine and further
imperilled critical health, energy, water and sanitation
infrastructure. An estimated 80 per cent of the
population - 24 million people - require some form
of humanitarian or protection assistance, including
14.3 million who are in acute need. The severity of
their needs is increasing, with the number of people
in acute need a staggering 27 per cent higher than
last year. Two-thirds of all districts in the country
are already suffering pre-famine, and one-third faces
the convergence of multiple acute vulnerabilities. An
estimated 85,000 Yemeni children under the age of five
may have died of starvation.

Furthermore, about 2 million Yemeni children have
stopped attending school since the start of the war and,
according to UNICEF, many schools are damaged or
not in use or have becomes shelters for the displaced.
The armed conflict in Yemen has killed and injured
thousands onemeni civilians since it began. According
to the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, almost 7,000 civilians have been
killed and more than 10,000 wounded. Thousands more
have been displaced by the fighting and millions suffer
from shortages of food and medical care.

We welcome the decrease in violence, as mentioned
by the Assistant Secretary-General this morning. We
hope that the situation will continue to improve. South
Africa continues to call on the parties to the conflict to
allow the free, regular and unimpeded passage of food
and other humanitarian relief and not to take actions
that would deprive civilians of their rights to food and
health. In that regard, we remind the parties to the
conflict that all necessary measures should be taken to
respect the Geneva Conventions. The unprecedented
humanitarian crisis is a strong indicator of the human
toll of continued military action and conflict, which
necessitates an urgent commitment to a ceasefire and
the pursuit of a negotiated, peaceful and inclusive
solution to the crisis.

In conclusion, we wish to reiterate that the only
sustainable solution to this conflict will be through
a negotiated, Yemeni-led political settlement that is
inclusive and puts the interests and well-being of all the
citizens of Yemen first.
