Mr. Rodrigo (Sri Lanka): At the outset, I wish to thank the presidency of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam for organizing this very important and timely open debate. My delegation also notes with appreciation the comprehensive briefings by Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo and Assistant Secretary-General Mueller. Sri Lanka aligns itself with the statement delivered by the representative of the Republic of Azerbaijan on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries. The briefings by the Under-Secretary-General and the Assistant Secretary-General highlighted the fragile situation in the Middle East and the grave situation in Palestine. This debate is taking place at a crucial time, when the region faces an escalation of tension and pressures. We join the calls by the Secretary-General and the international community for the parties concerned to exercise restraint, and we urge greater diplomacy and dialogue. This year marks the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations. However, a solution to the Middle East conflict continues to elude us. Peace cannot come to the Middle East until the question of Palestine is addressed comprehensively and a just and lasting resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, based on the two-State solution, where both sides can coexist, is reached. We remain deeply concerned about the deterioration of the situation on the ground in the occupied Palestinian territories with the increase in settlkement expansion, related attacks and the demolition of Palestinian homes and structures and the forced displacement of Palestinian civilians. All illegal settlement activities by Israel in the occupied Palestinian territories must cease forthwith and comply with the provisions and responsibilities under international law. Policies and measures aimed at altering the demographic character, identity and legal status of the occupied territories must also stop. We remain concerned about the critical situation in Gaza as a result of the ongoing blockade and closure, which are entering their fourteenth year and have created a dire and deplorable socioeconomic situation for the Palestinian people. With half of its population of 1.8 million under the age of 15 years old, the blockadehas had a grave effect on over 840,000 children. We join the international calls for the lifting of the blockade and for concerted action to improve the living standards of the Palestinian people. My delegation reiterates its support for resolutions 242 (1967), 497 (1981) and 2334 (2016), concerning the question of Palestine, as well as the implementation of all resolutions regarding the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, ending the occupation of the Palestinian territories and the cessation of all illegal settlement activities. Both parties to the conflict must create the necessary environment to facilitate peace. There is also an urgent need for mutual confidence-building measures to support efforts to resume dialogue and substantive negotiations. Sri Lanka continues to reaffirm its unwavering support and solidarity in the legitimate struggle of the Palestinian people for their inalienable rights and national aspirations, including their right to self-determination and for the establishment of an independent and sovereign State. Let us, as the international community, redouble our collective efforts and commitment to helping forge a peaceful, durable settlement of the situation in the Middle East and that of the question of Palestine. In conclusion, I wish to state that the sustained provision of vital humanitarian and socioeconomic assistance to the Palestinian people by the United Nations and the international community is commendable. The update from the briefing on the work of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) was heartening. My delegation was fortunate to have first- hand experience, having visited an UNRWA-funded school and medical centre in Jordan last year, and can testify to the crucial role it plays in providing essential services to the Palestinian people. Sri Lanka reiterates its full support for UNRWA's work and welcomes the extension of its mandate until the end of June 2023.
