Mr. Lacroix: I thank you, Mr. President, for
this opportunity to brief the Security Council on
the situation in Darfur in the context of the mandate
renewal for the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID).

One year on from the adoption of resolution 2429
(2018), I am honoured to bring to the attention ofCouncil
members a joint assessment of the Secretary-General
and the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
on UNAMID, as submitted in their special report
(S/20l9/445) of 30 May 2019, in line with paragraph
7 of the resolution. I will also shed light on the impact
of the political and security developments in the wider
Sudan since 11 April on the projected trajectory of
UNAMID, which also led to the Council's decision to
postpone the submission of the aforementioned report
by one month.

The special report before the Security Council
was finalized against the backdrop of significant
political developments at the national level which led
to the beginning of drastic changes in the 30-year-
old system of governance in the Sudan. Since then,
further developments have taken place, resulting
in an increasingly unpredictable situation. What
started in December 2018 as social unrest triggered
by socioeconomic grievances led to the removal of
President Al-Bashir on 11 April and the subsequent
takeover by the Transitional Military Council, which
is currently negotiating with the umbrella opposition
group of the Declaration of Freedom and Change Forces
on the nature and the structure of the governance system.

While the impact of the post-11 April events on the
prevailing situation in Darfur has been so far moderate,
the uncertainty of the negotiations' outcome may have
repercussions well beyond Khartoum and lead to an
escalation of violence. The 3 June attacks and killings
of civilians, which the Council condemned, exemplify
the risks. Further, the reported perpetration of such
violence by actors such as the Rapid Support Forces,
which are closely linked to Darfur, is worrisome for
its civilian population there. I should add that while
the Mission and its leadership are doing their utmost
to maintain normal interactions with the current
authorities, the prevailing fluid situation in Khartoum
makes it more difficult for the Mission to pursue those
contacts on a regular basis.

In that context, I would bring to the Council's
attention two specific challenges faced by UNAMID
to date that have unmistakably impacted its operations.
These include, first, the looting the of El Geneina super
camp on 14 and 15 May by civilians and members of
the Sudanese security forces, which was reported
to the Security Council in detail; and secondly, the
Transitional Military Council decree 102 of 2019,
issued on 13 May, requesting UNAMID to hand over
all camps to the Rapid Support Forces, which is in
contravention of United Nations rules and procedures.
Given those developments, we have had no choice
but to suspend the handover of UNAMID sites to the
Sudanese authorities until the Transitional Military
Council's decree is rescinded. In the meantime, we are
putting in place plans and measures to prevent future
incidents similar to the El Geneina looting.

Against that backdrop, allow me to briefly introduce
the main findings of the joint African Union-United
Nations assessment, as reflected in the special report.
The conflict trends in Darfur have remained the same
since 2016. The only rebel group active there, the Sudan
Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid, is restricted to pockets
of Jebel Marra, has limited operational capabilities and
is increasingly fragmented by infighting factions. The
other two rebel groups, the Sudan Liberation Army-
Minni Minawi and the Justice and Equality Movement-
Gibril, while having lost their foothold in Darfur,
remain active in the region and have become part and
parcel of the Libyan conflict. While the assessment
concluded that overall intercommunal violence has
visibly declined, the conflict drivers related to access
to land and resources, environmental degradation and
human rights violations need to be further addressed.

The Darfur political process is in a stalemate,
despite a brief breakthrough in December last year
achieved through intensive negotiations led by the
African Union Commissioner for Peace and Security.
In the meantime, the implementation of the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur continued, albeit at
a slow pace, and the Darfur Internal Dialogue and
Consultation process was completed in all Darfur states
at the locality level, formulating specific proposals for
durable solutions for internally displaced persons and
sustaining peace in Darfur.

The current context features a limited capacity
of law enforcement and rule of law institutions; a
prolonged humanitarian crisis, with some 1.5 million
displaced persons living in camps, 90 per cent of whom
cannot afford more than one food basket per day; and
few viable development programmes. This confluence
of factors requires a comprehensive approach beyond
peacekeeping. The Security Council has acknowledged
this shift since the adoption ofits resolution 2363 (2017),
which called for the reconfiguration ofUNAMID along
the two-pronged peacekeeping and peacebuilding
approach. Last year, resolution 2429 (2018) endorsed
the transition concept and supported the State liaison
functions as its implementation vehicle along four
peacebuilding priorities, while further reducing the
footprint of the peacekeeping component.

The special report reconfirms the continuation of
those trends and concludes that peacekeeping is no
longer the most appropriate tool to address the situation
in Darfur, which will require UNAMID to appropriately
adjust its posture, operations and capabilities towards
the final stages of its existence. The report's conclusions
therefore point to the continuation of the UNAMID
drawdown process and its exit in 2020, in line with
one of the proposed options, which were carefully
crafted to shape a gradual and responsible drawdown
reflecting the current realities. In addition, to ensure
that this process corresponds to evolving realities on
the ground, the assessment report proposes a review by
November 2019.

Moving forward, attention should be paid to the
conflict drivers, namely, access to land and resources,
climate change and environmental degradation, and
human rights and protection. In that context, human
rights violations, conflict-related sexual violence and
sexual and gender-based violence remain a significant
challenge, and for that reason the assessment
report proposes specific medium- and long-term
benchmarks. The State liaison functions framework,
which the Council endorsed last year to focus on the
rule of law, resilience and livelihood solutions, and
immediate service delivery for internally displaced
persons, will ensure the continuity of our intervention
beyond UNAMID.

With the final exit in mind, the strategic assessment
revisited UNAMID's priorities to focus on, first, the
revitalization ofthe political process, including through
an updated United Nations-African Union strategy on
the Darfur peace process; secondly, the strengthening of
the Sudan's rule of law institutions; and thirdly, support
to long-term stabilization through durable solutions for
internally displaced persons and a sustainable rights-
based approach for the Darfur population. In that
context, the Mission would enhance the role of the
State liaison functions as an innovative integration
mechanism of the whole-of-system approach.

Finally, we call upon Security Council members
to carefully consider the options for the drawdown
and liquidation of UNAMID, in accordance with the
guidance provided in resolution 2429 (2018) and in the
light of all the aforementioned considerations.

