Ms. Furman (Israel): I would like to thank the
delegation of Egypt for convening this meeting.

For decades, the Security Council has deployed
peacekeeping missions to help countries navigate the
difficult path from conflict to peace. From the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) and
the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
(UNDOF) on our borders, to peacekeeping operations
across Africa and around the world, Israel has first-
hand experience with peacekeeping operations
and fully supports their efforts. Israel has learned,
however, that such support is worthwhile only if
those forces are effective. That will be accomplished
only if the international community insists on the full
implementation of peacekeeping mandates.

As the Council is currently discussing the renewal
of UNIFIL's mandate, which was updated in the wake
of Hizbullah's attack on Israel and the second Lebanon
war of 2006, now is an appropriate time to review the
situation in southern Lebanon. In adopting resolution
1701 (2006), 11 years ago, the Security Council
wisely decided to significantly enhance UNIFIL's
mandate - with the goal of preventing the recurrence
of conflict. That resolution authorizes UNIFIL to take
all necessary actions to ensure that its area of operations
is not utilized for hostile activities. That, however, is
not the case.

Despite UNIFIL's presence on the ground, we have
noticed a disturbing trend. Hizbullah, the internationally
designated terrorist organization, supported and
funded by Iran, has increased its arsenal ofmissiles and
rockets tenfold and stockpiled sophisticated weapons.
It deliberately installs those weapons in villages and
towns, exploiting Lebanese civilians as human shields.
It has even attempted to disguise its military activities
under the banner of the so-called non-governmental
organization Green Without Borders.

The head of that terrorist organization, Hassan
Nasrallah, boasted again just a few weeks ago,

"Ever since 2006, Hizbullah has been growing
stronger [and] much more sophisticated in every
aspect - capabilities, military strategies and in
numbers".

The evidence of those activities shows the recurrence of
Hizbullah's blatant violations of resolution 1701 (2006).

Hizbullah's military build-up threatens the entire
region. While Israel strongly supports UNIFIL, it is
UNIFIL's utmost responsibility to address the unlawful
activities taking place in southern Lebanon and assist
the Lebanese Government in finally extending its
control over its entire territory. The Security Council
must guarantee the complete fulfilment of UNIFIL's
mandate and should remain fully informed on the real
situation on the ground, including obstructions and
challenges to the implementation of the mandate. Those
provisions are in the interests of Israel, Lebanon and
the region as a whole.

We would also like to take this opportunity to
affirm Israel's support for UNDOF, whose forces are
gradually returning to United Nations positions in
the area of separation. Israel appreciates UNDOF's
important contribution to maintaining stability in
the region and will continue to support and assist its
mission.

Israel understands both the importance and the
challenges of peacekeeping. Peacekeeping missions
have experienced more than 100 fatalities almost every
year for the past 14 years, due in part to the absence
of basic needs and supplies. If we expect peacekeeping
missions to execute their mandates properly, we must
provide them with the necessary equipment, training
and medical-response capabilities.

We are proud to work with the United Nations
to improve the Organization's ability to protect
peacekeepers. Israel supports the United Nations
Medical Services Division's reforms on the
standardization of medical care, field hospitals and
lifesaving first-aid training for peacekeeping troops.
Those steps will minimize casualties. Through our
partnerships with the United Nations, we will continue
providing the innovative technologies required to
confront the challenges of peacekeeping.

But we must remember that the technologies
themselves are not enough. Without both operational
and conceptual training, peacekeepers cannot use those
technologies to their fullest potential or maximize
their capabilities. We therefore support United Nations
efforts to improve training, such as the United Nations
Signals Academy in Entebbe, and we look forward
to lending our knowledge and contributing from our
expertise to assist peacekeepers' training.

Let me conclude by reiterating Israel's commitment
to continuing to support peacekeeping operations
worldwide and improving their capabilities on the
ground. However, we must also hold them accountable
to their mandates.

Israel is encouraged by Secretary-General
Guterres' comments during his official visit to Israel
this week, where he stated that he would do everything
in his capacity to make sure that UNIFIL fully meets
its mandate. I call on the Security Council members to
do the same.

