The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
France.

I shall focus on three main comments.

First, of course, I thank the two Presidents and
the two Prosecutors for their excellent and highly
instructive briefings. I would also note that
unquestionable progress has been made since our last
meeting in terms of the cooperation of States with the
two Tribunals and the working methods of the
Tribunals themselves. I will not dwell on those two
issues, which have been broadly addressed by other
delegations, but I feel that the Tribunals are now in a
satisfactory position to cope with the recent increase in
the number of cases to be handled, although we must
continue to find ways to expedite the work in the
interests of justice and reconciliation.

Secondly, it is important for us to remain vigilant
concerning the operation of the Tribunals. For
example, President Meron noted that the date set for
the completion of trials in the first instance might not
be met. We count on the Tribunal to minimize the
delay and hope that the current circumstances will not
jeopardize the final target of completing the work by
late 2010.

We have another concern with respect to the
Tribunals' operation. We believe that witness
protection must remain an ongoing imperative for the
two Tribunals. On that point, I might ask the two
Prosecutors to describe their main concerns in that area
and what recommendations they might wish to make.

Still in the context of vigilance, it goes without
saying, of course, that Member States themselves must
continue to contribute to the fulfillment of the mission
entrusted to the Tribunals, in particular by concluding
agreements with the Tribunals on the execution of
sentences.

Thirdly, we have all noted that we are now
approximately 10 years on. We should send a message
of steadfast resolve, above all because, as I indicated
earlier, remarkable progress has been made. Allow me,
again, to pay tribute to the exceptional contribution of
the two Tribunals to combating impunity and
strengthening international jurisprudence. We must
also remain fully resolute because we can get no
satisfaction from the fact that the principal indictees -
in particular Karadzic, Mladic, Gotovina and
Kabuga - remain at large. Thus, the efforts to secure
their transfer to The Hague and Arusha should be
redoubled. The timetable we have set for the Tribunals
must under no circumstances be impunity be default.
The fugitives and the States concerned must be aware
that the Council will not lessen its demands.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The next speaker inscribed on my list is
Mr. Zoran Loncar, Minister of Public Administration
and Local Self-Government of the Republic of Serbia,
on behalf of Serbia and Montenegro. I invite him to
take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.

