Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We wish to thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo and Ms. Ursula Mueller for their briefings. For the first time in 2020, we are holding a debate on the situation in the Middle East, and unfortunately we again begin the year with the alarming observation that not only has the region not seen positive trends, but we are also witnessing a growing escalation. We view the killing of the commander of the Islamic Revolutionary Guard, Major General Soleimani, and his associates, in Baghdad on 3 January, which was perpetrated on the soil of a sovereign State Member of the United Nations without its knowledge or consent, as an unacceptable act that undermines security and stability in the region. We call upon all parties to exercise restraint, demonstrate good judgment and prioritize diplomatic means. As a result of these actions, the region and the world found themselves on the brink of a conflict whose repercussions could have been unpredictable given that the margin of stability in the Middle East region is reaching its limit. Reducing the artificially created tensions around Iran would facilitate the defusing of tensions in the region. The countries of the Middle East and North Africa must themselves develop parameters to collectively ensure regional security. To that end, it is necessary to begin dialogue. Today's volatile situation in the Middle East is largely the result of States of the region not yet having established effective communication channels. Our shared objective is to help them do so. We have contributed to the fulfilment of this objective by proposing a blueprint for security in the Persian Gulf. We have achieved significant milestones in the Syria track. Thanks to the collective efforts of the participants in the Astana format, we have realized de-escalation and stabilization in much of Syria. On 30 October, the Constitutional Committee began its work. In order to reach a lasting peace in Syria and to ensure the return of millions of Syrian refugees to their homes, we must focus efforts on rebuilding the country's economy without political constraints. On Sunday, in Berlin, an important step forward was taken towards a political settlement in Libya. Furthermore, as part of an additional general de-escalation effort in Libya, meetings with representatives of the main Libyan forces were held in Moscow on 13 January. But these are only preliminary measures; they now must be underpinned by meaningful efforts, primarily within the United Nations and through Special Representative Ghassan Salame. The Security Council has yet to consider the final agreements of the Berlin process, but the main premise for settlement is that it is up to the Libyans to decide the fate of their country.We continue to hope that, thanks to the efforts of the Special Envoy Martin Griffiths, progress will also be made on a Yemeni settlement. In addition, we support the need for a speedy normalization of the situation in Iraq and Lebanon by harnessing mechanisms for broad nationwide dialogue. The establishment of calm in these countries is necessary for the entire region. Notwithstanding our attention to the aforementioned raging conflicts, we cannot overlook the principal long-standing issue in the Middle East, namely, the Palestinian-Israeli settlement. Everyone who is familiar with the history of the region understands that absent a settlement to the Palestinian problem, lasting peace in the region cannot be achieved. However, solutions that are presented as modern and innovative merely stymie our efforts to resolve the Palestinian issue. Attempts to erode the existing international legal framework for a settlement will not help matters. We reject the fait accompli policy - the recognition of Israeli sovereignty over the occupied Syrian Golan Heights, the transfer of an embassy to Jerusalem, declarations of plans to annex the Jordan Valley, settlement activity and the demolition of Palestinian homes - which seeks to undermine the internationally recognized basis for a Middle East settlement. Such actions only undermines efforts to achieve a lasting settlement in the Middle East on the basis of the two-State principle. Given those circumstances, it is more important than ever to mobilize the efforts of the international community to support the legal framework for a Middle East settlement, including the relevant Security Council resolutions, the Madrid principles and the Arab Peace Initiative. We must revitalize the work of the Middle East Quartet of international mediators, namely, the Russian Federation, the United States, the European Union and the United Nations. Moreover, we must overcome the inter-Palestinian divide between the West Bank and the Gaza Strip. In this regard, we welcome the confirmed readiness of all stakeholders to participate in general elections on the basis of previous inter-Palestinian agreements. We trust that these elections will be held on schedule in all the Palestinian territories. Finally, we commend the work of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, which is helping to stabilize the situation, and we call upon all stakeholders to continue to support the Agency.
