Mr. Zehnder (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
thank Nigeria for convening this open debate. I will
limit my remarks to the three following points.

First, Switzerland shares the opinion of the
Secretary-General that security sector reform should
be placed in the broader context of peacebuilding.
This approach considers security sector reform to be a
vast multidimensional task that contributes to conflict
prevention and a lasting transformation to a peaceful
society. That is why it is important not only to better
explore the existing links between security sector
reform and other dimensions such as the rule of law,
human rights and development, but also to reflect on
partnerships in this matter. The global focal point for
police, judiciary and penitentiary activity coordination
for promoting the rule of law after conflicts and other
crises could offer the possibility of strengthening these
links.

We must also strengthen the inclusive nature of
security sector reform efforts pursuant to resolution
2122 (2013) by integrating the gender perspective. The
importance of this point was brought up on numerous
occasions during the open debate in the Security
Council last Friday on women and peace and security
(see S/PV.7160). Women must included fully and on
an equal footing in the security sector reform process
and the different needs of men, women, boys and girls
must be taken into account. Switzerland will explore
this and other possibilities so as to strengthen its
support for efforts aimed at strengthening the security
sector reform on the ground and at the conceptual
level, among others, in discussions held here at United
Nations Headquarters.

Secondly, we believe it essential that the competent
United Nations authorities continue their essential work
to draft common standards and technical directives. The
publication of the Integrated Technical Guideline Notes
for security sector reform was an important step in this
process. Given its global reach, the United Nations has

an advantage on this issue. We therefore encourage it to
pursue action in this important area.

Thirdly, the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2013/480) underscores the importance of close work
collaboration with regional organizations in order, inter
alia, to promote local ownership. We fully support this
approach. The contributions of regional organizations
must be maintained and better linked to United Nations
efforts. In this context, I should like to share some of
Switzerland's experiences in this area since my country
has assumed the chairmanship of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).

The strengthening of governance in the security
sector is among our priorities as Chairman of the OSCE
in 2014. Switzerland plans to focus its efforts on two
levels - the political level and the technical level. At
the political level, we supported the creation of a group
of friends for security sector governance, chaired by
the Slovak Republic. The objective of the group of
friends is to raise awareness among States on the matter
of governance of the security sector.

At the technical level, we have tasked the secretariat
of the OSCE to establish an interdepartmental working
group on governance of the security sector, which
will be tasked with raising awareness within the
OSCE and to intervene as an interlocutor in relevant
questions in this area. The working group will also
draft internal directives on security sector governance.
The Swiss chairmanship also plans to work closely
with the United Nations so as to benefit from its
experience in governance of the security sector. To
that end, a conference will be held in July 2014 with
the participation of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations.

The draft resolution that the Security Council
will adopt today will provide supplementary support
and momentum for security sector reform and thereby
strengthen efforts under way throughout the world. We
hope that the structures concerned, in particular the
security sector unit and specialized teams deployed
in peacekeeping operations and in special political
missions will enjoy the resources they need to respond
to the growing needs in this area. Switzerland remains
fully engaged and will continue to be so, including in
the informal group of friends.

