Mr. Lal (India): I thank you, Sir, for convening this
open debate. In the interests oftime, I will read out only
parts of our statement.

Terror networks and non-State actors by themselves
do not have any capacity or access to advanced and
sensitive technologies and materials. However instances
of the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
(WMDs) are not unknown to us all. The possibility of
such collusion remains a real cause for concern. That
grave threat can only be contained through effective and
sustained international cooperation and monitoring.

As a country with advanced nuclear technologies,
India is fully conscious ofthe responsibilities that come
with their possession. India is a party to all of the 13
universal instruments accepted as benchmarks for a
State's commitment to combat international terrorism.

India participated at the ministerial level in the
2013 and 2016 International Conferences on Nuclear
Security organized by the International Atomic Energy

Agency, which plays a central role in promoting nuclear
security efforts. Our Prime Minister has participated in
all ofthe four Nuclear Security Summits held since 2010.
India also participates actively in the Nuclear Security
Contact Group. India has contributed to the goals and
objectives of the Chemical Weapons Convention and
participates actively in the inter-sessional process on
the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention.

Since 2002, India has introduced at the General
Assembly draft resolution entitled "Measures to prevent
terrorists from acquiring weapons of mass destruction",
which has been adopted by consensus every year, most
recently in 2016 as resolution 71/38, co-sponsored by
more than 70 Member States. The resolution offers a
consensus platform to strengthen international dialogue
and cooperation.

India has harmonized its legislative and regulatory
framework with the control lists, guidelines and best
practices of the Nuclear Suppliers Group, the Missile
Technology Control Regime (MTCR), the Wassenaar
Arrangement and the Australia Group. India's
admission to the MTCR, a year ago, is a recognition
of India's non-proliferation record and its ability to
contribute to global non-proliferation efforts. Last year,
India also joined The Hague Code of Conduct against
Ballistic Missile Proliferation.

We appreciate the efforts of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) and of the United Nations Office for
Disarmament Affairs (UNODA) and collaborate with
the 1540 Committee to organize capacity-building and
awareness-raising events. India is currently planning
to host an international workshop in cooperation with
UNODA and the 1540 Committee in New Delhi.

We have taken note of the requests for assistance
put forward by countries to the 1540 Committee and
remain ready to provide technical assistance and
training to any interested Member State. Details on the
technical expertise offered by India can be accessed
through our latest report submitted to the 1540
Committee this month.

India's Global Centre for Nuclear Energy
Partnership has conducted more than 30 international
and regional programmes, involving more than 300
participants from around 30 countries. In February,
India hosted the meeting of the Implementation and
Assessment Group of the Global Initiative to Combat
Nuclear Terrorism. It was attended by more than 150
representatives from over 40 partner countries, as
well as by the International Atomic Energy Agency,
INTERPOL, the European Union and the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.

An early conclusion to the negotiations on the draft
comprehensive convention on international terrorism
would be helpful. We support universal adherence
to, and the full implementation o,f the International
Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear
Terrorism and the Convention on the Physical Protection
of Nuclear Material, as well as its 2005 amendment.

Unmasked clandestine proliferation networks have
shown that non-State actors can exploit weak links in
global supply chains. All States must therefore assume
their responsibilities to combat the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction by non-State actors.
The measures undertaken by India in that regard are
consistent with the highest international standards and
are highlighted in India's latest national report to the
1540 Committee. We must remain vigilant, strengthen
cooperation, build capacity and encourage the full
assumption of national responsibility by States, in
accordance with their international obligations.

