Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I thank you, Sir,
for convening this briefing. It is well timed, following
our discussion of sanctions last week.

As this is our first opportunity to do so in the
Chamber, I should like to begin by expressing my
condolences and those of the United Kingdom to the
family of Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali and to our Egyptian
colleagues following the death of the former Secretary-
General on Tuesday. He was an influential leader of the
United Nations, presiding over the Organization during
one of its most challenging times.

One such challenge was, of course, Somalia. He
was tireless in his efforts to bring peace and stability to
that war-torn country, both by convening the ceasefire
talks in 1992 and through the subsequent deployments
of the United Nations Operation in Somalia. I am sure
he would have been heartened by the great progress
made in that country over recent years.

If we are to sustain that progress in Somalia this
year, the continued engagement of the Council will be
vital. The elections in the autumn are a crucial litmus
test for the welcome developments over the past four
years. But, as the attempted bombing of the Somali
airliner this month showed, real challenges remain. The
Council needs to be as attentive as ever. The work of the
Somalia and Eritrea Monitoring Group is a vital tool.
The Group is essential to keeping the Council informed
about What is happening on the ground. Let me set out
two ways to achieve that this year.

First, it is a sad inevitability that there will be
some individuals and entities inside and outside the
Government and political institutions who will seek
to spoil the political process to serve their own ends.
This is exactly the sort of information the Monitoring
Group needs to bring to our attention. We then need
to show that, as a Council, we are prepared to act. The
Somali people deserve a transparent and representative
Government. We owe it to them to help make this a
reality.

Secondly, turning to the military side, we must not
underestimate Al-Shabaab. They are down, but they
are far from out, which means that it is more important
than ever for Somalia to develop a credible and effective
security force that can tackle the threat it faces. Again,
the Monitoring Group has a key role to play by ensuring
that the Somali Government is fulfilling the terms of
the arms embargo suspension. This must include the
Government marking, registering and storing weapons
properly, and taking steps to build a truly national
army, rather than a series of regional militia.

It is important to underline the need for a frank
and constructive relationship between the Monitoring
Group and the Government of Somalia. This has
improved in recent years. Inevitably, with elections
approaching, the political temperature will increase. It
is imperative in the months ahead that the relationship
remain constructive, even if both parties do not agree.
The maturity with which the Government of Somalia
approaches its relationship with the Monitoring Group
will be an important indicator of how far the country
has moved in recent years.

Sadly, Eritrea's relationship with the Monitoring
Group is not nearly as constructive. In fact, it remains
unacceptable. The Group has a Chapter VII mandate
from the Council. As we heard so clearly in the open
debate on Monday (S/PV.7621), the powers invested by
the Charter through Chapter VII are not to be taken
lightly, and certainly not to be ignored. Eritrea must
cooperate with the Group and admit it into Eritrea. It
is frankly outrageous that this has not happened for
the past three years. So the ball is in Eritrea's court. It
can admit the Monitoring Group, have a constructive
relationship with the Group and allow the Council to
have an informed debate on the propriety of sanctions,
or it can continue to choose isolation, with all that
entails. I hope that, with a new Monitoring Group now
in place, Eritrea will see cooperation as the correct
response.

In Somalia and Eritrea, we see two contrasting
responses to wholly legitimate requests from the
Council. On the one side, engagement with the
Monitoring Group has supported progress that was
once thought unimaginable. On the other, continued
stalling and inaction have left Eritrea in isolation.
In discussing both countries today in open session, I
hope we can bring renewed focus to that contrast and
encourage Eritrea to change its approach. As we do
so, it is imperative that we give our full support to the
work of the Monitoring Group. They need it in the year
ahead.

