Mr. Ben Lagha (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. David Shearer, Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan, and Ms. Betty Sunday for their briefings. Tunisia welcomes the latest developments in the peace process in South Sudan, beginning with the decision to establish the revitalized Transitional Government. We consider this to be a new and crucial step forward and hope that the international community will continue to provide support to South Sudan so that the transitional phase can be successful and security, stability and peace can be established in South Sudan and in the region. Tunisia values the recent mediation efforts deployed by the two special envoys of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development and South Africa, under the auspices of the African Union and a number of countries of the region, in order to bring closer together the points of view of the Government and the opposition. We congratulate the South Sudanese parties, which have shown flexibility and a sense of responsibility in order to ensure that the interests of the people prevail. We urge them to make further efforts to consolidate trust and dialogue with a view to concluding the establishment of a revitalized, inclusive Government and to ensure greater participation by women. At the same time, we encourage the Government and the non-signatories to the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan to continue the dialogue. We reaffirm the importance of a final settlement of pending issues, including borders between states and transitional security measures, so as to further expedite the implementation of the peace process, pursuant to the provisions of the revitalized agreement. Based on its experience in political transition, Tunisia believes that all transition stages can be successful only through consensus. This is a strategic option aimed at defusing political tensions and violence, establishing democracy and promoting the participation of women and young people, as well as supporting the role of civil society. The latest positive developments must not allow us to forget the remaining challenges and complexities in South Sudan. Tunisia welcomes the fact that the ceasefire agreement is still widely in force. However, we express our concern at the deterioration of the humanitarian and economic situations and at the continued violations of human rights, criminal acts and acts of sexual violence, which are on the rise. These are violations described in last month's report of the Commission on Human Rights in South Sudan. We urge the Government to improve the security situation throughout the country and to address impunity. We also remind all parties to ensure respect for international human rights law, international humanitarian law and the delivery of safe and unimpeded humanitarian assistance to those who need it, as well as ensuring physical and emotional protection for citizens. We emphasize the need for the international community and the United Nations to continue to provide logistical and technical support to the Government in order to expedite the implementation of transitional security measures, particularly with regard to the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process and _ the formation of a unified army, towards the creation of a stable security, political and societal environment for the safe and voluntary return of displaced persons and refugees. Tunisia supports the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), and believes that this is extremely important given the current challenges. My country supports the efforts of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the Mission to advance the ongoing political process under way between the South Sudanese parties. We also support UNMISS in implementing its mandate in accordance with its four strategic priorities. We call as well for the facilitation of its work and freedom of movement so that it can implement the tasks assigned to it, especially in the area of protecting civilians and monitoring and investigating human rights. In conclusion, my country's delegation expresses its hope that the chapter of violence and fighting will be closed forever in South Sudan, leading to a new phase in its modern history based on sustained peace, justice, national reconciliation and prosperity for the people of South Sudan.
