Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
At the outset, I should like to thank Pakistan for its
initiative to hold this open meeting. I should also like
to welcome Foreign Minister Kasuri and to thank him
for presiding over this meeting.

I also thank Secretary-General Kofi Annan and
the other guests for their statements.

The pacific settlement of disputes to promote
international peace and security is one of the principles
of the United Nations Charter. It is also the primary
responsibility of the Security Council. As compared
with Chapter VII, the various provisions of Chapter VI
regarding the pacific settlement of disputes provide the
Security Council with a broader scope of action and
more flexible approaches to choose from as it plays its
role in maintaining international peace and security.

History shows that the use of force does not
resolve disputes and conflicts at their roots. An ever-
increasing number of countries and peoples have come
to see that the use or threat of use of force is incapable
of establishing and sustaining long-term peace and
security. The new security concept, which is primarily
based on dialogue and cooperation, is becoming one of
the most important current trends. The pacific
settlement of disputes gives specific expression to that
new concept of security. Experience in settling
disputes throughout the world demonstrates that most
disputes are solved by such peaceful means as
dialogue, negotiation and consultation.

When the Security Council can play a more
positive role, in accordance with Chapter VI of the
Charter, in ending conflicts, promoting peaceful
reconciliation and restoring regional peace and
security, the international community will undoubtedly
be able to entertain greater hopes for the pacific
settlement of disputes. The success or failure of the
Security Council in the pacific settlement of disputes
hinges on the political will of the parties to a conflict to
seek a peaceful settlement. The Council should
objectively and accurately assess and evaluate a
conflict situation in a timely fashion and offer
proposals for settlement and subsequent procedures. It
should also enhance its coordination with various
United Nations agencies and avail itself of various
ways and means, including authorizing the Secretary-
General to conduct good offices and mediation, to take
full advantage of the Organization's comprehensive
strengths.

For years, the United Nations has dispatched
numerous peacekeeping operations to conflict regions
throughout the world. Such operations have played
positive roles in easing tensions, promoting peaceful
reconciliation and restoring regional peace and
security. As for those hotspots that have defied efforts
to find solutions, the Security Council should enhance
its labours.

It should also be pointed out that States Members
of the United Nations are at all times obligated to
cooperate with the Security Council in its varied efforts
to find peaceful solutions to disputes. Within their own
capacities, they should also use their influence in
various ways to find definitive peaceful solutions to
disputes. The countries involved in disputes have made
numerous diplomatic efforts that are useful
complements to the Security Council's work to
promote peace.

