Mr. Wolff (United States of America): Let me
join others in congratulating you, Sir, and your
delegation on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of January. We very
much look forward to working closely with you. We
also welcome the new members of the Council, with
whom we look forward to a productive, cooperative
relationship over the next two years. I would also like
to thank Qatar for its presidency last month and to
thank those members whose terms on the Council
ended in December.

In addition, I would like to join others, on behalf
of my entire delegation, in welcoming Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon to the Council for the first time
in his new capacity. The Secretary-General will always
be welcome here, and we look forward to working
closely with him and his colleagues in the Secretariat

as the Council attempts to address the most serious
challenges facing the international community in the
twenty-first century.

I should like to compliment the Secretary-General
on his fast start in his first days in office. Among his
many early actions, we particularly note and welcome
the selection of Foreign Minister Asha-Rose Migiro of
Tanzania as Deputy Secretary-General. Tanzania
served effectively on this body over the past two years,
and it was a privilege to work closely with its
Government and its fine delegation during that period.
We look forward to working with Mrs. Migiro and with
all the other members of the Secretary-General's team
in the time ahead.

You have brought us together today,
Mr. President, to talk about the principal mission of the
Security Council under the United Nations Charter: its
responsibility to maintain international peace and
security. Unfortunately, as the work of the Council in
recent years has demonstrated, the range of challenges
facing the international community grows only more
complex and more challenging.

The Council must act not only to manage
conflict, but also to prevent it. The disturbing reality is
that a significant amount of the Council's time is spent
dealing with conflict within States, rather than conflict
between them. Not only does the Council need to act to
protect civilian populations that are the target of their
own Governments, but experience has demonstrated
many times over that in today's world, events
occurring in one country affect the world beyond its
boundaries. Internal conflicts create unstable borders,
increase regional tensions and create significant
economic and social burdens. Our continued and urgent
focus on the situation in Darfur is just one such
example.

The international community has long
recognized, rightly, that a general breakdown of
governance and political order, terrorism, cross-border
activities by armed groups, widespread and systematic
human rights violations and outflows of migrants and
refugees represent a threat to international peace and
security. The Council needs to be ready to identify and
address those kinds of threats before they break out
into open conflict or create unacceptable human or
material costs.

We must also strive, together with the Secretariat,
to ensure that traditional peacekeeping operations
continue to benefit from more sophisticated approaches
to assessment and planning. At a time of growing
demand for peacekeeping, the Council needs to
properly exercise its responsibilities, working with
other bodies of the United Nations, to ensure sufficient
oversight and effective management of peacekeeping
operations.

In that regard, we are very troubled by the recent
reports of sexual exploitation and abuse by personnel
participating in some United Nations missions, and we
urge the Secretariat to take appropriate action to ensure
that those reports are fully investigated and that those
responsible for any such abuses are held accountable.

It is also critical that the Council help countries
emerging from crisis to make the transition to a more
stable, long-term path of economic and political
development.

We welcome the establishment of the
Peacebuilding Commission. However, we will measure
the success of the Commission on the ground - in
Burundi, Sierra Leone and other countries in which it
will engage - in terms of visible results promoting
sustained peace, stability, reconstruction and
development.

Finally, we know with unfortunate certainty that
the Council will continue to be seized with the issues
of combating terrorism and preventing the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction. Only last week, Al-
Qaida issued an explicit threat against the United
Nations and its peacekeepers overseas. We know that
terrorists still work to kill innocent civilians around the
world. This body has a responsibility to meet those
threats with unity of purpose and clear resolve.

We must also continue to work to prevent the
spread of the world's most dangerous weapons and the
means of delivering them. That applies not only to
terrorists that seek them but also to States that pose a
threat to international peace and security.

In facing those challenges and the others on our
agenda, the Council must be prepared to act quickly to
respond to emerging threats or developing crises. But
we must act in a way that improves the situation on the
ground in affected areas. Our efforts must focus on
improving the ability of parties to a conflict to come to
a solution, and not to make that solution more difficult
or simply score political points for one side or the
other.

We will continue to work closely with the other
members of the Council and the Secretary-General to
ensure that the actions of the Council result in tangible
progress on the ground in addressing the most pressing
challenges the world faces today. We welcome ideas
from the Secretary-General about how we might
strengthen the exchange of information between the
Secretariat and the Council. In conducting our business
and generating the mandates that guide the
Secretariat's work on our behalf, we still have work to
do to make this body as effective as it should be. We
need, as one example, to find better ways to anticipate
crises and act to prevent the outbreak of, or relapse
into, conflict.

Again, Mr. Secretary-General, I join others in
welcoming you today. I hope you will be a frequent
participant in the Council.

