Mrs. Tripathi (India): We wish to congratulate
Poland on its assumption of the presidency of the Council
for this month and also wish to thank today's briefers.

It has been two decades since the Security Council
established the children and armed conflict agenda.
The importance of preventing and ending violations
against children in armed conflicts in order to achieve
sustaining peace is now well-recognized. Given that the
scale and severity of the grave violations perpetrated
against children remain on the rise, it is clear that
there are significant challenges to the effective
implementation of this mandate. We would like to make
four points in that connection.

First, grave violations continue to be perpetrated
by a range of actors in complex situations of armed
conflict. Terrorist networks and other non-State actors
continue to exploit children for their own nefarious
ends. In some situations, the nexus between the State
machinery and the non-State actors pose complex
challenges. The impunity of all such actors must be
ended through resolute action by Governments from
whose territory such entities operate. The international
forces operating in areas of armed conflict must also
ensure full compliance with international humanitarian
law and relevant human rights law in all their responses.

Secondly, there are well-established international
norms to protect children in armed conflicts. Today's
challenges arise out of the inability to abide by those
established norms. We must focus on consolidating
emerging positive trends, such as more parties to
armed conflicts engaging with the United Nations
and releasing and reintegrating children recruited by
different parties. Better integration of child protection
provisions in peace processes and greater accountability
for violations against children are crucial in that
regard. Constructive engagement with the national
Government concerned in the formulation and effective
implementation of child protection action plans is
integral to durable peace. Preventing persistent attacks
on schools, especially girls' schools, and ensuring heath
care also call for greater attention.

Thirdly, based on our experience of United Nations
peacekeeping over the decades, we understand the
importance of peace operations having sufficient
resources, commensurate with their mandate, and
the requisite number of child protection advisers on
the ground, for the effective implementation of child
protection programmes.

Fourthly, I stress the importance of a credible,
impartial and transparent implementation of the
mandate given to the United Nations system. Despite
the Council's clear mandate, we are disappointed that
the Secretary-General's report (S/2019/509) includes
situations that are not armed conflicts or threats to the
maintenance of international peace and security. That
attempt to selectively expand the mandate to certain
situations only politicizes and instrumentalizes the
agenda, thereby obfuscating and diverting attention
from the real threats to international peace and security.

We are cognizant of the urgency to act now to protect
today's child victims in order to prevent tomorrow's
armed conflicts. India remains a committed partner of
the United Nations in that endeavour.

