Mr. Foradori (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
I wish to thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International development of France, His Excellency
Mr. Jean-Marc Ayrault, for having convened this
high-level open debate on an issue to which Argentina
attaches a great deal of importance in its capacity as a
country contributing troops and police to peacekeeping
operations, which we have done for almost 60 years now.
We have also been a consistent promoter of full respect
for human rights and for international humanitarian law.

Likewise, we welcome the statements delivered
by his Excellency the President of the Central African
Republic, the Secretary-General and the President of
the International Committee of the Red Cross.

The protection-related tasks of the United Nations
have a central role to play in the context of the new
emphasis placed by the Organization on conflict
prevention and the achievement of sustainable peace
and development, on the basis of the three reviews
that took place focusing on peacekeeping operations,
peacebuilding and the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), on women and peace and security. There
can be no doubt that such protection tasks, particularly
those carried out by peacekeeping operations of the
United Nations, are vital when it comes to sustaining
peace before, during and after conflict.

In this task, for which host States themselves have
the primary responsibility, it is crucial that we have the
participation of all relevant national actors, in particular
civil society, bearing in mind the key role of women
and youth in conflict prevention and in the maintenance
and building of peace.

The protection of civilians in peacekeeping
operations has a different focus than does the
protection of civilians in the framework of international
humanitarian law. This has become a hot topic of
discussion over the past few years, particularly given
its link to the use of armed force.

Against that backdrop and in line with the
recommendation contained in the report (S/2015/446) of
the High-Level Independent Panel on Peace Operations,
which is also acknowledged in this latest report, it is
clear that the protection of civilians in peacekeeping
operations constitutes an integrated effort on the part
of a mission as a whole, requiring primarily close
cooperation between the military, police and civilian
components, in coordination with Governments, local
communities and the humanitarian organizations on
the ground.

My country therefore understands that this issue
cannot be considered from a purely military perspective
but has to be understood from a broader and more
integrated political and humanitarian perspective that is
focused on the fostering of a more secure environment
for protection. In such an environment, the use of
force, which is sometimes necessary in order to avert
tragedies such as those in Srebrenica and in Rwanda,
where peacekeeping operations failed the people they
were supposed to defend, constitutes a measure of last
resort when other, non-military alternatives fail.

Also on the basis of other recommendations
contained in the Panel's report, we underscore the
importance of non-armed strategies for the protection
of civilians in order to move peace processes forward,
as well as the creation of the aforementioned climate
of protection.

We believe that there can be an improvement in
many aspects of the implementation of protection-of-
civilians mandates in peacekeeping operations, among
which we would underscore the specific training oftroop
and police contingents. We acknowledge the efforts of
the Secretariat in devising guidelines and doctrinal
frameworks for such training. We reiterate the need for
broad-based consultations thereon with Member States,
particularly police- and troop-contributing countries,
because they will have to use them.

The effective protection of civilians in peacekeeping
operations also requires unwavering political will,
effective cooperation at the regional level, the better
equipping of contingents, more specific and central
planning tailored to the challenges on the ground,
and the use of new technologies, in keeping with the
principles of the Charter and of peacekeeping. All of
this is ofcourse closely linked to the adequate financing
of such missions.

What happens regarding the protection of civilians
anywhere in the world is not a matter of indifference
for the Argentine delegation, because it affects all of
us directly. That is why Argentina supports, in this
area and in others, the principle of non-indifference
among States. We cannot continue to lead from behind;
we must roll out a solid, collective policy that ensures
accurate diagnoses in order to promote specific
therapeutic actions.

When civilians in desperate situations approach
Blue Helmets, the basic minimum they expect from
them is protection. Our responsibility as Member
States is to create effective tools so that peacekeeping
operations do not fail to live up to that expectation and
serve to create a sustainable protection environment.
We must be equal to the circumstances and know how
to respond to those who require the protection of the
United Nations. We in the United Nations must be smart
enough to prevent, strong enough to implement and
secure enough to lead. This is our collective obligation.

