Mrs. Cordova Soria (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the Chinese presidency
for convening this timely meeting. We are also grateful
to Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-
Ngcuka and Mr. Smai'l Chergui for their briefings.

The signing of the revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan
is a fundamental step towards peace in that country. It
has enabled us to reach an encouraging moment that is
reflected in fewer confrontations and the willingness
of the parties to demonstrate their commitment to the
political process. We want to highlight the presence
of Mr. Riek Machar and President Salva Kiir standing
together in Juba on 31 October at the celebration of
the signing of the Agreement, and we must continue
to build trust between the parties in order to achieve a
lasting peace.

All of our efforts should be geared to the
implementation of the Agreement, which will enable us
to build a sustainable peace. That will not be possible
without the active participation of women. In that
regard, we welcome the initiative of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, UN-Women and the African
Union in making a joint visit to the field and focusing
specifically on the urgency of promoting the presence
and participation of women in the implementation of
the Agreement.

Throughout its almost two years as a non-permanent
member of the Security Council, Bolivia has
emphasized the importance of building an inclusive
peace process in South Sudan, and we see the efforts
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) as also having been directed at that goal. With
specific regard to women's participation, we stress that
the Agreement provides that both in the pre-transition
phase and during the transition itself, the Council
of Ministers and other decision-making bodies and
institutions must guarantee a quota of at least 35 per
cent for women's representation. Progress has been
made in that regard, but the parties will have to work
even harder to attain at least that percentage.

We want to point out that the Secretary-General's
message during the open debate on women and peace
and security in October (see S/PV.8382) focused on
the importance of inclusive peace processes and how
women's active participation is directly linked to a
more sustainable peace. There are various goals that
should be prioritized during this stage and the next
in order to promote the agenda on women and peace
and security, the drive to achieve gender parity in field
operations, the participation of women at all stages
of peace processes - in decision-making roles rather
than merely limited to advisory functions - and the
implementation ofa peace and security approach based
on gender, among other things. This is a good moment
in South Sudan to promote the implementation of those
objectives, along with the importance of creating a
protective environment for women, combating sexual
violence and developing transitional justice to ensure
accountability, among other things, for which the
establishment of a hybrid court under the leadership of
the African Union will be crucial.

While we commend the progress made in the
political arena, South Sudan continues to present major
challenges on the security, humanitarian and economic
fronts. Consolidating the political process is the only
way to address the root causes of the conflict, and the
Agreement is a promising step forward in that regard.
We highlight the commitment that the Government
and opposition have shown in signing it, and we
encourage them to continue along that path. The proper
implementation of the Agreement requires even greater
commitment and stronger political will on the part of
all of the parties involved. The ongoing collaboration
of the Transitional Government and the opposition
with the countries of the region and the United Nations
should therefore be further strengthened at this stage.

Secondly - and we should emphasize this
point - the cooperation of the international community
is essential to mobilizing the political and financial
resources needed to help implement the Agreement.
Thirdly, it is very important to ensure that the Security
Council stays united and works together with the
African Union and IGAD, especially in restoring trust
with the parties. We must therefore maintain a neutral
and constructive position, and for that it is vital that we
coordinate our actions with those of the wider region.
It is also crucial that the parties ensure an optimal
operating environment for the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS) and for humanitarian
workers, in accordance with international law and
international humanitarian law.

In conclusion, we reiterate our gratitude to the
countries of the region for the leadership that they
have demonstrated, which has enabled significant
progress to be made in the political process. We also
thank UNMISS, UN-Women and the African Union for
raising this timely issue and for their commitment to
the political process in South Sudan.

