Mr. Carrilho: With respect to women in
peacekeeping, and particularly in the police, of course
much more can be done. A lot has already been done
at the instrumental level by the Security Council,
through several resolutions, but in terms of improved
outreach, the police-contributing countries should
clearly be encouraged to participate with more females
in peacekeeping. When we are speaking about working
with the most vulnerable groups - victims, women,
children, the elderly, internally displaced persons and
persons with disabilities - the presence of females
in peacekeeping really makes a difference. Maybe
we can also enhance their conditions in terms of their
participation and welfare in peacekeeping; we might
give them shorter terms of duty.

Of course, as my colleagues have said, training is
essential. But if Member States have more females in
their national institutions, it will be easier to have more
of them in peacekeeping, so it is a global effort. And
finally there is the issue ofproviding special training in
language and driving skills, which can be a difficulty
in peacekeeping. Of course, we welcome the adoption
today of resolution 2185 (2014), which is an excellent
initiative that will undoubtedly result in more women
entering peacekeeping.

Concerning the question posed by the representative
of Rwanda on cooperation between the military and the
police - and in the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic in Bangui we have a battalion from Rwanda
that is participating in the Bangui Joint Task Force - we
have several instruments, either the normal type, with
meetings, but operationally speaking, the operations
centre is the same, with both police and military. In
the case ofthe Central African Republic, within Bangui
the United Nations forces, police and military, are
under a single command, a unique experiment that is
going very well and that we hope will produce even
better results than it has so far. As I said, more than
107 people have already been arrested. We also have
international security forces from Operation Sangaris
and the European Union-led peacekeeping force
(EUFOR RCA), as well as the national security forces.
So all of that entails a level of coordination that we are
organizing through that operations centre in order to
achieve coordinated action.

(spoke in French)

Concerning the question from the Permanent
Representative of Luxembourg on coordination in
the protection of women and children, that is a very
important issue for us, the police. Even at the Mission
level we have counsellors for the protection of children.
At the United Nations police level, we now have a focal
point - as we also do where we have responsibility for
judicial cooperation and criminal investigation - in
Bangui, as we hope we will also have in the provinces
in the future. That is because the country's future, of
course, depends on its children, and though it may not
be able to deal with that issue, despite the fact that,
let us be clear, as many Council members have said,
principal responsibility for protection belongs to the
national authorities. And, as my colleague from the
United Nations Mission in Liberia expressed it well, it
is our responsibility in terms of building the capacity
of the national police and gendarmerie to help them
become effective in this area.

(spoke in English)

Concerning the question from the Permanent
Representative of the United States on how we are
implementing the protection of civilians, leadership
is of course essential. At the level of the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and the Office of Rule of
Law and Security Institutions of the United Nations
Police Division, there are clear guidelines; in fact, new
standard operating procedures are being developed to
make our strategy sharper and more precise, including
on the ground, where we must be able to deliver. I
would point to the example I mentioned of a flash-
point matrix, where all areas are properly listed, with
frequent meetings at both the strategic and operational
levels geared to working out how we should tackle
them. In one particular neighbourhood in Bangui we are
specifically conducting operations on the protection of
civilians with a police and military capacity, ensuring
as far as possible that the people can have a normal life.
Of course, for us in Bangui the protection of civilians
is essential.

(spoke in French)

Regarding the question from the Permanent
Representative of Lithuania on how the United Nations
police assist the national judicial authorities, the
resolution that the Council has given us is a useful
instrument for temporary emergency measures, and
we have already arrested more than 100 people, but
it requires cooperating with the judicial authorities,
which we are doing. We are working together with the
national police and gendarmerie as well as prosecutors
and judges, and, at the end of the process, we are also
protecting prisons, so that is the level at which we are
working and assisting the national authorities. Where
training is concerned, we are helping the national
authorities both on the separation of the legislative
and executive powers and on basic training of police
officers and magistrates.

Concerning the question from the representative
of France about how things are going with the Bangui
Joint Task Force, we have the police and military of the
Mission's reserve units working together, as well as the
French forces, with whom we have an excellent working
relationship, as well as the European Union's EUFOR
RCA. As I said, we have an operations centre where
the various representatives are all together, sometimes
with liaison officers and, when necessary during a
crisis, with increased participation of those groups. In
terms of the protection of civilians, roles are identified
and we coordinate in order to avoid duplication of
efforts. In every neighbourhood, especially those that
are particularly threatened, we coordinate means with
deployments. We also have targeted operations, and
checkpoint and combing operations, and, when there
are threats in more specific spots, we coordinate - and
regarding that, I should thank France and Operation
Sangaris for their direct cooperation.

The representative of Jordan asked about how
we coordinate between the police, the military and
local authorities. We are trying - because that is our
mandate and because peacekeeping missions are always
temporary - to ensure that the national institutions
always play the primary role in security, and we support
that. We have the mechanisms to do so.

(spoke in English)

Concerning the question from the representative of
the United Kingdom about manpower, I do not know
a single police commissioner or special representative
who will ever be happy with the resources he has,
whether human or material. Of course we would be
delighted to have more, but we will not complain that
the resources we have prevent us from achieving our
mandates, particularly when the issue is the protection
of civilians. And the level of expectations, particularly
in the Central African Republic, is very high. I can
assure the members of the Council that we will do
our best to successfully implement our mandate. The
measure of success is always the end result, and the
aim for the end result is to have national security forces
and police that are able to provide security to their own
people. That is how we measure it. And there are tools.
My colleague from Liberia spoke about a few. The
Strategic Guidance Framework for International Police
Peacekeeping will help.

I think that I have addressed all the questions, as
well as that posed by the representative of the Republic
of Korea concerning the case management system. We
have an integrated approach, which is what the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA)
offers. MINUSCA enables the protection of human
rights, justice, community violence reduction and civil
affairs, which will naturally aid in the implementation
of the mandate, not only for police authorities, but
also for the political authorities and the transitional
Government to establish a country where everyone can
help and can have a normal life.

(spoke in French)

Finally, to the representative of Chad, the United
Nations police are cooperating with the national and
international police, and with the representatives of
the African Union. Of course, the African police will
always be welcome in terms of coordination.

(spoke in English)

Finally, it is our intention at MINUSCA to
continue to support national institutions operationally
and, as has been stressed by several members of the
Security Council, we are in the process of establishing
a development plan to strengthen the capacities of the
national police and gendarmerie.

