Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I should like to express my delegation's
support for the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) and for the efforts made by
Ambassador Jeremy Greenstock, Chairman of the
Committee, his Vice-Chairmen and the members of the
subcommittees and the experts to implement Security
Council resolution 1373 (2001).
During the two previous stages of its work, the
Committee was able to undertake important efforts in
the implementation of its mandate. This was
demonstrated by direct interaction between Member
States and the Committee, as shown in the numerous
reports submitted to the Committee under paragraph 6
of resolution 1373 (2001). The Committee has
considered a large number of these reports. It has
drafted letters of reply to States containing requests for
supplementary information or legislative texts, in order
that those States' national legislation be harmonized
with the requirements of counter-terrorism efforts. Sir
Jeremy, in his statement a few minutes ago, referred to
the statistics on these reports, which we find
encouraging.

The Committee is now entering the third phase of
its work. This is an important stage, during which the
Committee is to receive replies to the experts'
questions and legislative and legal texts as to how
Governments will confront this dangerous scourge.

Our delegation is convinced that the failure by
some 50 States to submit their reports to the Committee
reflects no ill will or intention not to implement the
resolution. The reasons for that non-submission were
set out earlier by Sir Jeremy, reasons that, we believe,
include the lack of financial, technical and
administrative resources. Not all States are equally able
to devote the necessary human, financial and technical
resources to review current legislation, upgrade it and
harmonize it with the requirements of the resolution.
The international community and the CTC must assist
these States in order to obtain the desired result: a
universal response to resolution 1373 (2001).

It is encouraging that the Committee has
reviewed this issue and decided to create a mechanism
for technical assistance to those Member States that
submitted reports and expressed a need for assistance,
and to those States that so far have been unable to file
reports. In this regard, we look forward to the
appointment of the seventh expert charged with
coordinating potential assistance and to the creation of
a trust fund to finance that assistance.

My delegation supports the future programme of
work to be undertaken by the CTC. We underline the
importance of continuity in the bureau and the
chairmanship of the Committee to ensure follow-up of
the successful outcome achieved so far in the two
previous stages. We also stress the utmost importance
of the role of the United Nations Secretariat in assisting
the Committee in the discharge of its obligations
through the provision of expertise and translation
services, and also because the Secretariat is the
institutional memory of the United Nations.

We believe that the States requiring assistance
should receive it either through their delegations here
in New York or through in their capitals. We also stress
once again the need for equitable geographical
representation in the group of experts.

Our delegation expressed its opinion and position
in detail at the meeting held on 18 January 2002. We
have always stressed the need to combat terrorism in
all its forms and manifestations, regardless of whether
the perpetrators are individuals or States. We believe
that the international community is today more duty-
bound than ever to put an end to the deliberate
confusion and ambiguity regarding the definition of
terrorism, with which we are all struggling.

We must also admit that ignoring the definition of
terrorism has encouraged some to ignore international
law, norms and values - which has led to grave
violations of human rights and of international and
international humanitarian law. This will also open the
way to selective accusations of acts of terrorism in
which some acts will be arbitrarily and
indiscriminately included and others will be placed
outside this understanding, such as State terrorism in
which war crimes and genocide are perpetrated. We
therefore believe that the international community must
be more objective and courageous in describing the
acts of destruction and killing being perpetrated against
the Palestinian people, who are languishing under
occupation and suffering from the most severe form of
terrorism.

Hundreds of millions of Arabs are looking to the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and the
international community to cooperate in developing a
definition of terrorism with a view to eradicating this
vacuum and coming closer to the truth - that is, if we
truly want to combat terrorism. We would also like to
stress once again that Syria is prepared to participate in
any effort to strengthen the work of the CTC, and we
pay tribute to the international community for the effort
it has devoted to the activities of the Committee.

