Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): We gather
here every year in the Security Council to discuss the
ongoing suffering of children in armed conflict. They
are the group most affected by conflicts, and we have
yet to find a radical solution to ending their suffering
and supporting the children who are its victims.

This year's report of the Secretary-General on
children and armed conflict (S/2017/82l) records the
highest percentage of violations against children in
conflict zones since the children and armed conflict
agenda was first articulated. But what has the Security
Council done to protect children in conflict zones? It
has established a legal framework that, if implemented,
will protect children. But why has that framework
not been implemented, and why do children in such
situations continue to suffer?

Egypt commends the new approach taken by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
in ensuring that her report is not merely a tool for
accusing one party or another but a tool for warning
the international community of the gravity of such
Violations and for finding solutions that protect children
in armed conflict.

In this regard, we would like to clarify the
following points.

First, we welcome the positive developments noted
in the report on contacts with parties to armed conflict
and the positive impact of dialogue and contact with
such parties on improving the situation of children
in different conflict zones. We encourage the Special
Representative to intensify this dialogue, especially
with non-State parties, without it influencing their
legal status.

Second, Egypt reiterates that Governments have the
primary responsibility to protect civilians, especially
children in armed conflict.

Third, we believe in the centrality of the commitment
to the children and armed conflict mandate and in the
need to avoid focusing on secondary or contentious
issues outside of this mandate.

Fourth, we also believe that the Security Council
and the General Assembly are the official international
forums for drafting or amending the institutional and
legal framework of the children and armed conflict
agenda. We take note of the regional and international
initiatives aimed at implementing this mandate but do
not consider them to be a basis for action so long as they
remain outside the framework of the Security Council
and the General Assembly, which we would recall,
originally created that mandate.

Fifth, Egypt calls on all States to address equally
the six grave violations identified by the mandate and
to refrain from considering any violation to be more
or less important than another. Such distinctions could
lead to impunity or tolerance for perpetrators and would
therefore render the mandate null and void.

Sixth, we must address the root causes of armed
conflicts, notably underdevelopment and the spread
of poverty.

Seventh, funding for programmes aimed at the
rehabilitation and reintegration of children victims of
recruitment in armed conflict zones remains extremely
low compared to the demand for such programmes.
We call on the international community, especially the
donor community, to increase these allocations.

Eighth, as we mentioned earlier, Egypt is in favour
of the latest developments concerning the drafting style
of the report of the Secretary-General. However, we call
for putting an end to the use of double standards. The
report registers violations in certain areas and list their
perpetrators in its annexes. However, we also note the
ongoing suffering of Palestinian children in Palestinian
territory under the yoke of the Israeli occupation, and
we wonder why they were not listed in the annexes to
the report. We join the Secretary-General in calling
on the Israeli Government to rescind its decision to
put children in administrative detention as this is a
violation of its international obligations, especially
those under the Convention on the Rights of the Child.

Tenth, concerning the drafting of the annual report,
in the light of the deficiencies in the methodology of
the work of the United Nations in Yemen in the area of
information-gathering, we call on the United Nations
to review its follow-up mechanisms relating to the
situation in Yemen, to open offices throughout Yemen
and to rely only on credible sources in preparing reports
on coalition operations.

Eleventh, we call for the addition of a section to
the report focusing on parties to conflict that have
been de-listed from the annexes, so as to identify best
practices and lessons learned and benefit therefrom in
dealing with parties that are still listed in the annexes.

The United Nations organs have put in place the
necessary legal framework to protect children in time
of war and in time of peace. The General Assembly has
acknowledged, in its various resolutions, that children
have the right to education and has called on Member
States to put in place the framework necessary to
provide education to children in emergency situations.

Many international instruments have stipulated
the right of Children to education, including the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights and the Convention on the Rights of
the Child. Although most countries have ratified these
international instruments, in most instances their
content has not been implemented, with attacks carried
out against schools and educational facilities in conflict
zones and in the occupied Palestinian territory. They
are also being used for military purposes, denying
children their right to education,

We believe that the international community,
especially donors, must provide the necessary financial
support to States suffering from armed conflicts,
especially recurrent conflicts, in order to rebuild their
schools and to provide non-conventional educational
services to children, including home-schooling and
distance learning. Special measures must be put in
place for refugee and migrant children from conflict
zones to ensure that they do not drop out of school.

The New York Declaration for Refugees and
Migrants compels countries to provide basic education
to refugee and migrant children. We renew our pledge
to fulfil our obligations.

