Mr. Molde (Denmark): On behalf of the Chairman-in-
Office of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE), I would like to express my satisfaction
that the Security Council has decided to convene this
formal meeting on the situation in Albania. It provides a
timely opportunity to sum up the main points of the
OSCE's involvement in resolving the crisis in Albania
and to consider the parameters for future international
assistance to Albania.

With the acceptable and adequate parliamentary
elections held on 29 June and 6 July this year,
respectively, and with the subsequent formation of a new
Government in Albania, the OSCE has achieved the main
objectives of its mandate in Albania, these being to offer
its good offices in order to reestablish contacts between
political parties in Albania, particularly with regard to the
adoption of an election law acceptable to all parties; and
to pave the way for acceptable elections under difficult
conditions at the end of June, thus reopening the door for
the international community to assist Albania in
rebuilding the country. The results were made possible by
the quick response of the international community,
including the Security Council.
With the new Government in place, a new beginning
for Albania has started. The responsibility for shaping the
future lies primarily in the hands of the Albanians
themselves. The international community must, however,
be ready to continue to assist Albania in this process. An
agreement on the conditions for international assistance
must be found.

The OSCE will be prepared to continue to support
Albania. Based on the OSCE's decisions in March and
the recent experiences with the international efforts in
Albania, and building on the conclusions of the
conference held in Rome on 31 July this year, the OSCE
is prepared to take up this challenge in two ways: first of
all, to continue to provide the coordinating framework for
international efforts in Albania, within which international
organizations can play their full part in their respective
areas; and secondly, to provide, in cooperation with other
international organizations, advice and assistance within
the OSCE's field of experience.

The focus of the OSCE's own efforts is now on
post-election assistance as it relates to the consolidation
and development of democracy and democratic values and
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms. The
OSCE's Office for Democratic Institutions and Human
Rights is to this end actively engaged in the development
of concrete programmes directed towards this essential
post-election assistance.

 

Close coordination with other international
organizations active in this field is paramount in order not
to duplicate efforts and to ensure complementarity. The
OSCE will work closely with the Council of Europe, the
European Union, non-governmental organizations and
others. The experience thus far has been positive.

The working group on Albania chaired by
Mr. Vranitzky will continue to convene in order to secure
a comprehensive international approach towards Albania.
The economic aid package coordinated among the
International Monetary Fund, the European Bank for
Reconstruction and Development, the World Bank and the
Commission of the European Union, as well as bilateral
agreements, must be accompanied by political reform and
progress in the process of national reconciliation.

The presence of the multinational protection force
made international efforts possible. Without this force the
parliamentary elections would not have been conducted as
well as they were. In this connection, the Chairman-in-
Office would like to express his gratitude to the Security
Council for the quick adoption of resolution 1101 (1997),
which mandated the deployment of the multinational
protection force, and for the ensuing prolongation of the
mandate on 19 June.

The multinational protection force left Albania earlier
this week. Continued international presence is contingent on
a satisfactory security situation. The Chairman-in-Office
therefore welcomes the Albanian Government's newly-
adopted plan for the reinstallment of order in Albania and
encourages the Albanian Government to continue the
positive dialogue with the international community on
security questions.

To conclude, the lessons learned from the Albanian
crisis are twofold: first, an immediate and decisive reaction
by the international community can go far in preventing
further destabilization; secondly, a comprehensive approach
to the problem is needed.

The issues of economic recovery, political reform and
security are all interlinked. Therefore, the international
effort must combine these elements. These are lessons for
the international community when dealing with other crises.
The OSCE stands ready to continue to play its part and
encourages all the other international organizations and
countries involved in Albania to do the same.

