Mr. AI-Hussein (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): The
Council of Ministers of the League of Arab States
recently held a meeting to consider the very dangerous
situation in Iraq. That meeting adopted a decision
reflecting the feelings of the Arab people. In that
regard, Jordan affirmed, as part of international efforts,
the need to find a peaceful solution to the Iraqi crisis in
order to avoid war and its negative and devastating
effects, both in Iraq and in the region. However, most
regrettably, it was not possible to find such a solution.

Jordan is continuing to expand its contacts with
fraternal Arab countries and members of the
international community in order to end hostilities as
soon as possible and to avert more physical and human
casualties. We also seek to avoid violation of Iraq's
territorial integrity, natural resources and national
unity.

Jordan is saddened and regrets the humanitarian
situation in Iraq, and would like to express our deep
concern with regard to this subject. We reaffirm our
commitment to provide whatever assistance and
humanitarian aid may be necessary - in particular as
concerns Iraqi refugees.

His Majesty the King of Jordan has made the
following statement to the people of Jordan:

"We are deeply committed to meeting our
humanitarian and fraternal responsibilities vis-a-
vis the Iraqi people to the extent of our
capabilities. We will therefore do our utmost to
end this war as soon as possible and to alleviate
the suffering of our brothers and help them cope
with the effects of the war."

Jordan would like to reiterate its appeal to the
international community and the parties concerned to
live up to their international responsibilities to ease the
plight of the Iraqi people so that they may overcome
their current situation. We call for an end to the war
and for the provision and delivery of the necessary
humanitarian assistance to the Iraqi people. We also
call upon the Security Council to live up to its
responsibilities, including by adopting a new resolution
on the oil for food programme as soon as possible.

The dangerous crises in the Middle East also
make it essential that we succeed in our efforts to end
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

