Mr. Schulz (Germany): In accordance with
paragraph 24 (e) ofresolution 1970 (2011) of26 February
2011, I have the honour to report to the Security
Council on the work of the Committee established
by the same resolution. The report covers the period
from 19 January 2019 to 20 March 2019. I would like
to highlight the following developments relating to the
work of the Committee.

First, with regard to the Panel of Experts, following
the adoption of resolution 2441 (2018), the Secretary-
General, on 2 January, appointed six individuals to
serve on the Panel. On 8 February, the Committee
held informal consultations and heard a briefing by
the Coordinator of the Panel of Experts on the Panel's
work programme under resolution 2441 (2018). The
Panel briefed on its intended areas of focus in its
mandate, mainly the arms embargo, armed groups and
attempts at illicit exports of petroleum and the assets
freeze. The presentation was followed by an interactive
discussion between Committee members and the Panel.
The Committee reiterated its support and appreciation
for the work of the Panel and encouraged the Panel to
intensify efforts to assist the Committee in carrying out
its mandate.
During the reporting period, the Committee
approved one request for exemption from the arms
embargo, under paragraph 9 (c) ofresolution 1970 (2011),
submitted by Malta. The Committee further received,
and did not object to, two notifications for exemption
from the arms embargo, under paragraph 13 (b) of
resolution 2009 (2011), submitted by the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL). The Committee
also received one post-delivery notification from the
Kingdom of the Netherlands regarding a previously
approved exemption request. The consideration of
four additional requests, submitted by Libya under
paragraph 8 of resolution 2174 (2014), is ongoing. The
Committee is also considering a guidance request from
UNSMIL related to the arms embargo.

With regard to the assets freeze, the Committee
provided guidance to Lebanon about the implementation
of the relevant provisions. With respect to the travel
ban, the Committee approved one travel ban exemption
request pursuant to paragraph 16 (a) of resolution 1970
(2011) for Ms. Aisha Al-Qadhafi. The Committee
further approved one travel ban exemption extension
for Mr. Sayyid Mohammed Qadhaf Al-Dam. The
Committee also received preliminary information from
the Panel about a possible case of non-compliance with
the travel ban by a designated individual, who reportedly
travelled from Libya to Egypt through Tunisia.

During the reporting period, the Committee
also responded to a prior communication from Libya
regarding attempts to undertake illicit exports of
petroleum from Libya. With respect to the 1970
sanctions list, the Committee sought additional
identifying information from Libya regarding one
designated individual.

During the reporting period, the Committee
received one implementation report from the Kingdom
ofMorocco, pursuant to paragraph 12 ofresolution 2441
(2018). While recalling that the primary responsibility
for implementing the provisions of the sanctions regime
rests with member States, let me reassure the Council
that the Committee is committed to facilitating the
implementation of such measures.

Finally, I would like to recall my intention to
work proactively towards organizing a Visit of the
Committee to all agreed areas of Libya, as mentioned
in the Committee's 2018 annual report (S/2018/1176).

