Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation thanks the Secretary-General
for his report to the Council on Angola. We also thank
Under-Secretary-General Gambari for his briefing.

We welcome the Minister for Social Assistance of
Angola, Mr. Malungo, and thank him for his statement.

We also extend our appreciation to you, Madam
President, for convening this open meeting.

The situation in Angola has been relatively stable
of late. The Government and society of that country
have pursued their efforts to achieve peace and
stability. At the same time, the Government has also
done a great deal of fruitful work on economic
development, the protection of human rights and
humanitarian assistance. Years of civil war have
inflicted serious wounds on Angola and the country
still has a long way to go in its efforts to achieve peace
and development. According to the Secretary-General's
report, 20 per cent of Angola's total population are now
internally displaced persons. This shocking figure
demonstrates that Angola still needs the international
community's attention and help. We hope that all
countries will respond in a timely and positive manner
to the 2000 United Nations Consolidated Inter-Agency
Appeal for Angola.

As all know, UNITA is primarily responsible for
the situation in Angola. It deserves the international
community's condemnation and sanctions. Through the
tireless efforts of Ambassador Fowler, the Chairman of
the Angola sanctions Committee, the United Nations
sanctions against UNITA have been tightened and
improved. We wish to express our appreciation for that.
We especially appreciate Ambassador Fowler's efforts
in this regard.

We note with satisfaction that, following the
establishment of the Panel of Experts, the Security
Council has created monitoring mechanisms to further
tighten the sanctions against UNITA. My delegation
supports the work of the monitoring mechanism and
hopes that it will adhere to its mandate under the
relevant Security Council resolution and submit its
report to the Council as scheduled. At the same time,
we strongly appeal to all parties to comply with the
Security Council's resolution and to cease providing
UNITA with weapons and any other form of support.

We have emphasized often and in various forums
that sanctions against UNITA are not an end in
themselves, but a means to create the necessary
conditions for a definitive political settlement of the
question of Angola. We hope that the international
community will make concerted efforts, coordinate its
action and, by tightening sanctions, compel UNITA to
lay down its arms, cease all hostilities and embark on
the path to national reconciliation as soon as possible.

The Chinese delegation has always supported the
positive role of the United Nations in the Angolan
peace process. We support the work of Under-
Secretary-General Gambari, the Secretary-General's
Adviser for Special Assignments in Africa. We
appreciate his visit to Angola in May. We have also
learned with satisfaction that the Secretary-General has
appointed a Head of the United Nations Office In
Angola (UNOA) and hope that this appointment will
facilitate the Office's work.

