Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome the participation in today's
meeting of the Secretary-General. We are grateful to
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ibrahim Gambari, for his comprehensive briefing
on the outcome of his important and useful visit to
Myanmar. Russia has consistently supported the good
offices mission of the Secretary-General, and we hope
that the efforts of Mr. Gambari will lead to positive
results and that they will help Myanmar's advancement
along the path of democratic development and
constructive cooperation with the United Nations and
the international community.

We repeatedly voiced serious concern at the
situation in Myanmar during the days of its recent
dramatic flare-up, when, unfortunately, there were
human casualties involved. We call upon the
authorities of the country and on the opposition forces
and those involved in protest actions to show restraint
to prevent the destabilization of the situation and
further manifestations of violence. We drew attention
to the information that the Myanmar leadership has
shown willingness to cooperate with the international
community, including, once again, to receive
Mr. Gambari again, and also to engage in contacts with
Aung San Suu Kyi and other leaders of the opposition.
It is important that that approach be acted upon in
practice.

The Russian delegation took an active part in the
adoption of the resolution of the Human Rights
Council on the situation of human rights in Myanmar.
The main point, we think, is to encourage that country
to consistently implement the proclaimed programme
of democratic reforms. We pin great hopes on members
of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations

(ASEAN) and other States of the region to continue
further efforts to promote a normalization of the
situation in Myanmar.

With regard to the Security Council, its job is to
continue lending political support to the efforts of
Mr. Gambari, who received an appropriate mandate
from the General Assembly.

