Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your leadership
and your work as President of the Security Council
during this particularly busy month. I would also like
to thank the Secretary-General for his briefing this
morning.

When Guatemala took its seat on the Council in
January 2012, the shadows of the emerging conflict in
Syria and the long-standing tensions between Israel and
the Palestinian Authority were somewhat eased by the
hope sown in the region by the so-called Arab Spring.
Although we remain confident that the legitimate
demands of the peoples will ultimately produce results,
for now there is only despair. Every week, the violence
escalates, divisions increase and the humanitarian
disaster grows. Our grief only increases with the
addition of the recent events in the Gaza Strip to the
situation in Syria, the situation in Iraq, its impact on
neighbouring countries, such as Lebanon and Jordan,
and the sudden rise in the activities of jihadists from
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.

Despite what I have just said, Guatemala remains
steadfast in maintaining that diplomacy and dialogue
are the best way to achieve a long-term solution in each
ofthe conflicts that undermines the Middle East. While
the extent of the current intransigence and hostilities
could suggest that it is naive, we continue to believe
that political solutions to the disputes that have divided
the region for years are the only way to achieve lasting

stability and the possibility of returning to the path of
progress.

For example, what is on everyone's mind, for the
central role it plays in the region, is the escalating
violence in Israel and the Gaza Strip. Again the civilian
population is threatened; once again we are faced
with clashing narratives with regard to the origin of
violence. While the recriminations cross and shares of
responsibility are assigned, that which it is found, with
amazement and horror, is the high cost that events have
left, especially for the defenceless Palestinian civilian
population. Not only do we deeply deplore the material
and human losses occurred, but we are convinced that
such actions will bring about a further escalation of the
conflict, together with unpredictable consequences for
both parties.

In that context, we join our voice to the urgent
calls from various sectors for an immediate cessation
of all acts of violence and reiterate that the only lasting
solution must be sought in a negotiation on the basis
of two States, Israel and Palestine, living in peace and
under secure borders.

We are aware of the enormous challenges that
a political solution may entail for the parties, both
nationally and internationally. However, we insist that
it is the only way left. Continuing along the present
course will only deepen divisions, preventing the
desired goal of peace.

