Mr. Shen Bo (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks you, Mr. President, for having convened today's
meeting. We listened carefully to the briefing by Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Arnault, and I
welcome Vice-President Naranjo to today's meeting.

The Colombia peace process is a good example ofan
instance in which the Council's cooperation has made
a difference in addressing hotspot regional issues. This
peace process is ofthe utmost importance for peace and
development in Colombia and of great relevance for the
maintenance of regional stability. China commends
the efforts made by the Colombian Government and
President Santos Calderon in this connection.

The full implementation of the final Peace
Agreement between the Government and the Fuerza
Alternativa Revolucionaria del Comun (FARC) is
at the core of the Colombian peace process. The
implementation of the peace agreement is currently
facing challenges that are due to complex factors. After
half a century of conflict and strife in the country,
healing the wounds left by war will not be an easy task.
The full implementation of the agreement encompasses
political, security, development and social integration
aspects. It is akin to a systematic engineering project
and requires sustained efforts on the part of Colombia
and the international community.

There is a high degree of consensus among different
sectors in Colombia and on the part of the international
community that the peace process there is irreversible.
China is confident that the Government and FARC will
be able to overcome the current difficulties and work
towards the same goal, staying the course in the peace
process so as to create conditions favourable to the full
implementation of the Agreement by the Colombian
Government and FARC and maintain the current
positive momentum.

China also hopes that the Security Council and
the international community will continue to focus on
and support the peace process in Colombia, respect the
leadership of the Colombian Government and people of
the process, and provide constructive assistance to help
along the way.

China commends Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Arnault and the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia for the important
role they have played in this connection. We hope that
the Mission will continue to enhance contacts and
communication with the Government and FARC and
make greater efforts to enhance trust and dispel doubts.

With a view to promoting the implementation of
the agreement by the Government and FARC, China
also hopes that the Government and the Ejercito de
Liberacion Nacional (National Liberation Army) will
overcome the current difficulties and reach agreement
without delay on an extension of the ceasefire.

China is ready, together with other members of
the Council, to continue to play its role in promoting
the peace process in Colombia and to achieve
comprehensive peace and stability in that country at an
early date.

