Miss Durrant (Jamaica): Let me join other
members of the Council in welcoming the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Bernard
Kouchner. We thank him for his frank and informative
briefing on developments in Kosovo. We also thank the
Secretary-General for the comprehensive report on the
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999).

My delegation recognizes that despite the many
challenges still facing the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), there has
been progress made over the past 15 months in many
areas, including in reconstruction, health, education,
local administration, public services, agriculture and in
the rule of law. In addition, the report indicates that the
macroeconomic fundamentals are largely in place.

The concerted effort being made by UNMIK to
build local capacity throughout Kosovo is critical for
long-term sustainability. For example, the joint
UNMIK-United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) preparatory assistance project focuses on the
development of planning and management capabilities
in several municipalities.

We note with satisfaction the progress made in
the civil registration process. Despite the problems
encountered, we sincerely hope that all ethnic
minorities will eventually feel confident enough to
participate in the civil registration. We also note the
related progress made in the preparations for the
forthcoming municipal elections, including the
adoption of regulations and central electoral rules
governing, inter alia, key elements of the election
process and procedures designed to prevent fraud. My
delegation believes that minority participation is, in the
long run, critical to the creation of a multi-ethnic
society, which will not be possible without
reconciliation between the communities.

It is against this background that I must express
my delegation's concern about the security situation,
the situation of detained and missing persons and
violations of human rights. The reports of politically
motivated violence are disturbing because that violence
can have a destabilizing effect and can reverse the
achievements already realized. Kosovo has indeed
come a long way in the past 15 months, and it cannot
risk jeopardizing support and crippling its potential
economic and social development.

We note that minority communities continue to
suffer threats, intimidation and violent attacks. These
incidents could undermine the attempts made to foster
tolerance and coexistence. We therefore commend the
initiatives launched by Mr. Kouchner to improve
conditions for minority communities, and his direct
contacts with the non-Serb minority population. We
join his call for Kosovo leaders to condemn acts of
violence, to commit themselves to respecting the
results of the municipal elections and to promote
tolerance and engagement between the various ethnic
communities.

My delegation takes very seriously the reports of
the discoveries from time to time by the Kosovo Force
(KFOR) of large caches of weapons. While we
commend UNMIK and KFOR for their continued
vigilance, we are not reassured by the wide array of
weaponry that is obviously still in circulation.

My delegation sees the issue of detained and
missing persons as one of the main obstacles to peace-
building, reconciliation and tolerance, as it remains a
major source of tensions in inter-ethnic relations. We
therefore welcome the appointment by the High
Commissioner for Human Rights of Ambassador
Henrik Amneus as her Special Envoy on persons
deprived of liberty. I note that his mandate covers
detainees and missing persons related to the Kosovo
crisis, regardless of ethnicity. We regard this as a
positive development, and we hope it will contribute to
the solution of this problem, which affects all
communities in Kosovo. Families of the missing and
detained persons deserve to know the fate of their
loved ones.

While there has been a dramatic reduction in
crime and a substantial improvement in the rule of
law - particularly in the training ofjudges and police
and in the appointment of an ombudsman - we note
that the court system has suffered from inconsistencies
in approach to the applicable law and from a lack of
understanding of the relevant international human
rights law. We therefore commend those countries that
have provided assistance to the judicial process.

We note, however, that UNMIK police confirm
that trafficking in persons, particularly in women, is a
growing and serious problem in Kosovo. We hope that
the draft regulation on trafficking will be speedily put
into force. The victims of trafficking must not only be
given physical assistance, but also psychological
assistance to deal with their ordeal.

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate Jamaica's
support for UNMIK. We salute the men and women of
UNMIK under the dynamic and tireless leadership of
Mr. Kouchner as they seek to implement the
resolutions of the Security Council, despite the
difficulties and constraints under which they operate.

