As this is the first time that you are presiding over the Security Council this month, Sir, let me wish you all the best. You may rest assured of our full support. We would also like to express our appreciation to Mr. Zhang Jun and his team for the excellent presidency last month amid difficult challenges. I would first like to thank Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif, Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), for his comprehensive briefing. I also welcome His Excellency Mr. Drame, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Mali. This meeting takes place at a very challenging time, amid the global coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. We all must continue to show our solidarity and support to the Government and the people of Mali. Mali, like all of us, is not immune to COVID-19 and therefore needs international support. Having said that, allow me to share three points. First, we welcome several political developments. Those include the conclusion of an inclusive national dialogue, the first round of legislative elections, the deployment to Kidal of the first reconstituted unit of the Malian armed forces, and the high-level workshop on women's participation. Women are an important element. Weconcur with the Secretary-General that it will take time for these achievements to translate into tangible improvements in the situation on the ground. Yet it is crucial to continue supporting the Malian stakeholders in the ongoing implementation of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, which remains the only viable path for long-term peace and stability in Mali. We look forward to further progress, including decentralization, the functioning of local authorities, the development of the northern development zone, and the catch- up phase of the accelerated disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process. Secondly, the security situation is dire, with ongoing and increasing terrorist activities in northern and central Mali. We welcome the commitment to step up efforts to fight terrorism in Mali and the region, including through the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel. We also welcome the consideration by the African Union of the possible deployment of the Multinational Joint Task Force to further degrade terrorist groups in the Sahel. We particularly deplore the continued targeting of MINUSMA and the international forces in Mali. We would like to express our deepest sympathy for the victims and pray for the rapid recovery of those injured. Despite this challenging situation, we commend MINUSMA, which continues to implement its mandate, and we welcome the efforts to move forward with the adaptation plan. Thirdly, the humanitarian situation is worsening, with an increase in the number of people displaced and suffering from food insecurity. We must also consider the risk of the spread of COVID-19 in Mali, which will put a further strain on the humanitarian situation. We are concerned that humanitarian access in northern and central Mali continues to face challenges due to the security situation. We call for safe and unhindered access for humanitarian assistance. In conclusion, all Malian stakeholders, with regional and international support, must continue their efforts to advance the peace process and to improve the security situation at this difficult time. We, as the Security Council, should continue to support the efforts of the Government of Mali. We must ensure that the gains achieved so far are not reversed and will eventually translate into long-term peace, stability and prosperity in Mali.
