Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me, at the outset, to express my
gratitude to Ms. Bintou Keita, Assistant Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, for her arduous
work in discharging her duties and for her excellent
presentation today of the report of the Secretary-
General on the situation in South Sudan (S/2018/609).

The Government of Equatorial Guinea wishes to
once again commend the tireless work and efforts ofthe
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD),
the African Union and the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS) to bring together the opposing

parties for a direct and constructive dialogue on peace
and stability in South Sudan.

Approximately one month ago (see S/PV.8273), the
Chamber bore witness to the existing divergence with
regard to the situation in South Sudan. The differences
consisted in disagreement on how to proceed, but we all
had the same goal in mind - for all parties to respect the
ceasefire and to return to the negotiating table. Today
we can say with a high degree of optimism and certain
satisfaction that the goal has been reached. That is why
all delegations here today are to be congratulated, since
our success is due, in part, to the attention we devoted to
this issue and the pressure the Council brought to bear.

Equatorial Guinea has closely followed the
high-level diplomacy that, over the course of last
month, has facilitated face-to-face meetings between
President Salva Kiir and Mr. Riek Machar, which have
culminated in yesterday's signing of a joint agreement
that establishes a permanent ceasefire and sets forth
new commitments in some of the most contentious
areas. We cannot but commend those actions, which
are undeniably decisive steps in the right direction.
Nevertheless, we remain cautiously optimistic, since it
is not the first time that the parties come to agreements
only to violate them later. We therefore call upon the
sense of responsibility of the opposing leaders and
remind them that this is a historic opportunity for their
people and the international community. We trust that
they will rise to the occasion.

Moreover, Equatorial Guinea is quite concerned
about the contents of the latest reports and briefings on
the situation in South Sudan. We emphatically condemn
the attacks on UNMISS forces on 4 June in the city of
Leer, the recent cowardly attack in Central Equatoria
province that killed a noble Bangladeshi soldier and all
other attacks mentioned by Ms. Keita. We reiterate that
such crimes must not go unpunished.

Additionally, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations presented a fact sheet on violations of
the UNMISS status-of-forces agreement, pursuant
to which, inter alia, the parties committed to taking
all appropriate measures to ensure the security and
freedom of movement of UNMISS, its members,
associated personnel and property and assets.

In the light of that, we must respectfully remind
all parties concerned that, in addition to seeking
peace, they are obligated to alleviate the humanitarian
needs of the population. That obligation can be met
only by facilitating humanitarian operations and
only when the threats and risks that humanitarian
assistance organizations and their brave personnel face
are eliminated.

The Government of Equatorial Guinea calls on the
Government of South Sudan to continue with its usual
collaboration with UNMISS, IGAD and the African
Union so that together they can reach the ultimate
objective of bringing peace and stability to the people
of South Sudan, who truly deserve it. We also welcome
the joint statement by the Secretary-General and the
Chairperson of the African Union on the successful
signing of the agreement we mentioned earlier. We are
certain that the issue will be dealt with on the sidelines
of the African Union Summit that is currently under
way in Nouakchott,

Allow me to emphasize something that we have
often said in our statements on this agenda item. Despite
the most recent developments, it must be reiterated that
now more than ever it is important that the parties to the
conflict refrain from any actions that could aggravate
the situation and take clear steps towards implementing
the agreement signed in December 2017. That involves
an end to the hostilities, the protection of civilians,
access for humanitarian aid and an immediate return
to the negotiating table in order to address in detail the
outstanding issues.

In conclusion, we reiterate the delight of my
Government regarding the positive and encouraging
news coming from that young and sisterly nation,
which we wish and expect to have a great future
despite the fact that they must work hard, learning
from past lessons. We are also grateful to the parties,
in particular the regional leaders President Kenyatta
of Kenya, President Omer Al-Bashir of the Sudan and
President Yoweri Museveni of Uganda, for acting and
for the efforts of former President of Mali Alpha Oumar
Konare and his contribution. They made it possible to
begin this new chapter. We call on them to continue to
work with great dedication in order to safeguard that
small but great victory.

Finally, and no less important, we applaud the
release of the 10 humanitarian workers who were
kidnapped on 25 April in the vicinity of the town of
Yei. They have been transported to Juba safe and sound.

