Mr. Holliday (United States of America): I wish
to thank the Assistant Secretary-General for his report.
We welcome the Secretary-General's progress report
and have read its recommendations with great interest.
The report furthers the dialogue that the Council has
pursued in recent months, and that we hope will continue,
on the regional aspects of West Africa's challenges and
the opportunities for regional cooperation.

A regional approach to conflicts in West Africa
clearly makes sense, given the transnational nature of
the challenges, the mobility of local populations and
the number of United Nations operations, and the
possible efficiencies that could be gained in the
process. While this is part of an ongoing dialogue, I
will comment on several aspects of the report.

First, we welcome the recommendations made by
the Security Council mission on Liberia and would
urge particular attention to the recommendation that the
donor community respond to Liberia's continuing
humanitarian crisis. As Council members know, the
United States, the United Nations and the World Bank
will host the donors' conference for Liberia in New
York on February 5 and 6. Secretary Powell and
Secretary-General Annan will address the conference,
and we urge delegations to recommend that their
Governments participate at the ministerial level and
use the conference to pledge their assistance.

The report rightly identifies the serious work
required in Sierra Leone before the scheduled
drawdown of the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL) at year's end. We expect
UNAMSIL to complete its drawdown as planned and to
meet certain benchmarks. However, we do recognize
that serious needs will persist, and we look forward to
Security Council deliberations on how those needs
could be met post-UNAMSIL.

We also echo the report's call for donor assistance
for the Special Court for Sierra Leone. That body plays
an important role in the national reconciliation process
and requires urgent financial support.

On C6te d'Ivoire, some of the comments in the
report dated 5 December have been overtaken, in our
view, by the more recent report of the Secretary-
General recommending a United Nations peacekeeping
operation. We are in the process of actively discussing
and considering the recommendation and the French
draft resolution authorizing a United Nations
peacekeeping operation. We would echo the
conclusions about the need for President Gbagbo, the
Government and all parties to heed the Linas-
Marcoussis Agreement and take the steps necessary for
the agreement to be implemented.

We enjoyed a discussion yesterday with
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) ambassadors at our Mission. It was very
informative. ECOWAS is making a significant
contribution to bringing about regional stability. While
we understand the constraints that it is under, we
believe that it is important for it to continue to develop
its capabilities and sustainability. I note also, as my
colleagues have, the creation of the African Union
Peace and Security Council and the possible
establishment of a peacekeeping capability there.

On regional and cross-border issues, given the
presence of multiple United Nations operations and
missions in the region facing transnational challenges
and mobile populations, we see the potential for inter-
peacekeeping operation support. We would be
interested, however, in hearing more details about the
Secretariat's views of the exact nature and scope of the
support, and we look forward to discussing more
concrete ideas.

We welcome the intention to submit
recommendations on how to strengthen ECOWAS's
moratorium on small arms and light weapons, and
cooperation between the United Nations and ECOWAS
to overcome the challenges to the moratorium.

Council discussions of small arms earlier in the
week only highlight the need to address the
proliferation of weapons in the region and the threat
they pose to regional security. Again, we are interested
in any concrete ideas on how the United Nations might
support the ECOWAS ban.

Disarmament and demobilization are post-conflict
requirements across the region, and we would welcome
any comments on how disarming and demobilizing
combatants might be incorporated into this regional
approach. We also look forward to the Secretary-
General's report on cross-border problems.

