Mr. Ebner (Austria): I would like to welcome
Mr. Vuk Jeremic', Foreign Minister of Serbia, and
Mr. Skender Hyseni, Foreign Minister of Kosovo, and
thank them for their statements. Let me further thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Lamberto Zannier, for submitting the report before
us (S/2010/ 169) and for the important contribution of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) to peace and stability in Kosovo.
Austria fully supports the continued efforts of UNMIK
to facilitate dialogue between all parties in an evolving
environment.

The period from December to March and up to
today has seen progress, including the recent
successful elections. At the same time, challenges
continue to persist in the areas of economic
development, good governance, the rule of law and the
fight against corruption and organized crime, and with
regard to the situation in northern Kosovo. In order to
ensure sustainability and preserve the gains achieved
thus far, we hope to see a continued focus by the
international community in these areas and to receive
information on progress made. The common strategic
framework developed by UNMIK and the United
Nations Development Programme will also serve this

purpose.

Unfortunately, there are still no signs of
communication, let alone cooperation, between the
Kosovo and Serbian sides. We strongly believe that,
despite the fundamental disagreement regarding the
most basic legal and territorial questions, a pragmatic
approach is possible, feasible and necessary for the
sake of the people of Kosovo, irrespective of their

ethnic background. In this sense, we hope that both
sides will intensify their efforts to find pragmatic
solutions to unresolved issues affecting the lives of the
people living in Kosovo on a daily basis. We hope that
pragmatism will also apply with regard to
arrangements for the participation of Kosovo in
regional and international forums, in consultation with
the respective organizations.

We share the assessment that the situation in the
North continues to be difficult. We believe that we
need a gradual reintegration of the North into the rest
of Kosovo, which will happen only through dialogue
and the acceptance of both the local communities and
Belgrade. We welcome the European Union's (EU)
accelerated efforts to enhance its visibility and
presence in the North, particularly through the
establishment of the EU House in northern Mitrovica.

We welcome the recent conduct of security
checks of freight going through gates 1 and 31 and the
joint patrolling of the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) with Kosovo police, as
well as the intention of EULEX to continue to increase
its presence and activities in order to address more
efficiently the rule of law challenges in northern
Kosovo, including the restoration of full customs
controls. We fully support the efforts of EULEX to
reintegrate Kosovo Serb and Kosovo Albanian judges
and prosecutors into the Mitrovica court and the in-
depth discussions on this matter with the authorities in
Belgrade and Pristina. We believe that the reintegration
of local judges should be among the highest priorities
of the international community for the North. It will
offer the possibility of justice in an area where it has
long been denied.

We are encouraged by the relatively calm security
situation and the decrease in tensions between
communities. In this context, Austria supports the steps
taken by NATO to restructure the Kosovo Force
(KFOR) and successively reduce troop numbers in
Kosovo, which will also enhance local responsibility.
Austria, which is currently the biggest non-NATO
contributor to KFOR, is determined to keep up this
strong commitment to the operation. Moreover, Austria
will continue to provide up to 30 experts for EULEX.

Austria would also like to highlight the valuable
contributions made by the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) mission in Kosovo
in supporting the development of democratic
institutions, in particular its continued assistance to the
Central Election Commission and in the monitoring,
protection and promotion of human rights, including
community rights. As pointed out in the Secretary-
General's report and according to a recent OSCE
assessment, the implementation of return strategies is
still facing a number of challenges and would require
enhanced political commitment to lead to sustainable
results.

Let me finally reiterate the importance of
working towards a common future for all countries of
the Western Balkans in the European Union. This
message was again reconfirmed at a high-level expert
seminar hosted by Austrian Foreign Minister Michael
Spindelegger with the participation of Greek Alternate
Foreign Minister Dimitris Droutsas and Director-
General Michael Leigh of the European Commission in
Vienna on 12 May. Experts from the Western Balkans
and the EU addressed the current political, economic
and social challenges in the Western Balkans in View of
EU integration. These discussions and some of the
proposals made should stimulate the debate on the
future enlargement the EU in view of the Sarajevo
conference to be held on 2 June.

