Mr. Maksimychev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We, too, would of course like to convey
our gratitude to the Secretary-General, the Senior
United Nations Coordinator for Ebola and the Director-
General of the World Health Organization (WHO), as
well as the representative of Medecins Sans Frontieres,
for their very comprehensive statements.

The rapid spread of the Ebola virus on the African
continent and its dire consequences are a cause for
growing concern, which Russia fully shares. The huge
challenge facing Guinea, Liberia, Sierra Leone and a
number of other States in the region cannot continue
without the coordinated response of the international
community. In that respect, we believe that the Council's
discussion of this topic is justified and welcome the
adoption of resolution 2177 (2014).

We highly value the selfless efforts of the three
States most affected by Ebola, their partners, other
Member States and non-governmental organizations
aimed at eradicating the disease and providing medical
and other assistance to the population. In that respect,
we would like to underscore the contributions of Cuba
and Medecins Sans Frontieres, which were among the
very first to join the ranks of those fighting Ebola
directly in West Africa.

Guided by the principles of solidarity, friendship
with African States and humaneness, from the very first
manifestations of the disease, the Russian Federation
has been actively involved in providing financial
and technical assistance to suffering countries, both
multilaterally and on a bilateral basis. To strengthen
the public health-care system in Guinea and Sierra
Leone during the Ebola outbreak, Russia financed the
purchase and supply to those countries through the
WHO of medical modules with a selection of drugs
and medical equipment capable of treating 60,000
individuals. Similar modules will be provided over the
next few days to Albania, which is one of the States at
high risk.

In the Donka hospital in Guinea, where those
infected with Ebola are hospitalized, a Russian
specialized anti-epidemic brigade is deployed. It is
composed of highly trained experts and specialists,
who, in cooperation with the WHO and Medecins
Sans Frontieres, provides assistance to the Ministry of
Health of Guinea in organizing activities to counter the
epidemic and diagnose Ebola in Russian biological and
mobile laboratories. Its operating costs are fully covered
by our country at an estimated cost of $3 million. We
are also preparing to dispatch to Guinea personal
protection equipment for health-care personnel and
volunteers.

Mindful of the broader consequences of the
epidemic, including the threat to food security, Russia,
in cooperation with the World Food Programme,
is preparing to provide food assistance to the three
countries most affected to the tune of over $1 million.
Our support has made a significant contribution to
scientific study of the Ebola virus. Russian experts and
specialists have successfully conducted pre-clinical
vaccination trials against Ebola. WHO certification
is expected, after which, if our assistance is required,
we will be ready to provide it. Furthermore, Russia has
developed high-sensitivity test systems for diagnosing
Ebola that we are ready to supply to all laboratories
operational in the area of the epidemic, under the
auspices of the WHO.

Help for the sick is quite clearly of primary
importance, but that is only part of the problem. At the
same time, the main reason why this deadly disease
continues to spread is the lack of effective prophylactic
and health-awareness systems in the affected countries,
due to a lack of epidemiologists and specialists in
biosafety, as well as managers in the field of sanitary
and epidemiological health. In that respect, the Russian
Federation is prepared to earmark a $2.5 million
contribution to the WHO budget for 2014-2015 to
promote the implementation of international health
protocols, which are the very basis ofthe global response
to threats such as the Ebola epidemic. We will also
provide direct technical assistance to countries in need
for implementing international health protocols to the
tune of $4 million. Furthermore, we plan to contribute
$3.5 million to the WHO to step up the organization's
readiness to respond to emergency situations.

We deem it important to inform the Council that
efforts to combat the epidemic have also come from
Russia's private sector. For example, the Russian
corporation Rusal financed the acquisition of personal
protection equipment for the Ministry of Health of
Guinea.

We welcome the energetic efforts of the Secretary-
General in organizing a coordinated and effective
response by the international community to the Ebola
epidemic. We deem it important that all participants
closely follow the main areas elaborated by the WHO
in its publication "Ebola response road map". The
Russian Federation's assistance is fully in keeping
with the main provisions of that document, and we
stand ready to continue to participate in implementing
the international strategy for combating the disease in
coordination with the Governments of affected States,
United Nations system entities and, of course, other
partners.

