Mr. Lamamra (Algeria) (interpretation from Arabic): Allow me at the outset to extend to you, Sir, the
sincere congratulations of the Algerian delegation on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month. We are convinced that, under your enlightened
guidance, the Council will succeed in promoting peace
and security throughout the world.

The Algerian delegation would also like to thank you
for having convened this public debate on the situation in
a brotherly African country. I wish to praise this
initiative, which allows Member States to express their
opinions on the tragedy of Liberia and on the report of
the Secretary-General, dated 21 May 1996, on recent
events in Liberia, before the report is even considered by

 

the Council. At a time when discussions are taking place on
reform of the Organization's working methods to ensure
transparency and greater efficiency in its deliberations and
consideration of questions relating to international peace
and security, we hope that this praiseworthy initiative,
which deserves to be encouraged, will open the way to
other initiatives for strengthening dynamic and necessary
dialogue, thus guaranteeing the legitimacy and
implementation of the Council's resolutions.

I also wish to thank your predecessor, Ambassador
Somavia, Permanent Representative of Chile, for the efforts
he made and results he obtained during his presidency of
the Council last month.

The international community welcomed the signing of
the Abuja Agreement last August by the Liberian factions.
This Agreement established for the first time a real
opportunity to end the devastating war and to create
conditions for overcoming the political crisis that has led to
a cycle of Violence and fighting, the price for which is
always paid by the people. The establishment by the
Council of State of the collective presidency, composed of
the leaders of all the political factions representing civil
society, coincided with a regional and international
determination to put an end to the conflict, rebuild the
country and normalize the situation within the framework
of a timetable giving priority to demobilizing the factions
and integrating them into civilian life.

If this critical and decisive stage in the peace process
was to succeed, political will and adequate international
political, financial and logistical support were needed to
energize and make irreversible the peace process, which
was initiated through strenuous regional and international
efforts. It was therefore appropriate to work to increase
confidence among the political partners who had been
fighting each other for more than six years. Hence, stress
was laid on the need to support the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) Monitoring Group
(ECOMOG) as an essential and determining element
entrusted with monitoring the implementation of the Abuja
Agreement.

International support was long in coming, but this in
itself cannot explain the deterioration of the situation over
the past few months. The prevarications of the Liberian
factions in respecting and implementing their commitments
compromised the credibility of the peace process and led to
increased tension, bloody confrontations and the recent
eruption of the situation.

The most recent developments came as no surprise.
Indeed, in his latest reports, the Secretary-General warned
of the deterioration of the security situation in the country.
Similarly, at its 63rd session, in Addis Ababa last February,

 

the Organization of African Unity warned of the volatility
of the situation and stressed the need for financial support
for the ECOWAS peace-keeping mission to accomplish
its task of monitoring the implementation of the Abuja
Agreement.

Unfortunately, recent events have demonstrated the
fragility of the peace process and totally undercut all the
great and arduous efforts made by the United Nations in
cooperation with the West African States.

In his latest report, the Secretary-General listed the
necessary conditions for a serious response to the crisis in
Liberia, foremost among which is scrupulous respect by
all Liberian factions of the Abuja Agreement, which
remains a valid framework for settling this crisis.

Recent developments in the situation have shown
that the serious cooperation in good faith by the faction
leaders is a sine qua non for the success of the regional
and international efforts. The Economic Community of
West African States has undertaken diplomatic efforts and
invested sorely needed financial resources to establish
peace and ensure the return to normal life so desired by
the Liberian people. Hence, the Liberian faction leaders
must shoulder their responsibilities and act in a positive
manner.

Moreover, lessons must be drawn from past
experience if the peace process is to be reactivated in
Liberia. Indeed, peace cannot be restored in Liberia unless
the factional combatants are disarmed and reintegrated
into civil life. Similarly, no political agreement will be
viable without a strong regional and international presence
and adequate economic assistance. In this respect, support
for ECOMOG would appear necessary and urgent.

The crisis in Liberia represents a major challenge to
the international community, given the complexity of the
situation in that brotherly African country. Recent events
are hardly encouraging to the regional and international
efforts being made.

The disappointment of the Secretary-General over
the behaviour of the Liberian faction leaders is also
understandable. However, the international community
cannot yield to despair, for it has a responsibility, both
political and moral, and therefore must pursue its efforts
to alleviate the sufferings of the people of Liberia, a
people who are tired of war and wish to live in security
and stability.

The acts of provocation, destruction and plundering
of United Nations property in Liberia must not sap our
collective determination to pursue our tasks there in the

 

service of peace, to ensure a model of outstanding
cooperation in peace-keeping between the United Nations
and a regional organization. This is happening at a time
when the States of West Africa, despite their limited
resources, are setting an outstanding example by agreeing
to make sacrifices for the general interest. In so doing, they
are supported by the OAU, which has placed its political
and moral authority alongside those West African Member
States.

