Ms. Rodriguez Abascal (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
The Cuban delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the delegation of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela speaking on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.

Our country, in seeking to defend its independence
and sovereignty, has suffered the consequences of
heinous terrorist acts - externally organized, financed
and implemented - that took the lives of 3,478 people
and left a further 2,099 disabled. Those acts were in
the main organized, financed and greenlit by the
Government of the United States and committed by
persons operating under its control and protection.

Having been a victim of State-sponsored terrorism
for decades has only strengthened Cuba's position of
principle and unshakeable determination to tackle
terrorism, as reaffirmed once again in the recently
adopted Constitution of the Republic.

Cuba rejects and condemns all acts, methods
and practices of terrorism in all their forms and
manifestations, by whomever, targeting whomever and
wherever they may be committed, irrespective of their
motives, including State terrorism. We reiterate that the
revolutionary Government of Cuba has never permitted,
nor will it ever permit, the use of its national territory for
the carrying out, planning or financing of terrorist acts
against any other State, with no exception whatsoever.

We condemn the harmful and illegal practices,
which contravene the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations, of certain States that finance,
support and promote subversive terrorist acts aimed at
undermining the constitutional order of other States,
imposing regime change and spreading messages of
intolerance and hatred against other peoples, cultures
and political systems. To that end, they resort, inter
alia, to the misuse and abuse ofmodern information and
communication technologies as a tool to misrepresent
and manipulate the facts to further their own ends.

In that context, we reiterate our strong condemnation
of the sabotage of the Venezuelan electricity grid,
which constitutes a terrorist act aimed at harming the
defenceless people of an entire nation, who are being
held hostage in the unconventional war unleashed by
the United States against the legitimate Government
headed by comrade Nicolas Maduro Moros and the
civil-military union of the Bolivarian Chavista people.

The international community cannot allow certain
States, under the pretext of an alleged combat against
terrorism, to commit acts of aggression, undermine
national sovereignty, interfere in the internal affairs
of other States and commit flagrant violations of
human rights or international humanitarian law. We
strongly condemn the use of double standards, political
selectivity and unilateral acts by some who attempt
to justify their behaviour and draw up politically
motivated lists, in violation of international law. All
of this undermines the central authority of the General
Assembly in the fight against terrorism.

Cuba reiterates its commitment to continuing to
cooperate and participate actively in the efforts of the
United Nations to combat the scourge of terrorism,
in keeping with the purposes and principles of the
Charter and international law, as it is firmly convinced
that that it is up to the Organization to lead the fight
against terrorism. In compliance with the commitments
it undertook as a State party to 18 international
conventions in the field of counter-terrorism, Cuba has
put in place various kinds of legislative, institutional
and administrative measures to prevent and punish all
terrorist acts and activities, including those linked to
the financing of terrorism.

Cuba has a specific criminal code for tackling
criminal behaviour of a terrorist nature, Law 93 against
acts of terrorism. In addition, Cuba's penal code has
criminalized money-laundering and the financing of
terrorism. The Cuban State has set up a coordinating
committee for the prevention and tackling of the
financing of terrorism and the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction, as well as asset laundering and
its predicate offences. In addition, the Central Bank
of Cuba has a general directorate for investigations
into financial operations, which acts as a financial
intelligence unit and is charged with receiving,
investigating and analysing reports of suspicious
transactions linked to the financing of terrorism.

Following Cuba's joining the Financial Action
Task Force of Latin America (GAFILAT), in December
2012, the Central Bank of Cuba signed a memorandum
of understanding for cooperation between the States
members of GAFILAT. As part of this mechanism,
Cuba is a signatory to 19 cooperation agreements in
the field of financial intelligence and participates in the
Asset Recovery Network.

Cuba's commitment and institutional capacity
to prevent money laundering and the financing of
terrorism was acknowledged by the Financial Action
Task Force in 2014. Our country has been a part of the
global network of financial intelligence units since
2015, when it joined the Egmont Group of Financial
Intelligence Units.

In concluding, we wish to reiterate that the combat
against terrorism in all its forms and manifestations
requires an integrated approach, through direct action,
prevention and concrete actions to eradicate its root
causes. It is also crucial to provide international
financial assistance and cooperation in order to create
and build capacity for the combat against terrorism.

Cuba has demonstrated, through practical examples,
its ongoing readiness to cooperate with any State at
the bilateral or multilateral level in the prevention and
tackling of international terrorism, on the basis at all
times of mutual respect and of the norms and standards
of international law.

