Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): We thank the Council
for giving Bangladesh the opportunity to make a
statement. We thank the Under-Secretary-General and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict for their respective
briefings and recommendations.

Presidential statement S/PRST/2017/22 of 6 November
urged Bangladesh to continue to provide shelter and
humanitarian assistance to those who continue to
flee violence in Myanmar's Rakhine state until they
can return voluntarily and in conditions of safety and
dignity to their homes in Myanmar, with due regard
for the principle of non-refoulement. We made a pledge
to the Council that we would continue to honour our
commitment to that effect.

To date, Bangladesh continues to receive fresh
arrivals of Rohingya, with a daily average of 100-400
people. According to the latest update of the Inter-Agency
Coordination Group operating on the ground, the total
number of arrivals in Bangladesh has reached 646,000
since 25 August. That number continues to rise. Last
week in the General Assembly, we talked about the
humanitarian situation (see A/72/PV.69). The dire
situation of displaced people is perhaps evident from the
hundreds of thousands of children who had to receive
measles and rubella vaccination and were administered
life-saving nutritional packages. Our authorities are in
a race against time to prevent a cholera outbreak and the
spread of diphtheria, which had long been eliminated
in Bangladesh.

Many of the fresh arrivals are taking place due
to alleged coercion to accept national verification
documents that designate the Rohingya as Bengalis.
We remain concerned over recurrent reports of
arson in Rohingya localities in northern and central
Rakhine state, which belie the claims of normalcy and
stabilization in the area. We urge the United Nations
and its partners to keep a close watch on the volatile
situation in central Rakhine state so as to prevent further
possible outbreaks of violence against the Rohingya,
who are mostly confined to internally displaced person
camps in the area.

As has been mentioned, in pursuance of our
bilateral engagement, on 23 November Bangladesh
and Myanmar signed an arrangement on the return of
displaced persons from Rakhine state. We consider
that document to be a critical first step towards the
possibility of ensuring the voluntary repatriation of all
the forcibly displaced people who entered Bangladesh
in the aftermath of the widespread violence in Rakhine
state in October 2016 and August this year. As per the
arrangement, we are currently working with Myanmar
on setting up a joint working group, with clear and
specific terms of reference, towards initiating the
process of repatriation in the third week of January
2018. The Myanmar authorities have agreed to conclude
the repatriation process within a reasonable time, with
the assurance that the returnees will be settled in
temporary shelters for a brief period of time.

The arrangement also states that the returnees
should be rehabilitated in their original place of abode
or in places close by. It further states that Myanmar will
issue national verification documents to the returnees
upon their return. That should, however, be dealt
with separately from the verification to be conducted
to facilitate their return in the first place. We believe
that the Myanmar authorities have taken due note of
the various concerns raised by different quarters with
regard to all those provisions. We take this opportunity
to reiterate some ofthose concerns from our perspective,
as a party to the bilateral arrangement.

First, the provision for concluding repatriation
within a reasonable time must not be taken as a license
to prolong the process over an indefinite period. Our
concerns in that regard are further reinforced by the
initial plans for return and rehabilitation that were
unveiled last week by the Union Enterprise Mechanism
for Humanitarian Assistance, Resettlement and
Development in Rakhine, and also shared by the State
media in Myanmar. Given the number of facilities being
created for the reception of returnees and their capacity
to manage caseloads per week, it would take decades
to conclude the repatriation of nearly 650,000 people.
That would be an untenable situation, to say the least.

Secondly, not only is the number of houses
reportedly being rebuilt or constructed by the Union
Enterprise in particular townships insignificant
compared to actual needs, but the Union also has a
very small portion of those earmarked for the majority-
Muslim population in those areas. There is scope for
drawing various inferences from those small numbers
about the actual possibility of repatriating the entire
forcibly displaced population. However, in the interest
of good-faith engagement, we wish to refrain from
drawing such conclusions at this point.

There have also been widespread concerns over
the possibility of maintaining the status quo with
temporary shelters, as seen in central Rakhine state.
The Union Enterprise does not appear to have clear
contingency plans to address such concerns, including
on the scope for involving relevant United Nations
agencies and other partners in the rehabilitation and
reintegration process.

Thirdly, the imposition of national verification that
denies the Rohingya of their historically grounded self-
identity has been one ofthe main reasons for the recent
violence and atrocities in Rakhine state. According to
reports, the Myanmar authorities continue to pursue
divisive policies to convince certain sections of the
Muslims to accept national verification documents that
designate them as Bengalis. Such policies run counter
to the recommendation of the Advisory Commission
on Rakhine State, chaired by Mr. Kofi Annan, and
need to be pragmatically reviewed by the Myanmar
authorities in order to put an end to the State policy of
treating the Rohingya as illegal immigrants and, hence,
non-citizens.

Fourthly, the verification to be conducted prior
to return must factor in the total dehumanization,
dispossession and disenfranchisement of the Rohingya,
and all the more so because they fled their homes
without any documents or evidence in support of their
residency in Rakhine state. It would be expected of
the Myanmar authorities to apply clear criteria to and
modalities for verification of the Rohingya and other
communities without undue discrimination. We also
remain concerned over the lack of efforts to address the
hate speech that continues to be propagated by certain
segments of the local population in Rakhine state
and elsewhere.

These concerns make it evident that the signing
of a bilateral arrangement for repatriation does not
guarantee that the displaced persons will be able
to sustainably return within a reasonable time in
conditions of safety and security. As a matter of fact,
the bilateral repatriation arrangement is rather limited
in its scope and is not perhaps expected to address the
root causes of a protracted crisis that has led to what
has been termed a "text book case of ethnic cleansing".
Even if the arrangement were complied with in good
faith, it would not necessarily ensure that the returnees
would find the situation conducive to their stay in the
medium-to-long term. Bangladesh continues to make
efforts to ensure the participation of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) in the repatriation, rehabilitation and
reintegration process.

In response to Myanmar's commitment to implementing
the Kofi Annan Commission's recommendations, we
continue to see the creation ofvarious commissions and
committees, with multiple subcommittees and various
responsibilities. It remains to be seen how the Myanmar
authorities will manage to navigate the labyrinth of those
commissions, committees and their recommendations
to deliver meaningful and tangible results so as to
make a real difference on the ground in Rakhine state.
Humanitarian agencies are yet to be granted unfettered
and sustained access to all the affected populations in
order to independently assess their needs and provide
comprehensive assistance and protection. Despite
the limited access granted to non-international staff
of the World Food Programme, other international
humanitarian actors, including UNHCR, which has
staff based in Maungdaw and Sittwe, face restrictions
in their movements. Once again, such restrictions do
not speak of positive developments on the ground and
cannot be addressed through bilateral efforts.

The Secretary General's Special Representative on
Sexual Violence in Conflict observed in her briefing
that all the women and girls she had interacted with in
Bangladesh demanded justice for the inhumane torture
and brutalities that they had been subjected to. The
United Nations fact-finding mission continues to be
denied access by Myanmar, even after it put forward
a constructive proposal for gathering a group of
interlocutors from concerned entities of the Government
to engage with them in a transparent manner. Against
that backdrop, the High Commissioner for Human
Rights, in his statement in the Human Rights Council
on 5 December, suggested the possibility of setting up
an independent and impartial investigation mechanism
by the General Assembly, complementary to the work
of the fact-finding mission.

In tandem with the presidential statement
S/PRST/2017/22, at its current session the Third
Committee adopted draft resolution A./C.3/72/L.48,
mandating the Secretary-General to appoint a special
envoy on the overall situation in Myanmar. In View of
the broader scope of the special envoy's mandate, we
believe that the Council would be in a position to gain
a first-hand impression and an analytical perspective
concerning realities on the ground in Myanmar,
particularly in Rakhine state, from such a political
mission. It will ne critical to ensure that the Myanmar
authorities engage with the special envoy in good faith.

As we have previously said in the Council,
whatever momentum we see in our bilateral engagement
with Myanmar has been the result of widespread
international outcry and engagement over the latest
violence and atrocities committed in Rakhine state. We
urge the Council to act as the custodian of the bilateral
process, and, if we may add, of the rights and protection
of the Rohingya as the most persecuted people on earth.

The latest arrangement signed between Bangladesh
and Myanmar has made it clear that there is only so much
we can do for the Rohingya, whose voices and concerns
must not be lost in the bilateral process. It is critical
that the Council remain seized with the Rohingya issue
at regular intervals in the months to come. We align
ourselves with the Special Representative in our call to
consider the adoption of a Security Council resolution.
We also reiterate our invitation to the Council to visit
Bangladesh and, if possible, Myanmar, to witness the
grave situation.

I wish to conclude by repeating the powerful words
of the High Commissioner for Human Rights:

"Refusal by international as well as local actors
to even name the Rohingyas as Rohingyas i to
recognizethemasacommunityandrespecttheirright
to self-identification - is yet another humiliation,
and it creates a shameful paradox: they are denied
a name while being targeted for being who they
are. The Rohingya have been physically attacked,
oppressed, deprived of nationality and rights.
How much do people have to endure before their
suffering is acknowledged and their identity and
rights are recognized by their Government and by
the world?"
