Mrs. Cordova Soria (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank Mr. Staffan de Mistura, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Syria, and Mr. Mark Lowcock,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, for
their informative briefings. My delegation reiterate its
appreciation and support for their sensitive work.

We also express our condolences to the Government
and the people of Russia for the loss of lives during
yesterday's incident.

We are meeting once again to discuss the sensitive
issue of the current and future situation of the Syrian
people. However, we stress that, according to the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2018/845), military activity
in the south-west has decreased as a result of the
Government recovering territory held by armed groups
and its consolidation of control in that region. However,
we insist that the parties must respect their obligations
under international law, particularly international
humanitarian law, in order to ensure the protection of
civilians, hospitals and educational institutions, as well
as to protect the workers of the various humanitarian
agencies on the ground.

Part of that protection must go hand in hand with
the prompt and active clearance of explosive remnants
of war throughout Syrian territory, beginning with
densely populated areas. We consider that to be an
urgent and fundamental action, since those remnants
pose a risk to medical and humanitarian personnel and,
most critically, to the civilians who are returning to
their places of origin.

We underscore that in eastern Ghouta during the
latest reporting period, according to the Secretary-
General's most recent report, many displaced persons
were able to return to their homes and resume their
normal lives and even commercial activities. We also
note that, according to the report, the humanitarian
agencies of the United Nations have been able to reach
more than 2.37 million people with food assistance, as
well as with medicines to some hard-to-reach areas. We
stress the need to include in the agenda the release of
people detained and kidnapped by terrorist groups, as
well as the identification of the bodies of victims of
violence in the conflict.

We insist on the need to ensure the protection of the
2.1 million people in need of humanitarian assistance
in the province of Idlib, including the 1.4 million
internally displaced persons. We also reiterate our
deep concern about the possible escalation of violence
in Idlib governorate, where there are approximately
3 million people, including the regrettable presence
of almost 80,000 members of non-State armed groups
and terrorist groups, designated as such by the Council.
Bolivia takes this opportunity to reiterate its categorical
rejection of all acts of terrorism as criminal and
unjustifiable, wherever, whenever and by whomever it
is committed.

We believe that any effort or measure taken within
the framework of resolution 2401 (2018) that provides
for the fight against terrorist groups designated by the
Council, or other armed groups, in order to separate
them from the civilian population must also consider
the protection of civilian lives under international
law. In that connection, we welcome the agreement
reached hours ago at the highest levels between Russia
and Turkey in Sochi. That agreement will enable the
removal of all radical combatants from Idlib, including
the Al-Nusra Front, which has links to Al-Qaida, and
heavy weaponry belonging to all armed groups.

We highlight the initiatives of the Astana guarantors
to reduce violence throughout the Syrian territory. That
is why we must strengthen the Astana agreements, one
of the international initiatives that helped to reduce
violence and facilitate peace and stability in Syria.
In that regard, we call upon the parties to continue
working for the full implementation of resolution
2401 (2018), while highlighting once again that those
local agreements helped not only to reduce violence
and allow the evacuation of people in need, but also
to facilitate the arrival of humanitarian assistance.
We hope that those agreements will continue with the
aim of allowing access for convoys, including cross-
border convoys, emergency medical evacuations and
humanitarian corridors that will enable the voluntary,
unhindered, dignified and safe movement of civilians
to their places of origin.

We reiterate our support for the efforts of
Special Envoy De Mistura and for his talks with the
various stakeholders in the framework of the high-
level diplomacy. We repeat that the Syrian conflict
has no military solution, and we therefore reject any
attempt at break-up or sectarianism in the country.
On the contrary, we wish to state that the solution is
to sustain and implement the Sochi final declaration,
whose main aim is the establishment ofa constitutional
committee. We hope that Mr. De Mistura's efforts in
that regard will bear fruit.

Within the framework of the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations, international law and
respect for the principle of the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Syria, we call for the resolution of this
conflict through an inclusive political process, based
on dialogue and consultations, led by and for the Syrian
people and allowing for a peaceful and sustainable
solution to the situation within the framework of
resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva process.

