Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): Mr. President,
we are grateful to you personally and to your
delegation for having launched this initiative as well as
for having prepared a very useful note in order to
provide guidance for this debate. The concept of
international peace and security, as provided for under
the Charter, has been subject to a broadening
interpretation over the past few years, and today's
debate constitutes a further step in that evolution.

We agree with those who have pointed to the
competence of other bodies in the area under
discussion today, in particular the Commission on
Sustainable Development and, of course, the General
Assembly. At the same time, climate change and
energy issues certainly have the potential of posing a
threat to international peace and security. This debate
is therefore an appropriate way to address a potential
future threat and a good way for the Council to adopt
preventative approaches, wherever possible.

It is quite clear that environmental issues already
have, in many cases, at least strong corollary effects on
situations that threaten peace and security. Several
ongoing conflicts are, among other factors, driven, for
example, by the scarcity of water resources, and all
figures available indicate that this particular issue will
be dramatically exacerbated in the near future, since
access to clean water will significantly decrease
globally over the next few years. Other issues are mass
displacement and migration due to adverse
environmental conditions, food shortages and lack of
cultivable land.

It would appear that all existing and potential
threats from environmental damage come together in
the overarching threat posed by climate change. While
that threat was recognized quite some time ago, the
collective international response has nevertheless not
been very swift and far from adequate. We strongly
welcome the personal commitment of the Secretary-
General to make the issue of climate change one of his
priorities, and we also welcome current efforts to
address the threat in a more effective way beyond the
year 2012 and beyond the terms of the Kyoto Protocol.
There is barely an issue on which multilateral action is
more obviously needed and, indeed, indispensable.

It will, of course, not be this Council that will
make a decision on the collective response to climate
change. However, the Council, as the most prestigious
United Nations body, can make a significant
contribution both by promoting a full understanding of
the nature of the threat and by addressing some of its
elements on an ad hoc basis and as part of situations
that threaten peace and security.

We understand that this meeting will not result in
a formal outcome. That is in keeping with the character
of this debate, the main goal of which is to raise
awareness and to promote a shared understanding of
the risks we are facing. Nevertheless, we hope that this
event will positively affect the manner in which the
Council conducts its work in the future. In making its
decisions and designing a response to situations that
threaten international peace and security, the Council
must take into account all relevant factors.
Environmental factors have clearly been neglected in
the past, even in cases in which they are of quite
obvious relevance. There is much room for
improvement there. In order to do so, the Council
could increasingly resort to the relevant expertise on
those matters which is available in the United Nations
system, but not necessarily in those parts of the
Secretariat that traditionally service the Security
Council. Formal and informal briefings from the
competent United Nations agencies and programmes
could greatly assist the Council in its efforts to make
more informed decisions. The Council could also
consider setting up a special entity providing such
expertise or simply include it in its capacity in the area
of conflict prevention.

In that context, we welcome the commitment and
willingness shown by the Secretary-General this
morning, as well as the proposals made, among others,
by the delegation of Norway this afternoon.
