Mr. Carazo (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation would like to thank the Dominican Republic
for convening this open debate on this important topic,
which affects us all. The Secretary-General has called
climate change a defining issue of our times and a
direct threat to our existence. He has warned us that
"we are in trouble".

It has been established time and again that
climate change is inextricably linked to some of the
most pressing security challenges, given the serious
consequences of the loss of livelihood, food insecurity,
environmental degradation, marginalization and
socioeconomic insecurity, as well as other impacts that
leave entire populations vulnerable, defenceless and
more prone to disease, poverty and/or displacement
to other territories. Such factors often give rise to
disagreements, conflicts and even armed confrontations
between countries seeking access to increasingly
limited resources or control over parts of our planet
that are still unregulated or have only just begun to
be regulated.

Costa Ricais in an area ofhigh climatic vulnerability.
As the Chief Scientist of the World Meteorological
Organization told us this morning, Hurricane Nate, in
2017, was the greatest natural catastrophe in the history
of Costa Rica. We understand the situation and we are
taking the necessary measures to comprehensively
address the attendant challenges.

In 2017, the Comptroller General of the Republic
issued a report that reveals that Costa Rica fell from
forty-eighth in 2015 on the global climate risk index to
ninety-first in 2017, showing a substantial deterioration
in that area. Similarly, between 1998 and 2010, there have
been 320 events linked to climate change. According
to the same report, the annual cost of repairing and
rebuilding infrastructure affected by floods, storms and
droughts increased from $14.83 million to $337 million
in the same period. The current cost of natural disasters
is increasing at the rate of 3 per cent per quarter and is
estimated to reach 2.5 per cent of our gross domestic
product in 2025.

Against that backdrop, my country has raised the
need to create a climate-specific fiscal framework that
will allow for efficient investment and allocation of
resources to mitigate and cope with extreme weather
events, which are no longer infrequent emergencies but
recurring phenomena. Costa Rica has also designed a
series of national policies and plans aimed at following
through with our nationally determined contributions,
as well as the National Decarbonization Plan 2018-
2050, which, taken in conjunction with our national
development plan, our investment plan and other key
sectoral instruments, include 10 axes of decarbonization
that cover the entire economy, from the agricultural
and transportation sectors to the industrial, waste
management and energy sectors.

It is a fact that some regions of the world are more
prone than others to directly experiencing the impact of
climate change. However, it is important to recognize
that its effects are felt globally and at all latitudes of the
planet, and that those persons and regions in situations
of greater vulnerability and marginalization are always
the most affected.

Similarly, it has been shown that the impact of
climate change is borne disproportionately by women,
who are forced to miss out on long-term educational
and economic opportunities. Consequently, Costa
Rica has devised a strategy known as the Coalition
for All, which seeks to address gender issues in major
environmental treaties and agreements, prioritizing
gender equality and human rights issues in multilateral
environmental agreements in a cross-cutting way. The
Coalition for All already enjoys institutional support
from the United Nations through the UN-Women and
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, as well as from a significant number
of countries in different regions.
Costa Rica is convinced that if we do not take
prompt and decisive action, the consequences will
be devastating for everyone. The latest report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, which
we fully endorse, alerts us to the need for far-reaching
action to avoid the serious consequences of climate
change. Such action would also bring clear benefits for
human beings and ecosystems, as well as the possibility
of a more sustainable and equitable society.

We must use scientific evidence to create policies
and take actions that improve our risk assessment,
early warning and above all conflict analysis abilities,
as well as strengthen our resilience at the national
level and at the level of the United Nations, in order
to better understand and address the security risks
related to climate change at all levels. This requires that
those issues be kept on the various agendas of United
Nations bodies and agencies, starting with the Office
of the Secretary-General, and that we strengthen and
harmonize coordination among organizations dealing
with climate change.

Similarly, we must strengthen international
cooperation on those issues, as well as inter-agency
coordination and the mobilization of the relevant
United Nations agencies, particularly with regard to
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change and the Paris Agreement on Climate Change. In
previous debates on this issue, the proposal to appoint
a special representative on climate and security has
emerged, a suggestion that, given the evidence, would
be worth considering.

Only through concerted and institutionalized
action will we, as an international community, be
able to address the consequences of climate change,
which, in turn, will also enable us to tackle any related
security challenges.

