Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL),
Mr. Ghassan Salame', for his briefing. I also thank the
Deputy Permanent Representative of Germany for his
briefing on the work of the Libya Sanctions Committee,
established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011).

I will focus in my statement on two main issues:
first, security developments and, secondly, political
and economic developments.

First, with regard to security developments, the
brotherly Libyan people faced dangerous qualitative
challenges over the past year, which threatened the
security and stability of the country. Foremost among
them were the outbreak of military action in the oil
crescent region and the regrettable military clashes
in Tripoli, which led to many deaths and injuries. In
addition, there were a series of terrorist explosions that
have hit some vital Government institutions, such as
the High National Election Commission, the Libyan
National Oil Corporation and the Foreign Ministry
headquarters, the latter a terrorist act for which Da'esh
claimed responsibility.

Those security challenges were the main result
of the lack of unified security institutions under the
control of the State. It is therefore imperative for the
international community and the Security Council to
make all the necessary efforts to ensure a sustainable
solution to the spread of armed groups and provide
support to the Government of National Accord in order
to implement the joint security plan and ensure the
security of greater Tripoli. The plan aims at security
arrangements that can provide protection for citizens and
private and public property, establishing public order,
with uniformed security and police troops replacing
military formations, and setting up mechanisms that
coordinate with UNSMIL. We hope that all parties in
Tripoli will cooperate with that plan, thereby having a
positive impact on the security and safety of civilians
as well as private and public property.

Despite those challenges, it is of vital importance
to highlight the security progress achieved in Libya,
which Mr. Salame touched upon in his briefing. As he
stated, UNSMIL played a vital role at the beginning of
this year through the visit by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General to the city of Sabha, in
southern Libya, for the first time in seven years, despite
the security challenges there. He listened to the various
concerns and problems facing southern Libyans,
especially security concerns. He also set the stage for
the first model police station in the capital Tripoli, which
will enhance Libyan security institutions and integrate
professional practices into community policing, under
the supervision of the Libyan Government.

Secondly, with regard to economic and political
developments, our meeting today is held after the
international momentum generated at Palermo during
the international meeting on 12 and 13 November 2018,
which culminated in support for the United Nations
action plan and the holding of a comprehensive national
conference, which will be held in the first weeks of
2019 to prepare for the presidential and parliamentary
elections. We hope that the national conference will
respond to the concerns of all Libyans about advancing
the Libyan political process in a way that puts an end to
the current divisive situation, the continued stalemate
and the intensive deployment of armed militias, thereby
leading to a united and stable Libya free from threats to
peace and security for all Libyans.

Therefore,weurgeboththe House ofRepresentatives
and the High Council of State to continue their efforts
and finish the limited amendments to the Libyan
Political Agreement on reforming executive authority.
We also urge the House of Representatives to finalize
the Constitution referendum law in a way that meets all
the concerns of the brotherly Libyan people.

With regard to the economy, we welcome the
plan for economic reform adopted by the Presidency
Council. If implemented, the plan would meet the
aspirations of the Lycian people and limit the control
of armed militias over the parallel economy. We also
welcome the progress made by UNISMIL in auditing
the internationally recognized Central Bank of Libya
and its parallel bank in the east.

In conclusion, we reiterate our support for
Mr. Salame's efforts to facilitate a comprehensive
Libyan political process based on the United Nations
action plan. We call on all Libyan parties to reach
a peaceful political solution by working seriously
and constructively to take the necessary technical,
legislative, political and security steps to hold
transparent, comprehensive and peaceful elections with
a view to building a united, stable Libya. Here would
like to recall Mr. Salame's words when he said that it is
time to turn the page on division and that a united and
just State is the only one capable of fighting to defend
human rights and ensure the security and stability of
the citizens.

