Mrs. Cordova Soria (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, we should
like to express our thanks to Mr. Ibrahim Thiaw for
his briefing. We should also like to thank Ambassador
Jinga, Mr. Ghanem and Mr. Rioux for their statements.

It is clear that the situation in the Sahel region is
alarming and presents great challenges in the security,
governance and development sectors. The region
continues to face a volatile and complex environment
that includes asymmetrical threats carried out by
armed and terrorist groups and transnational crime that
in turn includes trafficking in drugs, human beings
and weapons, among other things. Those three factors
put at risk not only the stability of the countries of
the region, but also represent a threat to the political
peace processes. As such, they represent a threat to the
civilian population.

Bolivia has reiterated strongly the need to analyse,
but above all identify, the structural causes of conflicts.
In the specific case of the Sahel, those causes have
had a profound impact on the current context of the
region. We have mentioned it before, and we shall do
so again: the consequences of interventionism and
regime-change policies following the 2011 conflict in
Libya unleashed the side effect of destabilization in the
Sahel and brought about chaos, the disastrous results of
which continue to be experienced to this day.

Unfortunately, in addition to the precarious
security situation, the Sahel poses other great
challenges. The humanitarian situation is the one
that we should focus on more closely. According to
data provided by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, eight countries in the region
are at risk of a humanitarian crisis, since, out of the
150 million inhabitants, approximately 24 million
require humanitarian assistance and 10 million are at
risk of food insecurity. In addition, there are more than
3 million refugees and forced displaced persons, not to
mention the adverse effects of climate change, which
further exacerbate the crisis in the region.
In turn, Mali and the Lake Chad basin represent
the most significant hotspots in the region. In Mali,
insecurity has intensified and clashes between
armed groups, asymmetric attacks, cross-border
influences and intercommunal violence have led
to massive displacement, further undermining the
humanitarian situation.

Despite the bleak outlook in the Sahel, we would
like to emphasize the significant efforts of regional
and subregional organizations, led by the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union. We welcome
and commend the efforts and the considerable political
will of Burkina Faso, Chad, Mali, Mauritania and the
Niger in terms of cooperation and operationalization
of their forces on the ground. The Joint Force of the
Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) is a great and
exemplary demonstration of the coordinated efforts
of the African Union and the United Nations, as well
as showing a high level of solidarity among member
States and the international community in general.

We consider it essential that the G-5 Sahel Joint
Force, as part of the concept of operations approved
under resolution 2359 (2017) and previously endorsed
by the Peace and Security Council of the African Union,
generate once and for all the necessary capabilities
for the full deployment of the military, police and
civilian components. To that end, it is crucial that the
countries that make up the Joint Force receive technical
cooperation and predictable and sustainable funding.

Moreover, the commitments made at the conference
held by the European Union and other countries in
Brussels on 23 February are an encouraging sign for
the capacity-building of the contingents of the Joint
Force. All initiatives towards achieving stability
and lasting peace in the region are critical. However,
we are concerned that those funding pledges have
not yet been fully fulfilled. We believe economic
cooperation to be a responsibility towards the region
due to the intrinsic links between the current context
and the interventionist policies to which we referred.
It is therefore an unavoidable obligation that must be
fully met.

On the other hand, it is essential to strengthen
the programmes under the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel, which provide an overall
framework aimed at strengthening governance,
resilience and security in the countries ofthe region. The
strengthening of those capacities in the countries of the
region, and above all their ownership and decisiveness
on the ground, is fundamental. The six priority areas of
the United Nations Support Plan for the Sahel, which
focus on cross-border and regional cooperation to
ensure complementarity and coordination among the
countries of the region, should enable the joint efforts
to mobilize expertise and financial resources. In that
context, significant coordination among the United
Nations, the Economic Community of West African
States, the United Nations Office for West Africa and
the Sahel and the African Union is crucial.

Finally, we draw attention to the critical and
necessary humanitarian action in the Sahel. It has saved
many lives, but millions of people still urgently need
it. We call on and strongly encourage the international
community to continue to support, through technical
support and economic and humanitarian cooperation,
all initiatives for the people in the interest of achieving
stability and sustainable peace in the region.

