I thank Ms. Hayden, Officer-in-Charge of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), for her helpful briefing. I also wish to take this opportunity to thank Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, former Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan, and appreciate the work of UNAMA under his leadership. China also looks forward to working closely with Ms. Deborah Lyons, the new Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan, in the coming days. The peace and reconciliation process in Afghanistan is at a critical juncture. We appreciate the efforts of the parties concerned in promoting the political dialogue and peace process, and welcome the contact made between the Government of Afghanistan and the Taliban. We also welcome the efforts of the international community and the countries of the region in promoting intra-Afghan negotiations. China firmly supports a broad and inclusive peace and reconciliation process that is Afghan-led and -owned, and fully respects the will of the Afghan people in deciding their future. We call on all Afghan parties, including the Taliban, to seize this historic opportunity to jointly develop political and security plans that are acceptable to all through intra-Afghan dialogue and negotiations. China will continue to work together with the international community, especially the countries of the region, including Russia and Pakistan, to promote the intra-Afghan dialogue process. We would also like to work with the Afghan people to maintain a united Afghanistan. A divided Afghanistan is in nobody's interest and hurts Afghans the most. We should try our best to avoid that. The security situation in Afghanistan is also at a critical juncture. We appreciate the efforts made to promote security in the country. Nevertheless, the situation remains grim. We urge the international community and theAfghan parties to do whatever they can to strengthen the security capacity of Afghanistan, including supporting the capacity-building of the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces, in order to help Afghanistan effectively respond to threats such as terrorism, transnational crime and drug trafficking. We welcome the agreement signed by the United States and the Taliban. As the parties implement the agreement, China calls on them to ensure that the withdrawal of foreign troops from Afghanistan be conducted in an orderly and responsible manner in order to avoid a security vacuum and, in particular to prevent the rise of terrorist organizations taking advantage of the situation in Afghanistan. Ensuring Afghanistan's economic and social development is also challenging. Without a solid foundation, there can be no lasting and sustained peace and prosperity in Afghanistan. Resolution 2513 (2020) calls for the promotion of regional cooperation and connectivity. Recently, Afghanistan and Pakistan started transporting goods through Gwadar Port in the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor, which represents new progress for Afghanistan's integration into the regional economy. We welcome that new development. All Afghans - men, women and children - are members of the same family who share the same future. We will help the Afghan people to the best of our ability by contributing to peace, stability and development in Afghanistan. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic poses a serious challenge to Afghanistan. All efforts should be made to help its Government combat the pandemic. On 20 March, China shared its experience in preventing and controlling the new pandemic with 19 South-Asian and Eurasian countries, including Afghanistan via video-teleconference. China has donated anti-epidemic materials, including 30,000 test reagents, 250,000 facial masks and some ventilators to Afghanistan. They will arrive in the country on | April. We hope those efforts will help the Afghans to fight the pandemic, and we will continue our efforts in that regard
