Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): Cote
d'Ivoire thanks the American presidency of the Council
for organizing this briefing on the humanitarian
situation in Yemen, and the United Kingdom for taking
the initiative to request this meeting.

We thank Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, for his briefing on the latest developments
in the situation in Yemen.

My delegation is concerned by the resumption of
fighting since 18 September around Al-Hudaydah port
following the failure of the peace talks in Geneva on
8 September. These clashes are likely to aggravate the
humanitarian crisis, which is already considered by the
United Nations as the worst in the world. All the more
worrying is the fact that this takes place in an urban
area with more than 600,000 inhabitants. Furthermore,
the Al-Hudaydah port, which handles 70 per cent of the
country's imports, is the main gateway for approximately
90 per cent of the humanitarian aid on which millions
of Yemenis depend. As a result, the renewed fighting
around that strategic port not only puts the delivery
of humanitarian aid at risk, but has also led to soaring
prices for basic necessities. According to the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, food prices
have risen by 68 per cent since 2015. Furthermore, there
are also fuel shortages.

Concerned by the serious deterioration of the
humanitarian situation, cote d'Ivoire calls on the
warring parties to adhere to an immediate ceasefire to
allow safe and unhindered delivery of humanitarian aid
to populations in distress. We invite them to resume
dialogue with a View to a political settlement of the
current crisis and to respect their obligations under
international humanitarian law.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire urges the parties to the
conflict to take ownership ofthe peace plan proposed by
Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy to the Secretary-
General on Yemen, and encourages him to continue
his mediation and good offices for the resumption of
intra-Yemeni dialogue.

