Mr. Seek (Senegal) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes seeing you, Sir, the Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Home Affairs of Malaysia,
preside in person over the 775 8th meeting of the Security
Council, which your country has judiciously chosen
to dedicate to the crucial issue of non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction. I would therefore like to
thank and congratulate the delegation of Malaysia for
having taken this initiative, which will undoubtedly
allow us to further deepen our reflection on the issue
and intensify our already steadfast mobilization within
the framework of the full review of resolution 1540
(2004), whose eponymous Committee Spain is chairing
so effectively.

I would also like to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his briefing, as well as Mr. Emmanuel
Roux, Special Representative of INTERPOL to the
United Nations, and Mr. Gregory Koblentz of George
Mason University, who in their outstanding briefings
laid out fully the scale of the multidimensional
challenges we face in the area of the non-proliferation
of weapons ofmass destruction, their means of delivery
and associated materials.

The delegation of Senegal aligns itself with the
statement to be delivered shortly by the representative of
the Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries.

This debate could not be more topical, given the
risk of nuclear, biological, chemical proliferation. It is
aggravated by several factors, among them the crisis
in the global nuclear non-proliferation regime, the
resumption of a frenetic arms race with weapons that are
increasingly advanced and miniaturized, vulnerabilities
made possible by scientific and technological progress
and by information and communication technologies,
and industrial and trade globalization.

We must face those challenges in the global context
of terrorism and violent extremism, including in the vast
Sahelo-Saharan region. Those challenges underpinned
the adoption ofresolution 1977 (2011), which tasked the
Committee established pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1540 (2004) with conducting an in-depth
review of the state of progress of the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004). The resulting process has
included a number of cycles of consultation with all
Member States, international, regional and subregional
organizations, as well as civil society.

The Senegalese delegation is of the view that
the culmination of the process took place during the
official public consultations on 20 and 22 June here in
New York, during which the essential recommendation
was to redirect actions and strategies towards a more
comprehensive, coordinated, cohesive and sustainable
approach aimed at ensuring international peace and
security in the face of the multiple challenges posed by
proliferation. Senegal hopes that the concrete, practical
and appropriate measures proposed by Member States
will be effectively put in place with a View to facilitating
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).

An analysis of the data regarding Africa shows
some ongoing progress in the implementation of those
measures, particularly in the drafting of appropriate
legislation and the submission of implementation
reports. Congratulations are in order, but we must
recall that those measures must be improved,
specifically through the implementation of national
legal frameworks on biological weapons.

Such measures are still missing in several African
countries, and they must be accompanied by effective
internal control mechanisms dealing with sensitive
materials and technologies. My delegation notes the
political commitment of the African Union to ensuring
that its member States implement the resolution, which
is best reflected through the Review and Assistance
Conference on the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004), held in Addis Ababa in April. That is why
the delegation of Senegal calls for the strengthening
of the proposed cooperative operations between the
Committee and African States, most of which have
enjoyed its support in the effective implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004).

In that spirit, we will be able to make strides,
particularly in the context of improving assistance
procedures for identifying and analysing needs
for material assistance as well as the maintenance
of continued dialogue on assistance with
interested subregional, regional, international and
non-governmental organizations. Such an effort
obviously requires building the capacity of the
Committee and its experts. In a similar vein, Senegal
supports the establishment of national focal points
and calls upon Member States that have the necessary
resources to contribute to that effort. Senegal believes
that the establishment of a permanent mechanism to
improve the interaction and coordination between those
who provide and those who benefit from assistance is
crucial so as to avoid duplicating work and identify best
practices in that regard. An approach of that nature will
clearly require ongoing commitment and considerable
long-term financing.

Senegal, for its part, is not only a party to nearly all
international counter-terrorism conventions, but in 2006
it also ratified the Pelindaba Treaty for the establishment
of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Africa. Domestically,
Senegal adopted, among other legislation, Act 2006-
36 on 16 October 2006, banning the development,
production, stockpiling and use of chemical weapons
and providing for their destruction, which is entirely
consistent with the Convention on the Prohibition of
the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of
Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction.

Three years later, my country adopted a law
on nuclear security and radiation health. In the
area of biological weapons, draft legislation is
being drawn up that will incorporate the relevant
provisions of the 1972 Convention on the Prohibition
of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of
Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on
Their Destruction, as well as those set out in resolution
1540 (2004). At the institutional level, Senegal has
in place a national commission on nuclear, biological
and chemical weapons, a radiation health and nuclear
safety authority and a nuclear, radiological, biological,
chemical group attached to the national firefighters
brigade. Senegal recently adopted a voluntary five-year
plan of action for the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004).

Relevant international organizations and other
interested sectors within international civil society,
including the industrial and commercial sectors, have an
important role to play in the fight against proliferation.
Their contribution in the form of organizing workshops
on the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and
providing assistance is significant, especially in
African countries. That role was highlighted at the
meeting held in Abidjan in February at the behest of
the Inter-Parliamentary Union. That meeting afforded
an opportunity for legislators from various African
countries to note the challenges relating to the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction in
Africa and to reflect on how to bolster national legal
frameworks set up in order to implement resolution

1540 (2004).

As the briefers this morning amply demonstrated,
the rapid progress in science and technology, the
march of globalization and an ever-changing business
environment are new elements that could be exploited
by ill-intentioned non-State actors in order to acquire
weapons of mass destruction. It is imperative to
tailor existing measures or to adopt new ones so as to
definitively prevent them from doing so.

Therefore, in connection with the fight against the
proliferation of chemical weapons in Syria, Senegal
welcomes the implementation of the Joint Mission
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons and the United Nations for the elimination
of the chemical weapons programme of the Syrian
Arab Republic, charged with identifying people,
entities, groups and Governments guilty of using
chemical weapons, including chlorine gas. The success
of its mandate is a good example of cooperation and
assistance in that field.

The delegation of Senegal hopes that 1540
Committee will continue to focus its efforts on
facilitating the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004), on assistance, cooperation and awareness-
raising regarding the specific obligations stemming
from the resolution.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the firm
commitment and unflagging willingness of Senegal to
spare no effort in contributing in its national, subregional
and international capacities to the global fight against
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.

