Mr. Seek (Senegal) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
today's briefing, and Mr. El-Ghassim Wane, Assistant
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
for the helpful briefing he has just given us on the
establishment of the joint force of the Group of Five for
the Sahel (G-5 Sahel).

We would like to take this opportunity to reiterate
to the delegation of Sahel Member States - represented
here today by the Permanent Representative of Mali
and joined by the representatives of Chad, the Niger,
Mauritania and Burkina Faso - the deep condolences
and sympathies that the delegation of Senegal expressed
following the despicable terrorist attacks on 13 and
14 August in Ouagadougou and Mali. Our condolences
also go to every country whose citizens died in those
cowardly terrorist attacks, including two from Senegal.
We should therefore firmly condemn terrorism and
violent extremism in all their forms and manifestations,
regardless of motive or perpetrator.

The despicable attacks in Ouagadougou and
Douentza are a tragic reminder of the intensity of this
threat and its rampant spread in West Africa and the
Sahel. That is why, as the Security Council did in its
adoption on 21 June of resolution 2359 (2017), Senegal
once again welcomes the establishment of the joint
force for the Sahel, which Assistant Secretary-General
Wane has just described to us with details not only ofits
launch but also of its expected coordination with other
missions such as the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali and Operation
Barkhane. Senegal therefore calls the international
community to put its solidarity into action by giving
broad, rapid support to the G-5 Sahel in terms of
financial, logistical and human resources so that it can
be operationalized as soon as possible. It is urgent that
we ensure that together with the Multinational Joint
Task Force of the Lake Chad basin and the support
of organizations such as the Economic Community
of West African States, the United Nations Office for
West Africa and the Sahel and the African Union, and
of bilateral and multilateral partners, the G-5 Sahel can
become operational in mobilizing against terrorism
in general, in full respect for the spirit and indeed the
letter of the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the

Sahel - because it goes without saying that military
efforts alone cannot eradicate these terrorists and
must therefore be part of a comprehensive approach
whose focus includes combating organized crime and
trafficking in arms, drugs and human beings, but also
encompasses improving education and strengthening
resilience to the multiple effects of climate change.

In conclusion, I would like to echo the delegations
of France and Ethiopia in saying that the international
community must be committed to taking on its moral
and political responsibilities on this issue. We believe
that the effective implementation of the alliance
for the Sahel just announced will be a major step in
that direction.

