Mr. Covie (spoke in Serbian; interpretation provided by the delegation): I am very grateful for the
statements made at this meeting. I have just a few
comments to make on what the Council has heard
today.

I must make it clear that the Serbs are not Victims
of misinformation; their sense of insecurity is a
consequence of the horrific reality that for nearly six
years they have faced in Kosovo and Metohija. Since
2001, I have had the opportunity to observe and
participate in the ongoing process. I have attended a
number of Security Council meetings on this subject,
including meetings that took place before 17 March
2004. At that time, we were full of optimism and we
hailed the great achievements that had been made.
Then came the events of 17 March. Everyone said that
they amounted to a mere incident, but after all that has
happened I will leave it to Council members to decide
whether that was indeed the case.

We are in an environment that limits our options.
Our choices have been reduced to the following. If the
status quo remains, there will be violence. If the status
quo cannot continue, some Council members have said
that Kosovo and Metohij a will never come under
Belgrade's rule or that the situation will never revert to
that of 1999.

Some members have also said that the partition of
Kosovo is unacceptable. I appeal to them to take that
one step further and say whether or not they would
view independence for Kosovo as acceptable. Perhaps
we should attempt to have such an exchange of views,
because the problem of Kosovo and Metohija has gone
beyond the constraints of diplomatic exchanges of
views that focus on great achievements, impressions
and so forth. For nearly six years, more than 200,000
people have been unable to return to their homes.

Some speakers today, with the best of intentions,
spoke of the lack of good will on the part of Kosovo
Serbs. What sort of good will must the Serbs
demonstrate when their houses are set on fire, when
they must go to work in armoured vehicles and when
their children need armed escorts to go to school? Does
that reflect the multi-ethnic society and the standards
we are all fighting for?

I do not think that this is an easy problem. I do
not think that Mr. Jessen-Petersen has an easy job. But
I appeal to Council members to stop accusing Belgrade
of things for which it bears no blame. If the
international community is to blame any party for the
failure and incompetence of those who should be
addressing the Kosovo issue, that party is not Belgrade.
Belgrade will accept responsibility, but only where it
bears blame.

The Contact Group needs to be able to influence
the assessment of standards implementation. Here, let
me speak of the standards relating to returns.
Assessments of progress cannot be limited to intentions
or desires. When we assess progress on returns, we
need to know how many people have returned and how
many of them have remained in their homes. We know
that many will not return, and we do not wish to be
biased in that regard. I know that some will respond
that numbers are not that important. But they are
indeed important. I was encouraged by the most recent
report of the Secretary-General (S/2005/88), because it
has begun to make use of figures and percentages: that
is the only way that progress can be assessed.

We also heard today that security conditions have
improved. How can that be measured? Is it measured
by a smaller number of Serbs being killed or injured? It
is just that they have learned to keep out of harm's
way: that is the reality of Kosovo. Perhaps no one
wishes to see that reality, but we must work to improve
the situation.

We heard that the situation can be seen to have
improved because President Tadic and Prime Minister
Kostunica have visited Metohija. If that is an
indication of improved security, then I agree. But this
assessment should not be misused with respect to
political processes. We have said that Belgrade would
not impinge on any such processes; as long as I am in
my present position, we will place no obstacles in their
way. But we have also promised that we would not
accept an arrogant approach on the part of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK). We can cooperate in the process, but it must
be on an equal footing. I request the Council's support
in that regard, which would help both us and
Mr. J essen-Petersen.

Encouraging Serbs to participate in the
Institutions is no easy matter. I regret that no speaker
today mentioned the fact that at one point Serbs did
indeed participate in the work of the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government. They left, however,
because they viewed them as lacking credibility and as
being a step towards an independent Kosovo. Such a
Kosovo would be without Serbs, but it would not bring
peace and stability to the region. We have to be serious
politicians and consider matters in the long term.

Let me briefly address the question of power
outages. I agree that they constitute a technical
problem, and I shall provide members with a transcript
of our meeting with the Kosovo Energy Company at
Prolom Banja in December 2004. All that was said is
true, but it should be added that in the past there were
8,000 Serbs among the company's 15,000 employees;
today, there are only 28.

Parallel structures were also mentioned. Such
parallel structures provide a livelihood for 35,000
people who live and work in Kosovo.

Let us be open and frank about all the issues. I
know that Kosovo and Metohija poses a major twenty-
first-century problem, but I am here to work
constructively to resolve it.

Lastly, let me refer to the country dialling code,
which was also mentioned by the Special
Representative. The International Telecommunication
Union (ITU) has said that it would be possible to have
both the old country code and the new country code in
place, as well as a sub-code that is part of the current
country code for Serbia and Montenegro, 381. It would
be possible to do that through Monaco, as has been
done thus far. We are available for any talks with the
Special Representative and UNMIK to come up with
an economical solution. But I appeal to all not to
misuse the ITU country code issue.
I also ask that the Secretary-General not prejudge
the resolution of the issue of Kosovo's final status. Any
change in the current "standards before status" policy -
such as a change towards "both standards and status" -
would basically be a recognition that the international
mission in Kosovo had failed.

As far as Belgrade is concerned, we are at the
Council's disposal for any kind of constructive
cooperation. But we must be very realistic. No
politician in Belgrade is ready or willing to participate
in the independence of Kosovo.

