The President: After consultations among
members of the Security Council, I have been
authorized to make the following statement on behalf
of the Council:

"The Security Council reiterates its previous
resolutions and presidential statements on
Somalia, in particular its resolution 1872 (2009),
which reaffirmed the Djibouti Agreement as the
basis for a resolution of the conflict in Somalia.

"The Security Council reiterates its support
for the Djibouti peace process outlined in the
Transitional Federal Charter, which provides a
framework for reaching a lasting political
solution in Somalia. The Security Council
reaffirms its support for the Transitional Federal
Government as the legitimate authority in
Somalia under the Transitional Federal Charter
and notes the declaration on 22 June of a state of
emergency as a result of the recent renewal in
fighting led by Al-Shabaab and other violent
opposition groups, which constitutes an attempt
to remove that legitimate authority by force. The
Security Council also reiterates its support for the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, for his efforts
towards advancing the political process in
Somalia.
28

"The Security Council condemns the recent
attacks on the Transitional Federal Government
and the civilian population by armed groups and
foreign fighters who undermine peace and
stability in Somalia. The Security Council
reaffirms its demand of 15 May 2009 that violent
opposition groups immediately end their
offensive, put down their arms, renounce violence
and join reconciliation efforts. The Security
Council condemns the flow of foreign fighters
into Somalia.

"The Security Council deplores the loss of
life in Somalia and the deteriorating humanitarian
situation, which has resulted in increased flows of
refugees and internally displaced persons,
threatening stability in the region. The Security
Council calls on all parties to abide by their
obligations under international humanitarian law,
in particular to respect the security of civilians,
humanitarian workers and AMISOM. personnel.

"The Security Council reaffirms that
Somalia's long-term security rests with the
effective development by the TFG of the National
Security Force and the Somali Police Force, in
the framework of the Djibouti Agreement and in
line with a national security strategy, and urges
the international community to support the
Somali security institutions, including through
training and equipping.

"The Security Council commends the
contribution of AMISOM. to lasting peace and
stability in Somalia, expresses its continued
the

appreciation for the commitment of troops to
AMISOM. by the Governments of Uganda and
Burundi, and condemns any hostilities towards
AMISOM. In this context, the Security Council
welcomes the decision by the African Union
summit at Sirte on 3 July to increase AMISOM's
strength to its mandated troop levels and its call
for AU member States to provide the necessary
military and police personnel.

"The Security Council takes note of the
decision of the African Union summit in Sirte,
calling on the Council to impose sanctions
against those, including Eritrea, providing
support to the armed groups engaged in
undermining peace and reconciliation in Somalia
and regional stability. The Security Council is
deeply concerned in this regard and will consider
expeditiously what action to take against any
party undermining the Djibouti peace process,
based on all available evidence, including that
submitted to the Monitoring Group and the
Committee established pursuant to Security
Council resolution 751 (1992)."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2009/19.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my

list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at I p.m.

09-3985]
