Mr. Costa: It is an honour to address the Council,
and I thank you, Mr. President, for the invitation to do
so.

At the outset, I should like to stress three points
regarding the drug situation in Afghanistan. First,
during the past quarter century, Afghanistan has found
itself at the crossroads of Violence and, as a
consequence, of illegal activity. War and lawlessness
have been the forces that have driven opium production
to its present levels, not the other way around; let us be
sure we get the logic right. Secondly, the establishment
of the effective rule of law is essential. The
Government's commitment to controlling the
cultivation, trade and abuse of narcotics can be
honoured only if stability and security spread
throughout the country - a point just raised, in a
sense, by my colleague Mr. Guehenno. Thirdly, it is not
true that the whole country is involved in illegal
activity. Less than 1 per cent of its land is devoted to
opium poppy cultivation, and no more than 6 per cent
of its families derive the resulting illicit income from
that activity. Only five of the country's 31 provinces
produce opium on a large scale.

The Afghan Transitional Administration is
gradually rebuilding the country's Government, and
national policies are being developed, difficult and
long as the process is. In the process, generous support
from the international community - particularly from
the nations that have taken the lead in various sectors
of the Administration - remains indispensable. Allow
me to thank in particular the Government of the United
Kingdom for its generous and continuing role in
leading the anti-narcotics work.

While the opium economy undermines current
institution-building efforts in Afghanistan, the
argument could actually be turned around: the slow
progress in re-establishing the rule of law is hurting the
ability of the authorities to reduce the drug economy. It
is a vicious circle that we need to break, and I will
return to this issue.
What are the facts of the current situation? In
2002, the Office of Drugs and Crime in Vienna - my
Office - estimated poppy cultivation in Afghanistan at
74,000 hectares, resulting in 3,400 tons of output from
five provinces in the northern, eastern and southern
parts of the country. All tribes and ethnic groups were
involved. What about this year, 2003? According to our
preliminary survey - we shall release the final survey
in September - current opium cultivation appears to
have spread to new areas, while a perceptible decrease
has taken place in the traditional provinces of
Helmand, Kandahar, Nangahar and Oruzgan. On
balance, neither the total surface under cultivation nor
the volume of output is likely to change significantly in
2003 with respect to last year.

What is the significance of all this? We need to
recognize that, despite current efforts, in the coming
years Afghanistan will continue to be the world's
largest opium producer. Why such a long time frame?
Because, over the past 20 years, Afghan agriculture -
actually the entire infrastructure in the countryside -
has been destroyed, resulting in a war economy in
which arms, drugs, smuggling and opium have
provided the means of livelihood, savings, credit and
the means of exchange for almost one fifth of the
economy. About 20 per cent of the gross domestic
product of Afghanistan is involved in this illegal
activity.

To rid Afghanistan of its dependence on illegal
activities, it is necessary to create ample and easily
accessible opportunities for alternative, licit sources of
income. This task, however, is rendered complicated by
the interrelated economic and political factors,
including security factors, that I addressed just now.
Let me look at them from my own angle.

First, with respect to the economic factors, on the
surface of it the country seems to defy a basic law of
economics, according to which price and risk trends are
correlated. In the modern market, as in every economic
aspect, prices increase if risks increase. This is not the
case in Afghanistan today. Opium prices, which were at
about $35 to $50 per kilo a few years ago, have
recently shot up to about $550 to $600 per kilo. While
the revenue generated to farmers by the opium harvest
in the 1990s was $150 million a year, last year it was
$1.2 billion - almost 10 times greater. An amount of
this order of magnitude is equal to the resources made
available by the international community to
Afghanistan last year. Illegally, the same amount of
income is being generated domestically.
In order to understand how important it is to
redress the risk/reward balance in the Afghan
countryside, let me make another point regarding the
security and political factors I have already addressed.
The task of ridding Afghanistan of the drug economy
requires much greater political, security and financial
capital than is presently available to assist the rural
areas affected by opium production and, above all, to
improve the central Government's ability to implement
its opium production ban.

Drugs originating in Afghanistan provide
resources to crime and terrorism. They are a threat to
stability. They pose a major health threat. They corrupt.
Let me address these points one at the time.

The drug dealers, among them the remnants of
the Taliban and Al Qaeda, have a vested interest in
ensuring that the Afghan State remains weak in
Afghanistan. In pursuing their goals, they foment
regional strife and nourish separatist ambitions and
armed conflicts to destabilize the Government.

Secondly, corruption is both a cause and a
consequence of narcotrafficking in Afghanistan, much
as it is everywhere else. My Office has studied
extensively the drug-trafficking routes. A common
element among them is the presence of corrupt
Government officials, corrupt port and airport staff and
corrupt customs employees. The old Silk Road has now
been turned into an opium-paved road and is riddled
with such evidence of corruption.

Perhaps the most serious threat, however, has
come from the spreading of HIV/AIDS because of drug
injection. In some of the countries neighbouring
Afghanistan, four out of five - over 80 per cent of -
new cases of HIV infection have been caused this way.
Unless the problem is brought under control, the risk of
a pandemic in the region cannot be excluded - a point
that President Putin himself raised in his recent address
to his nation.

Finally, the massive drug traffic from Afghanistan
endangers economic and social stability in the
countries located along the trafficking routes, thereby
fuelling crime, money-laundering and terrorist
activities beyond the Afghan border.

Therefore, in closing, I would like to stress the
importance of a partnership in addressing the Afghan
drug question. The Transitional Islamic Government of
Afghanistan last month adopted a first national drug
control strategy. It foresees the elimination of opium
within 10 years through law enforcement and rural
development. It also aims to counter domestic
processing and trafficking, fight money-laundering,
reduce abuse and enhance international cooperation in
drug control.

Indeed, we believe that the Afghan drug economy
can be reconverted to peace and growth if the
Government is assisted in addressing the roots of the
matter. A report recently prepared by my Office -
copies of which are available to the members of the
Council - has exposed the roots of the problem. First,
the report has deconstructed Afghanistan's drug
economy into its main components: production,
trafficking, financing, refining and abuse. Secondly, the
report has reconstructed the country's development
processes piece by piece to show that it is essential to
help farmers decide in favour of licit crops; to replace
local narco-usurers with microcredit programmes; to
provide jobs and education to women and children,
who are most heavily involved in the cultivation of a
labour-intensive product like opium poppies; to turn
bazaars into modern trading places; and to neutralize
warlords and their efforts to keep the drug trade alive.

As I said earlier, however, national efforts are not
enough. Hence the convergent efforts of neighbouring
countries through which narcotics are exported and of
Europe and Russia, where heroin abuse helps nourish
opium cultivation in Afghanistan, are needed.

In particular, the international community needs
to develop a comprehensive approach. Here are a few
elements of such an approach. First, we need to assist
Afghanistan to implement its drug control strategy. We
then have to promote in Afghanistan and its neighbours
concerted measures against drug trafficking,
stockpiling, clandestine laboratories and supply of
precursors. We need to mainstream drug issues into the
overall reconstruction programmes for Afghanistan,
inviting the international financial institutions, the
multilateral development banks, the United Nations
agencies and bilateral donors to channel resources
accordingly. Finally, we need to provide a follow-up to
the recent Paris Conference on Drug Routes from
Afghanistan with the proposed consultative groups.

A final point is addressed mainly to Europe and
Russia, which represent the main lucrative markets for
Afghan heroin. It is important that the main reduction
efforts be intensified. This was a View expressed by
ministers when they met in April at the United Nations
Commission on Narcotic Drugs in Vienna. This is a
View I support and which I believe would have a
significant impact on the Afghan drug threat.

