Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): The
Great Lakes region has been the subject of a great
deal of attention on the part of the Security Council
for many years. The commitment of the United Nations
demonstrates the importance attached to stability in
that region at the heart of Africa. With over a third
of United Nations peacekeepers deployed around the
world, today the Great Lakes region still remains a
cause for concern and the subject of great attention for
the international community.

That is why we thank you, Sir, both as President
of the Security Council and as the head of the
International Conference of the Great Lakes Region,
for having organized this important meeting. Our
efforts must continue. We also welcome the presence
of the Secretary-General, several ministers from the
countries of the region and the Commissioner for Peace
and Security of the African Union, Mr. Chergui, as well
as the representative of the World Bank, Mr. Pillai. We
thank them as well as Mr. Said Djinnit, Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region,
for his commitment and we support the road map that
he has put forward for implementation.

In his report (8/2016/232) on the implementation
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Secretary-
General outlines certain positive developments in the
region, in particular the holding of largely peaceful
elections in Tanzania, but also in the Central African
Republic, where the challenges were immense. Today
a new era is opening in that country. The end of the
transition and the establishment of elected authorities
requires our continued commitment to help the country
in stabilizing and developing.

On the other hand, the political crisis in Burundi,
which is also accompanied by a serious security and
humanitarian crisis, is a sad reminder that we must never
be complacent. After a decade of commitment on the
part of the United Nations, which has enabled Burundi
to begin its journey on the road towards stability as
outlined in the Arusha Accords, we are concerned by
the developments in the country. It is crucial that all
regional and international actors join efforts to ensure
that violence ends and that a genuine dialogue begins
without any delay. France, together with the United
Nations and the African Union, will continue to act to
end that crisis and to re-establish peace and stability
while respecting human rights.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, we are
on the eve of a crucial period for the future of a country
where the United Nations has been so committed. The
situation has improved since 1999, when the Council
decided to create the United Nations Observer Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Nevertheless,
we remain concerned by the continuing fragility of the
country. In several regions, the security situation has
stabilized and the restoration of the State's authority
is taking place across much of its vast territory. The
capacity of the Congolese armed forces and the
Congolese national police have also been reinforced.
However, instability in the east of the country
remains a reality, with dozens of armed groups still
contributing to the expansion of a spiral of violence.
They are illegally exploiting natural resources and are
committing abuses against the population, who has
already suffered too much. Everyone must play their
part to put a definitive end to the threat posed by those
groups. Most concerned in that regard, of course, are the
authorities of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
in cooperation with the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as
well as the countries of the region.

Efforts to restrict political space also concern us,
on the eve of important electoral deadlines for the
country's future. The deadlines stipulated for those
elections, envisaged in the Constitution as taking
place by the end of the year, concern us, especially
as they risk causing a new period of instability in
the country. Respect for civil liberties is essential,
and that calls for vigilance on our part. We urge the
authorities of the Democratic Republic of Congo to
respect their constitutional commitments as well as
their international commitments to respect human
rights and fundamental freedoms, and we encourage all
stakeholders to move towards dialogue in all its forms,
and not to resort to violence. In that regard, again, the
Security Council will have to be particularly vigilant,
at a time when we are considering the renewal of the
United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

France is a long-time friend of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the countries of the region.
Our greatest wish, as a close partner and member of the
Security Council, is to see those countries consolidate
their momentum towards sustainable peace and
stability. That would allow them finally to profit from
the wealth of their natural resources and to focus on their
development and the well-being of their populations.
In that vein, we welcome the holding in Kinshasa on
24 and 25 February of the Private Sector Investment
Conference for the Great Lakes Region, which brought
with it hopes for the essential economic development
of the region. Better regional economic cooperation

will be crucial to creating common and shared interests
and for overcoming divisions. The regional strategic
plan presented today and the commitment of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
will be key to keep moving in that direction. France,
along with the European Union and the United Nations,
remains at your side, Sir, in your capacity within the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region, to
help the whole of the region along that path.

