Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): At the outset,
I would like to welcome you here and thank you for
presiding over the Council this morning, Mr. President.
I would also like to take the opportunity to welcome to
New York the new Ambassador of China and to wish
him every success in carrying out his duties.

I would first like to once again congratulate
Ms. Sandra Honore on her appointment as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in Haiti and to
reiterate my country's full support for her in her new
job. I would also like to thank her for her presentation
of the semi-annual report (S/2013/493) on the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
My statement will focus on the political, security and
humanitarian aspects of the current situation in Haiti.

The political situation remains worrying, due to
the recurring difficulties encountered by the Haitian
political class in finding solutions to institutional
problems and in working steadfastly to improve their
country's governance. Indeed, we are sorry to see that
due to various differences, there have been delays
in organizing the senatorial, municipal and local
elections, despite the political agreement on 19 April
that established the transitional Electoral Council
and despite the willingness of all Haitian political
stakeholders to see the elections held before the end
of 2013. It is crucial that those elections, which have
been delayed for two years, be held this year in order
to ensure political stability, prevent any dysfunction of
the country's institutions and put legitimately elected
representatives in charge of the State. In that regard,
we welcome the establishment of the joint Government-
MINUSTAH-United Nations task force responsible for
speeding up the preparation and organization of the
elections. We hope that it will bring a speedy end to the
delays in approving the electoral law, which is an crucial
component of the electoral machine. In that regard,
we note that, as Ms. Honore' said, President Martelly
brought such an electoral law before Parliament
yesterday.

In the area of security, Togo is pleased with the
general calm and stability in Haiti. There is no question
that the security sector is the most concrete example
not only of the country's progress with reconstruction
and stabilization but in particular of the effectiveness
that local populations have the right to expect from
the cooperation between MINUSTAH and the Haitian
authorities. As the report indicates, political acts of
Violence have visibly decreased, as has the percentage
of crimes such as murders, rapes and kidnappings. That
continuing improvement in the security climate has
been made possible by the continued efforts of Haitian
leaders, in cooperation with MINUSTAH, to strengthen,
train and equip Haitian National Police personnel.
Regular police operations, alone or in cooperation
with MINUSTAH units, have enabled them to break
up many gangs, prevent their criminal activity and
substantially reduce criminality and insecurity in the
country. Togo urges the Haitian authorities to continue
to expand the police force throughout the country and
to strengthen its operational capacity. We also call on
Haiti's partners to continue to support it in making up
the deficit in financing the 2012-2016 development plan
for the National Police and enabling it to achieve all the
goals of the plan, particularly increasing the number of
police officers over the next two years.

Concerning the humanitarian situation, Togo notes
that significant progress has been made, especially
in resettling displaced persons and with regard to
sanitation measures. As the Secretary-General's
report indicates, thanks to financial contributions
from the international community, more than 34,000
internally displaced persons have been resettled and
33 sites closed. Such significant efforts, however, are
counterbalanced by the need for aid, which remains
huge. The gradual withdrawal of humanitarian agencies
is making living conditions in the camps - where
a large number of internally displaced people are
still housed - increasingly precarious. Togo is also
concerned about the cases of famine and malnutrition,
which have been exacerbated in part because of the
vagaries of the climate. On top of that, the persisting
cases of cholera in weather particularly conducive to its
spread leads to fears of a resurgence of the epidemic if
the appropriate measures are not taken to suppress it,
particularly in the area of water treatment and sanitation.
My country urges the international community to
continue to stand by the Haitian authorities in order to
help them eradicate that scourge once and for all.
Togo believes that, despite the problems presented
by political misunderstandings and the threats due
to unstable weather and the cholera epidemic, Haiti's
overall situation continues to improve, due to the joint
efforts of the Haitian Government, MINUSTAH and
other international organizations, which have helped to
gradually establish encouraging conditions for security,
stability and macro-economic performance.

I would like to conclude by commending the major
role that MINUSTAH continues to play in Haiti through
its involvement in programmes of reconstruction, the
maintenance of security and building the rule of law.
One of the Mission's most remarkable efforts has been
in protecting vulnerable groups, particularly through
its fight against sexual and gender-based Violence
and impunity for serious human-rights violations. We
support MINUSTAH's announced restructuring and
urge the Haitian authorities to continue to take on the
process of restoring and developing their country so
that the Mission's disengagement will not weaken the
Haitian State.

