Mr. Dj ani (Indonesia): I would also like to welcome
the Colombian Foreign Minister, Mr. Carlos Holmes
Trujillo Garcia. The presence of the Minister is, as
always, and once again, a demonstration of Colombia's
partnership with the United Nations in support of
durable peace.

Indonesia welcomes Colombia's continued
commitment clearly set out by President Duque
Marquez to implement the Final Agreement for Ending
the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace.
As has been said many times in this Chamber, the
agreement represents an opportunity for lasting peace
in Colombia. Indeed, the agreement is also a positive
example for the rest of the world that, through dialogue
and diplomacy, conflicts can be brought to an end. In
the light of that, I would like to address three issues:
the Special Jurisdiction for Peace, reintegration and
international support.

First, the Special Jurisdiction for Peace, together
with its objective, is one of the key components of
the peace agreement. It is important that the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace receive the full support and
cooperation of all the parties involved. Its independence
and autonomy, as well as the judgments it arrives at,
also need to be respected fully. We continue to support
the work of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace, as it is
playing is critical in promoting access to justice and
national reconciliation. We hope that the statutory law
on the jurisdiction will soon be passed and that swift
action on this democratic exercise between the executive
and Parliament will be taken to ensure that this legal
foundation is put into place as soon as possible, with a
View to protecting the rights of victims and providing
legal security for all the parties concerned.

Secondly, reintegration is key to the successful
implementation of the peace agreement, and we
underscore the need for progress at all levels. It is
essential for us to show former combatants who have
laid down their weapons that it is in their interest
to be on the right side of history. Access to legal
revenue sources and to land is at the heart of effective
reintegration. In that context, as pointed out by the
Secretary-General in his report (S/20l9/265), Indonesia
is pleased that approximately 94 per cent of the families
concerned have received the financial benefits from the
illegal-crop-substitution programme.

Based on our past experience, we also believe
that reintegration is a long process that requires
patience, but it needs to be done as swiftly as possible,
bringing reassurance, certainty and hope for the
future. Reintegration should not only focus on former
combatants but also receiving communities, which is not
solely the responsibility of the central Government, but
also the provincial and local Governments, community
leaders, civil society and others.

We welcome the many projects reported by the
Special Representative geared towards accelerating
the reintegration process. We also appreciate that
those reintegration projects also include women, as
Ms. Salamanca mentioned. We believe that women are
important drivers that ensure reconciliation. This is an
important fact. In our experience, the healing process
not only involves the feeling of security and safety but
also involves concrete reassurances of livelihood and the
belief that there is a brighter future ahead. Nonetheless,
every country and society has specific characteristics
and traditions, and we trust the Colombian Government
knows what is best for its people.

Thirdly, we would like to stress international
support. After half a century of conflict, healing the
wounds of war will not be easy. Therefore, support
from a united international community and the
Security Council is an important factor. We believe
that international organizations, including financial
institutions and the private sector, should support
Colombian efforts to consolidate peace. This also an
important factor.

In conclusion, Colombia has travelled far on its path
to peace. It is crucial that it now stay the course, and that
all parties continue to play their role befittingly. The
unity of the Security Council is ofvital importance. We
must collectively ensure that this historic opportunity
will pave the way for an enduring peace in Colombia.
And I must say, Mr. President, that this is not a sad
day today.

