I thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Shearer and Mr. Yakani for their briefings. First of all, we would like to commend the decision of President Kiir to establish a high-level task force to combat the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic as well as the appointment of First Vice-Presidents Machar and Abdelbagi to head this task force, which shows what can be achieved if the peace process advances. While this action and the holding of the ceasefire among the parties are encouraging developments, we remain concerned that the implementation of the peace agreement has been inconsistent, which is having very serious consequences for the population. This political deadlock is preventing the formation of critical institutions, including the appointment of the State leadership required to lead a COVID-19 response at the local level. Amid this power vacuum, community violence is escalating, which has led to casualties and displacement and has hindered the work of aid agencies. In addressing this challenge, we must pay the utmost attention to the human element in this crisis. The humanitarian crisis in South Sudan is deepening as the dire emergency created by the COVID-19 pandemic adds more perils to an already critical situation. More than 9 million people are in need of food assistance and a sharp spike in confirmed COVID-19 cases is making South Sudan one of the countries in the world where there is a faster growth of the virus. This situation is highly concerning when 56 per cent of the population has no access to basic health- care services. Another source of concern is the persistent levels of sexual violence. Women and girls in South Sudan face some of the highest levels of violence in the world, and 80 per cent were at risk even before the pandemic. Now they are forced to quarantine with their abusers and cut off from their support systems. In that regard, we strongly encourage the Government of South Sudan to ensure accountability for these serious violations, including compliance with the provisions prohibiting sexual violence by all parties. Likewise, we urge the Government to establish a specialized court for sexual and gender-based crimes to advance the work of the Hybrid Court for South Sudan and to provide support to survivors. On the other hand, we are hopeful that the 35 per cent quota for women will be fulfilled. The appointment of nine women in the Transitional Government of National Unity falls short at 25 per cent. We understand that, due to the COVID-19 emergency, the focus has shifted to confronting this pandemic. However, dealing with this challenge should not, in any way, come at the expense of the peace agreement. In that regard, we urge the parties to prioritize advancing the implementation of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan and to continue their negotiations in good faith to avoid a major crisis, with devastating consequences for the population. While facing the COVID-19 pandemic and other conflict inducers, it has never been as urgent to stop the political stalemate and to de-escalate the intercommunal violence in order to end the legacy of disease, hunger, abuses and displacement. In that regard, it is necessary that the United Nations continue to support the people of South Sudan, in cooperation with the Government. Consequently, the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) must be able to have timely and unhindered access for operations and humanitarian activities. We urge the South Sudanese Government to end violations of the status-of-forces agreement and the widespread restrictions on the movement of UNMISS personnel. It is imperative that efforts be directed towards an agreement that directly involves the Sudanese leadership, finds common ground and pushes towards a reasonable and sustainable compromise. We owe it to the people of South Sudan.
