Mr. Aguilar Zinser (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation wishes the Prime Minister of Cote
d'Ivoire and his delegation a warm welcome to New
York and to this Security Council meeting. We believe
that his presence here reaffirms his Government's
commitment to the tasks that the Council has been
carrying out, most particularly the mission to West
Africa - especially cote d'Ivoire - that took place
several weeks ago.
That mission, headed by Ambassador Jeremy
Greenstock, took place at a very important time for
moving the peace process forward in Cote d'Ivoire.
Thus it is no coincidence that it was led by
Ambassador Greenstock, who is sitting with us for the
last time in the Security Council. My delegation wishes
to express to him our affection, our friendship and our
appreciation for the work done here during the time
when he represented his country. We shared a
substantial part of that time with Ambassador
Greenstock, and we were able to observe not only his
great diplomatic professionalism but also his great
human qualities as our colleague in the Council, where
we had many opportunities to agree and occasionally to
disagree. In both situations, we found his human
qualities to be an example by which to continue our
friendship and affection in the future. We wish
Ambassador Greenstock every success in his difficult
and complex mission, and we assure him that the
Council will be following his work in Iraq closely.

The efforts that we have been pursuing in West
Africa have a special dimension in Cote d'Ivoire. We
believe that peace in C6te d'Ivoire is closely linked to
political development, to the creation of security
conditions and to economic and social development in
the whole region. Cote d'Ivoire has a strategic role in
mobilizing resources for economic activity in the
whole region, and therefore peace in C6te d'Ivoire also
means peace and prosperity for West Africa.

That is why we salute the progress made in the
political transition and in the prospects for the
consolidation of national reconciliation. We believe
that that calls for unequivocal commitments by all
parties to the full implementation of the Linas-
Marcoussis Agreements. In that connection, Mexico
welcomes the 4 July joint statement of Cote d'Ivoire's
armed forces and security forces and of the armed
forces of the Forces nouvelles, through which the end
of the war in that country was declared, allegiance to
the President of the Republic and to the Government of
National Reconciliation was reaffirmed, and all
residents were urged to take the road of peace.

In that respect, my delegation joins the delegation
of Germany in asking the Prime Minister what
prospects exist to move forward the process of full
reunification and the establishment of authority for
reconciliation and transition throughout the country's
territory. We reaffirm Mexico's support for the full
implementation of the recommendations submitted by
the Security Council mission to West Africa,
particularly with regard to the holding of elections in
2005. We believe that the United Nations and the rest
of the international community must lend their
assistance to the electoral process, including with
regard to the establishment of a trustworthy electoral
register and the creation of an autonomous authority
that gives transparency to the process with a View to
creating conditions for a lasting peace in that country.
In that respect, we should like to ask the Prime
Minister what progress, in his opinion, is taking place
in his country in order to hold those elections as the
culminating point in the peace process, from which we
hope a new political structure will be consolidated,
providing stability to Cote d'Ivoire.

Similarly, we call on the senior authorities of
C6te d'Ivoire to arrive at a prompt solution with regard
to the full composition of the Transitional Government
that considers all of its components, in the terms set
forth by the Linas-Marcoussis Agreements and by
subsequent agreements.

Another aspect that will be crucial in the coming
months is that related to the adoption of all measures
necessary for the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) programme to move ahead -
according to what has been presented to us this
morning - and on schedule. Special attention should
be devoted to disarming groups of youths in order to
ensure security for the populations and to eliminate
threats to the political solution that is supported by all
the parties in cote d'Ivoire.

The recurring problems of the excessive
availability of small arms and light weapons and the
use of mercenaries and of child soldiers are viewed by
Security Council members as unacceptable, not only in
the case of Cote d'Ivoire but throughout the region.
Regrettably, that is a situation that prevails in other
conflict regions in Africa, including in West Africa.
Thus we believe that the Security Council and the rest
of the international community must take robust steps
to put an end to arms trafficking and to the practice of
using mercenaries, and that they should do everything
in their power to prevent minors from being recruited
as combatants. That will be a guarantee of a future
without violence.

We hope that presidential statements on Cote
d'Ivoire and the statements made in the context of the
Security Council missions to Central and Western
Africa will be properly followed up.

Mercenaries and arms trafficking are critical
problems for the region, and they are aggravated by the
situation in Liberia. Unfortunately, the violence in
Liberia has not subsided and there is no immediate
relief in sight. Further fighting and attacks on the
civilian population in the capital, Monrovia, have been
reported today. In that regard, I would like to ask the
Prime Minister how he believes the worsening conflict
in Liberia is affecting his country now and what impact
it will have in the future. We know what efforts his
country has made to try to prevent the conflict in
Liberia from spilling over into Cote d'Ivoire. What is
the current situation in that regard?

We are concerned about the humanitarian
situation C6te d'Ivoire, which is still fragile, and has
been aggravated by the arrival of refugees from
Liberia. We appeal to the countries of the region and all
parties in Cote d'Ivoire to guarantee security and
unrestricted access to humanitarian organizations so
that they can perform their functions for the benefit of
vulnerable populations that are suffering under these
unfortunately conditions of conflict.

We reiterate our belief that a key role is to be
played by humanitarian organizations, specialized
United Nations personnel and non-governmental
organizations. We again underline the importance of
providing them with protection and unrestricted access
to areas where they need to attend to the civilian
population.

Today's debate must go beyond statements. It is
essential for the Government and other parties in Cote
d'Ivoire, as well as the United Nations, regional and
subregional organizations, civil society and other
actors involved, to move ahead with the fulfilment of
their respective commitments and mandates. This is
required for the consolidation of the peace process and
for stability and security in the country and the
subregion. This should become part of a collective
effort to return to the path of economic and social
development, for the benefit, in particular, of the least
privileged.

I would like to conclude by stressing the
importance of the Council's ensuring effective follow-
up of its efforts, of the commitments set out in its
resolutions and presidential statements and of the
observations made during Council missions to various
countries - in this case, C6te d'Ivoire. We believe that
follow-up by the Security Council in the coming
months of developments in Cote d'Ivoire will be
critical in providing support to enable the authorities in
that country to reach the internal consensus needed to
fulfil the requirements of the Linas-Marcoussis
Agreement and the political timetable envisaged.
Once again, we reiterate the importance of the
Security Council's keeping its attention focused on this
matter, so that, through such follow-up, it can
contribute to the consolidation of the developments
that are under way and avoid any pitfalls.

