Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): Senegal
thanks the delegation of Uruguay, which submitted
the draft resolution before the Council. I make the
following remarks in my national capacity.

The delegation of Senegal notes with concern the
latter of 23 February 2016, in which the Secretary-
General proposes that Mr. Serge Brammertz of
Belgium be appointed Prosecutor of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, replacing
Mr. Hassan Bubacar Jallow of the Gambia, who
had been Prosecutor of the Mechanism since 2012.
Bearing in mind also the Secretary-General's intention
to reappoint Judge Theodor Meron as President of
the Residual Mechanism and Mr. John Hocking of
Australia, who has been Registrar of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) since
15 May 2009 and ofthe Mechanism since January 2012,
Senegal asked for a briefing by the Secretariat as to
the reasons for the failure to reappoint Mr. Jallow as
Prosecutor, representing the de facto exclusion of Africa
from the leadership of the Mechanism. It is particularly
regrettable to note that this exclusion contravenes the
principle of the equitable geographical distribution
enshrined in article 10 of the statute of the Mechanism,
which provides that the Council shall take due account
of the "adequate representation of the principal legal
systems of the world" in its appointments.

The argument on behalf of continuity, raised during
the course of the briefing, was fare from relevant, given
the fact that Mr. Brammertz had not initiated most
of the ongoing cases before the ICTY. Indeed, other
Prosecutors before him had been replaced in the course
of proceedings. On the contrary, the need to ensure
the continuity and stability of the management of the
Mechanism would speak in favour of the reappointment
of Prosecutor J allow, who led the Tribunal competently,
responsibly, rigourously and effectively for four years,
as was acknowledged by the Secretariat at the briefing.
Moreover, aware that there was nothing in the foregoing
arguments to prevent his reappointment to his functions,
Prosecutor Jallow had already established teams to
work on the cases to be submitted in appeal to the ICTY.
In establishing these teams, he relied principally on
staff of both the ICTY and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) to manage the appeals, as
they had done in previous cases. It is also important to
note that the ICTR still has before it the case of three
fugitives who will be tried by the Mechanism once they
have been arrested. The Mechanism has already begun
preparations for the trial of those fugitives.

More critically, the appointment of Mr. Brammertz
as Prosecutor of the Mechanism cannot be justified on
the basis of the cost savings mentioned, because the
President of the Mechanism is in the same situation as
Prosecutor Jallow, and it is of the highest importance
that the same principle be applied to both of them in
order to avoid a double standard.

Africa has always been at the forefront of the
fight against impunity, in particular with regard to
the establishment of the ICTY and the ICTR. As such,
given the recognition of Mr. Jallow's attributes - his
high moral character, impartiality and integrity, as
well as the need for Africa to be represented in the
Mechanism - Senegal decided to abstain in the voting
on the draft resolution. However, we would like to
stress that our support for the Mechanism remains
unwavering. Moreover, I would like to note that this
matter was the subject of a letter addressed by the Chair
of the Group of African States to the President of the
Security Council.

