Mr. Akram (Pakistan): As this is the first debate
in the Council this month, may I take this opportunity
to extend to you, Sir, our warm felicitations on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council during the
current month, which promises to be a busy and
important one. We also wish to extend every
cooperation to you, Sir, to ensure the success of your
presidency. I also express my delegation's admiration
to Ambassador Yafiez-Barnuevo, the Permanent
Representative of Spain, for his eminently successful
presidency last month.

Pakistan believes that an end to the cycle of
violence between Israel and the Palestinian people
living under occupation could facilitate the
implementation of the road map and the realization of
the vision of a two-State solution in accordance with
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973)
and 1515 (2003).

Unfortunately, instead of proceeding on the road
map to peace, the Israeli Government has, once again,
reacted by launching a cruel and ill-considered
offensive, killing more than 80 Palestinians since last
Wednesday. Innocent people, including women and
children, have borne the brunt of the military might
that Israel has brought to bear in the densely populated
areas of Jabaliya and Beit Hanoun, to secure what has
been described as its right to self-defence.

No one can justify the killing of innocent
civilians. That is why we condemn terrorism. The
rationale of the right to self-defence can not be invoked
for attacks that cause mainly civilian casualties. It was
after the horrible experiences of the last world war that
the Geneva Conventions were adopted, outlawing the
targeting of mainly civilian targets. As an occupying
Power, Israel is bound by the Geneva Conventions,
especially by the Fourth Geneva Convention. Need we
remind ourselves that grave violations of the Geneva
Conventions can be considered war crimes and crimes
against humanity?

The real cause of insecurity, for Israel as much as
for the Palestinians, is Israel's illegal, protracted and
forcible occupation of Palestinian territories. The
uninterrupted policy of illegal settlements has added
injury to the continued occupation. The construction of
a separation wall in defiance of the advisory opinion of
the International Court of Justice is a manifestation of
an objective, that of the permanent annexation of
occupied Palestinian territories.

The Security Council has a political, moral and
legal obligation to demand that Israel: first,
immediately withdraw the forces it sent into the Gaza
during the last few days, and halt its deliberate policy
of unleashing death and destruction against the
Palestinians; secondly, respect its obligations under
international law, especially international humanitarian
law; thirdly, allow the United Nations and other relief
organizations full and unhindered humanitarian access
to areas affected by its incursions; and fourthly, fulfil
its road map obligations - particularly those related to
its withdrawal from the occupied Palestinian territories
and its construction of illegal settlements.

Israel must carefully consider the short and long-
term implications of its actions and policies. As the
President of Pakistan observed in the General
Assembly, "The tragedy of Palestine is an open wound
inflicted on the psyche of every Muslim" (A/59/PV.5).

A clash of civilizations may be the objective of
some extremists, but it is certainly not in the interest of
those who seek the part of peace and security in the
Holy Land and beyond.

