Major General Finn: It is an honour and a
pleasure for me to be invited to speak today on the
subject of caveats and impediments to command and
performance. Since I was appointed Head of Mission
and Chief of Staff of the United Nations Truce
Supervision Organization (UNTSO), almost two years
ago, the subject and effects of caveats imposed by
many of the 25 troop-contributing countries (TCCs)
have never been far from my attention. The UNTSO
military component is made up of approximately 153
unarmed military observers. My key tasks as the Head
of Mission for UNTSO are to assign well-trained
military observers under the operational control of
the Force Commanders of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) and the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF). Focusing
on supports to the Force Commander of UNDOF has
been provided by Observer Group Golan, tasked within
UNDOF to observe and report violations in the area
of separation, located east of the disengagement line
between Syria and the Israeli-occupied Golan, and the
areas of limitation on both sides of the disengagement
line, the Alpha side in the Israeli-occupied Golan and
the Bravo side in the Syrian-controlled Golan.

Since the outset of the conflict in Syria, and
especially as it spread to the Golan, we have all faced
legitimate concerns regarding the safety and security of
our personnel, including the UNTSO unarmed military
observers of Observer Group Golan. Unfortunately,
while UNDOF, UNTSO, the United Nations
Department of Safety and Security and the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations have sought to improve
security measures and reduce risks, several of our
troop-contributing countries imposed national caveats
that restrict where their observers could deploy. Caveats
are a controversial subject, and their impact on United
Nations missions has been much discussed. Indeed,
they impose significant restrictions on multinational
operations and often restrict the operational role and
functions of individual national contingents or United
Nations military observers employed on multinational
missions such as UNTSO.

Returning to the work of UNTSO, the deterioration
ofthe situation in Syria has led to a number of countries,
as stated, imposing restrictions on the activities of their
personnel assigned to Observer Group Golan on the
Syrian-controlled side of the ceasefire, which I referred
to as the Bravo side. At one stage in 2013, all except
seven of our 25 TCCs had caveats of varying effects
on their observers deployed in Observer Group Golan.
It even reached a situation where, if one more troop-
contributing country had imposed restrictions, UNTSO
would have been unable to meet its commitment to
provide professional, trained military observers to the
Force Commander of UNDOF on the Bravo side of the
area of separation.

To give an idea of the effect of caveats, when the
Force Commander ofUNDOF and I briefed our TCCs in
April 2014, I mentioned that only six nations provided
over 75 per cent of the observers deployed on the Bravo
side -that is, on the Syrian-controlled Golan. Naturally,
the situation posed an undue burden on those nations,
including in terms of exposure to risk. The restrictions
also affected performance in that they complicated my
efforts to maintain the desirable mix of three observers
of different nationalities in any observation post in
order to ensure better impartial reporting as well as
an appropriate mix of experienced and inexperienced
officers in teams and in our observation posts. It also
limited the flexibility to assign officers ofthose nations
to other locations where UNTSO operates - at our
headquarters in Jerusalem, at our liaison offices in
Beirut, Damascus, Jerusalem and Cairo, or to Observer
Group Lebanon, the operation within UNIFIL in south
Lebanon.

Caveats imposed distinctions among military
observers and the roles they perform, affecting the
morale of individual observers. As the Secretary-
General has reiterated in his reports on UNDOF,
those restrictions have hindered the implementation
of UNDOF's mandate, and they limited the capacities
and hampered the operational flexibility of Observer
Group Golan, on whose skills UNDOF relied move
heavily when the deteriorating situation required
increased focus on static observation and reduced
mobile activities.

I fully understand what drove the imposition
of those restrictions, and I share the desire of troop-
contributing countries to see the risks to their deployed
personnel mitigated to the greatest extent possible. In
peacekeeping missions, removing the threats of course
rests ultimately with the parties to the conflict and with
those with influence over them. But I worked closely
with the Force Commander of UNDOF to carry out
a range of mitigating measures, including improved
medical evacuation and casualty evacuation capacities.
We raised and reinforced perimeter fences and equipped
observers with advanced night vision equipment with
remote viewing to allow them to anticipate threats.
Work continued right up until our eventual relocation
from the area of separation by UNDOF in September
2014. We fitted our observation posts with ballistic
skirts and bulletproof glass on the observation towers.

We reassured TCCs by emphasizing the tight
coordination between the Force Commander of
UNDOF and myself and by the provision of contingency
planning that was, and still is, manifested by regular
evacuation exercises and the deployment of security
parties for the observation posts to either augment or
replace unarmed observers, if required. That close
coordination, reflecting the priority placed by the
UNDOF Force Commander and myself on safety and
security, was demonstrated as recently as last month,
when heavy firing over the course of a week impacted
one of our observation posts.

Under-Secretary-General Ladsous has continuously
stressed the importance that his Department and
all peacekeeping operations place on the safety and
security of personnel in the field. He has emphasized
that contributors' personnel are our most critical asset.
Since September of last year, all UNTSO observers, as
well as the majority of UNDOF personnel, have been
relocated to the Israeli-occupied side of the ceasefire
line, due to the security situation, as a further mitigation
measure implemented by my colleague the Force
Commander of UNDOF in conjunction with DPKO.

Yet seven countries - not counting the four
permanent members of the Security Council - that
contribute observers but whose military personnel
are restricted by the Disengagement Agreement from
serving on the Golan continue to impose caveats. While
that has limited impact at the moment, the limitations
on performance and flexibility will again come to the
fore when a decision is eventually made to return to the
Bravo side. When that might occur will be determined
on the basis of very best assessments of the security
conditions, which UNDOF, with our support and that
of DPKO, is continually monitoring. Therefore, the
removal of the remaining national caveats remains a
priority issue.

A recent review ofUNTSO led by DPKO highlighted
the mitigation measures that have been implemented
by UNDOF and UNTSO in respect to the operations
and physical security of military observers in Observer
Group Golan. The review recommended that UNTSO
contributors with caveats should be strongly urged to
lift them. It also recommended reducing the number of
military personnel contributed to UNTSO by countries
that continue to have restrictions on the deployment of
their military personnel, increasing the contributions of
those that do not have caveats and expanding the pool
of UNTSO TCCs by inviting new contributors without
caveats.

With the support of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, some of those recommendations have been
adopted, including the deployment of United Nations
military observers from new TCCs and reducing the
numbers of United Nations military observers from
countries with national caveats. In addition, senior
staff appointments or positions in the mission are being
filled only by countries without caveats.

Caveats impact all United Nations peacekeeping
missions, notjust UNTSO. They restrict a commander's
ability to exercise command and control and are an
impediment to performance. I fully recognize the
national interests that drive caveats, but I also see that
caveats threaten to drive a wedge between contributing
nations, also threatening United Nations peacekeeping
and observer capabilities. It is welcome that the High-
Level Independent Panel on Peace Operations has made
important recommendations in that regard.

Despite those challenges, the presence of United
Nations peacekeepers on the Golan has played a key
role in helping to prevent the Syrian conflict from
becoming a Syrian-Israeli conflict. Our well-trained
observers continue to provide impartial and expert
reports. I encourage contributors to UNTSO to continue
to provide officers with the right profile and experience
to match the challenges ahead.
I am grateful to all our TCCs for the support they
continue to give to the work of peacekeepers during
these challenging times. In particular, I extend my
thanks to those nations that enable the deployment of
their officers to all areas ofUNTSO's area of operations,
without restrictions.

