Ms. Pulido Santana (Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, let me express my delegation's
satisfaction at seeing you, Sir, preside over this
important Council meeting. In taking the floor, I should
like to say that we subscribe to Costa Rica's statement
on behalf of the Rio Group.

Venezuela joins in the international community's
jubilation at the emergence of East Timor as a new,
full-fledged and sovereign member of this community.
We believe that, for the United Nations in particular,
that event represents the satisfaction of having fulfilled
in the framework of its purposes, one of the goals for
which it exists.

On this date of such importance for the East
Timorese and of shared celebration for all democratic
countries of the world, we wish to extend a message of
friendship and cooperation to the people and the
Government of East Timor: we share their confidence
and natural optimism in their present and future.

The President of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, Mr. Hugo Chavez Frias, who had the great
honour of being invited by the Secretary-General to the
ceremonial proclamation of the independence of East
Timor, deeply regrets that he was unable to be
personally present on this historic occasion, although
that was his intention. A mission led by our
Ambassador in Jakarta is attending this historic event
to bear witness to our country's support.

Venezuela, as a member of the Special Committee
on the Situation with Regard to the Implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples, is particularly
gratified at these first steps towards an institutional life
now being taken by the people of East Timor. That
important development undoubtedly constitutes a new
milestone in the history of the struggle of the United
Nations for the realization of the right of peoples to
self-determination.
Naturally, many challenges lie ahead for the new
nation. We are confident that the maturity it has
achieved will enable it, with the cooperation and
assistance of the international community and with the
continued support of the United Nations, to deal with
the varied problems that still exist and with those that
the newly independent nation will have to face.

It is encouraging to see that East Timor is already
taking its first steps towards, and is beginning to plan
for, laying the solid foundations of its economy
through the sovereign exploitation of its natural
resources.

We are also confident that the same courage and
steadfastness that have led the East Timorese people to
the threshold of peace and democracy will also prove
fundamental as they carry out the tasks of building
their new country. Peace and democracy must be
accompanied by resolute and generous support from
the international community, particularly from the
international financial institutions, in order to ensure
the success of those tasks and to make East Timor a
viable State.

I would not wish to conclude without expressing
our congratulations to the Government of President
Gusmao and to the new national leaders. I also wish to
reiterate our appreciation to all those bodies and
officials of the United Nations that made a decisive
contribution so that East Timor would today be able to
proclaim its independence. We especially wish to
express our thanks to the Council, over which you, Sir,
are so honourably presiding, to the General Assembly,
to Secretary-General Kofi Annan, to the Secretary-
General's Special Representative, Mr. Sergio Vieira de
Mello, and all his staff, and to all those who preceded
him in the Secretariat and who played a very active and
key role in the negotiations.

We are convinced that the United Nations will
continue its invaluable assistance to the new sovereign
State through the successor mission established by
resolution 1410 (2002). We hope to welcome East
Timor as a new Member of the United Nations family
at the next session of the General Assembly.

