Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank the Secretary-
General and the Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process for their, as always, detailed but
sobering briefings to the Security Council. I want to
say too that we fully support the work on the ground of
Mr. Mladenov and his team and the work that they do
every day to search for peace in the Middle East.

We were also pleased to see President Abbas in the
Chamber today and to hear his message.

For many years, we have spoken about the Middle
East peace process as being at a crossroads. This
statement has never been more accurate than it is
today. And at every crossroads there is a choice to be
made. At this moment in time, there are a number of
worrying developments in terms of the choices we see
being made. Accelerated illegal settlement expansion,
harmful Israeli legislative measures, resurgent violence
including rocket attacks, the grave and deteriorating
humanitarian situation in Gaza - which we dealt with
in detail last week - and a threat to the specific status
of Jerusalem, as it is embodied in, inter alia, resolution
478 (1980), are among the many examples. At the same
time, our commonly agreed destination is as clear as
ever. It is two States, Israel and Palestine, living side by
side in peace and security.

In order to contribute to the two-State solution, we
must acknowledge the fundamental root cause of the
conflict, which the occupation. If we are to be able
to reach a sustainable peace, humanitarian, economic
and political actions are all needed, but their full
engagement will not suffice if the illegal occupation of
Palestine does not end. As we work on the steps ahead,
this perspective must be kept in mind. Sweden remains
fully committed to the two-State solution, based on
international law, known parametres and relevant
resolutions of the Council, including resolution 2334
(2016).

Respect for international law and United Nations
resolutions remains at the core of the peace process. It
is therefore more important than ever to be principled
and to base our decisions and actions on international
law. The Council is central to upholding the rules-
based system, and the debate tomorrow will also focus
on the significance of this system and respect for the
Charter of the United Nations. The aim remains two
States living side by side in peace and security, with
Jerusalem as the capital of both. That is also the policy
of the European Union. There is no alternative, and
that is why no action should be taken that prejudges
the final-status issues. Such issues can be taken off the
table only as part of negotiations between the parties.
That includes Jerusalem and refugees. In this regard,
the Council has a duty to uphold its resolutions on the
special status of Jerusalem.

We were pleased to see President Abbas in the
Security Council today, as I said earlier. Sweden
recognized Palestine in 2014 and fully supports
Palestinian state-building. For sustainable progress,
efforts towards the re-establishment of Palestinian
Authority control in Gaza and intra-Palestinian
reconciliation are crucial, as are continued efforts to
strengthen inclusive and democratic institutions and
processes in Palestine.

As Special Coordinator Mladenov said, the peace
process needs to be inclusive in order to advance and
achieve sustainable results. Women's fair representation
and full and meaningful participation in the peace
process is a prerequisite for progress. The younger
generations must also be included and given hope of a
better future and an alternative to the current situation.
The private sector also has a role to play. In both
Palestine and Israel, civil society plays a crucial role in
advancing peace. That is why Sweden engages closely
and widely with civil society, in particular women's
groups and youth, in both countries.

As previously stated, including in the Council last
week, a significant reduction of funding for the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East (UNRWA) is deeply worrisome and
must be urgently and sustainably resolved. Failure
to resolve the funding situation will have serious
humanitarian and security consequences in the region.
For that reason, Sweden has already made our payment
of $59 million for 2018 to UNRWA, and we urge
others to step up their funding, including by making
their payments as early as possible. Furthermore,
Sweden, Jordan and Egypt, together with UNRWA
and the Secretary-General, have decided to co-host a
ministerial conference in the spring on the Agency's
pressing financial situation.

We are indeed at a crossroads. Our final
destination - the two-State solution - is getting
further away by the day. The political and even physical
space for a two-State solution is drastically shrinking.
The choices that we all make - Israelis, Palestinians
and as members ofthe Council - will determine where
we end up. The Council also has a responsibility to act,
including by supporting the parties in moving from
words to action. Difficult choices need to be made.
What is needed now is political leadership and courage
to make the bold choices and pick the right path to break
the long-term deadlock and restart a genuine peace
process. Only that way can we reach our commonly
agreed final destination.

