Mr. Mansour (Palestine): At the outset, I thank
the Polish presidency for convening this important
and timely debate, which has particular significance
for the State of Palestine against the backdrop of the
violent repression by Israel, the occupying Power, of
peaceful civilian protests in the Gaza Strip over the
past few weeks.

For decades, the Palestinian people have appealed
to the international community for protection in
accordance with the rules and norms enshrined in
international law, in particular humanitarian law. For
decades now, our people have suffered a protection
crisis, compounded by the length and depth of the
Israeli military occupation and the impunity enjoyed by
Israel, which has emboldened its commission of grave
violations of the United Nations Charter, international
law and United Nations resolutions.

Only such blatant impunity can explain how Israel
dared to open fire from hundreds of metres away on
peaceful protesters with live ammunition in a deliberate
and wilful manner, killing more than 100 Palestinian
civilians, including children, and wounding thousands
of civilians in broad daylight.

International law is clear as to the protections to
which civilians are entitled. An occupying Power
cannot claim the right to security at the expense of the
right to the security, protection and well-being of the
occupied people, nor can it do so at the expense of a
people's right to self-determination.

Equally, there is no right to security that justifies
permanent occupation or the illegal acquisition of land
by force and its colonization. There is no right to security
that justifies a blockade imposed on 2 million people
for 11 years. There is no right to security to justify the
unlawful use of force, notably the use of lethal force
against peaceful protesters. International law draws
a clear line between legal action and war crimes and
crimes against humanity, and we call upon all States
not to accept any justification for the commission of
such crimes.

In that connection, the State of Palestine today
submitted a referral to the International Criminal Court
regarding war crimes, especially the ongoing war crime
of settlements.

The international community, including the
Council, has made lofty commitments to protect
civilians, and the obligations on all are clear. There
cannot be one standard for the entire world and another
for Israel. Impunity is the greatest threat to civilians,
while accountability is the greatest shield protecting
them, deterring and preventing the recurrence of crimes.

Are the Palestinian people entitled to protection
under the provisions of the United Nations Charter,
international humanitarian law and international human
rights law? The answer must be yes. Is anyone under
the illusion that Israel has any respect for its obligations
under these instruments? Has it not demonstrated time
and time again its contempt for the rule oflaw, including
the right to life?

There can be no doubt that it is the responsibility
of the international community to bring this situation
of prolonged, recurrent, widespread and systematic
violations to an end. It is also the responsibility of the
international community to provide protection to the
people under occupation for as long as it persists.

Seeking to uphold this responsibility, Kuwait, in its
capacity as the Arab representative in the Council, has
in recent days begun consultations on a draft resolution
on the protection of Palestinian civilians, following the
grave incidents and loss of Palestinian life in Gaza just
a week ago at the hands of the Israeli occupying forces.
We urge Council members to seize this opportunity to
demonstrate that the principles enshrined in Security
Council resolutions on the protection of civilians,
including children, have no exceptions, and to show
their readiness to consistently act in defence of these
principles in the face of such grave violations.

We appeal to Council members to uphold their
Charter mandate and the Council's credibility and
authority, which is being severely undermined.
Moreover, we call on all States that believe in the rule of
international law to uphold the law in a situation where
its breach has been tolerated for too long, prolonging
the Israeli occupation and its crimes against our people,
prolonging their suffering and the denial of their rights,
and preventing the realization of peace. As the Council
addresses today the critical issue of the protection of
civilians, we call on it to act accordingly and to ensure
that Palestine is not the exception.

