Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): Let me thank Under-
Secretary-General Lacroix for the presentation of a
very insightful report of the Secretary-General on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2017/565).

Since our previous meeting in March (see S/PV.7903), the situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo has remained fragile and dangerous.
The political agreement of 31 December 2016 has
yet to be implemented. It is a matter of concern that
the new Government, which was sworn in before the
National Assembly on 16 May, was not recognized by
the Rassemblement des forces politiques et sociales
de la Republique democratique du Congo acquises au
changement. We reiterate our call to all stakeholders in
the country to implement the 31 December agreement
through peaceful dialogue.

The implementation of the agreement must be
supported and reinforced by regional States and
organizations through the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the Region. Under these circumstances,
the swift organization of the presidential elections
by the end of 2017 is critically important in order to
avoid turning the intensified political tensions into a
full-fledged conflict. We welcome the efforts of the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
with the assistance of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo (MONUSCO), in completing the voter
registration process in the near future.

Kazakhstan commends the activities of
MONUSCO to support the implementation of the
31 December agreement and the electoral process. We
strongly condemn the activities of all armed groups
operating in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
their violations, especially those involving attacks on
the civilian population, United Nations personnel and
humanitarian actors; summary executions; sexual and
gender-based violence; and large-scale recruitment and
the use of children against international law. All armed
groups must drop their weapons and cease immediately
all forms of violence. The Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo should maintain a
high level of cooperation with MONUSCO and conduct
joint operations to neutralize those armed groups.
This is also important in order to register all voters
and prepare for the elections of the troubled Kasai and
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo regions.

As we heard from Ms. Gamba de Potgieter last
Thursday, the scale of human rights violations against
children in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
especially in the Kasai region, has been the greatest it
has ever been for the past few years. Therefore, I would
like to reiterate that the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo bears a primary responsibility
for the protection of the entire civilian population, first
and foremost women and children. With regard to the
killing of two United Nations experts, Kazakhstan
believes that comprehensive, credible and transparent
criminal investigations by the authorities of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo must continue in
order to bring all perpetrators to justice.

The humanitarian situation in the country,
exacerbated by the ongoing violence in the Kasai
region and the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo, has continued to deteriorate since the beginning
of 2017. The downward macroeconomic trend and
poor socioeconomic situation are aggravating the
humanitarian situation as well. The United Nations
system, international financial institutions and the
African Development Bank must strengthen the
peace-development nexus to support the humanitarian
and political process in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

