Mr. Allam-Mi (spoke in French): I would like to
say how honoured I am and pleased to be here among
the members of the Security Council at this important
informational meeting on the Central African region.
I express my sincere thanks to the French presidency
for its invitation addressed to me to succinctly brief the
Council on the Economic Community of Central African
States (ECCAS), which is, it must be emphasized, one
of eight pillars for the building of African integration.

Established in 1983, ECCAS covers a geographical
area of 6.6 million square kilometres where more than
160 million people live today. It aims to promote and
strengthen harmonious cooperation among its member
States, as well as balanced and sustainable development
in all areas of socioeconomic activity. To that end, we
have just launched, on 13 May in Kinshasa, the ECCAS
Free Trade Area. Together with the infrastructure and
the environment, free trade is one of our main priorities.
Our highest priorities today, however, are peace and
security issues, which was not the case when ECCAS
was established.

Issues of peace and security were imposed on
ECCAS at the end of a period of lethargy for the
institution between 1992 and 1998, as a result of the
violent wars that 7 of its 10 member States experienced
during the period. The ECCAS peace and security
architecture works in harmony with the African Union
Peace and Security Architecture, with results that can
certainly be improved upon but are still encouraging.
ECCAS has been able to take concrete action on the
ground. For example, the situation in the Central African
Republic led ECCAS to deploy its first peacekeeping
mission, the Mission for the Consolidation of Peace in
the Central African Republic, which started with a staff
of675 but grew to a staffof2,600 for its second mission,
in 2013, at the peak of the crisis, thereby avoiding chaos
in the country.

Accordingly, the member States of ECCAS have
agreed, for over two decades, to make significant
sacrifices in terms of human, material and financial
resources. They have continued to support the Central
African Republic, despite the deployment of Operation
Sangaris, the African-led International Support Mission
in the Central African Republic, and then United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic. Just recently,
the financial contribution of ECCAS - decided in
November 2015 at the seventh extraordinary summit
of Heads of State of the region held to consider the
situation in the Central African Republic - was
instrumental in the holding of elections and in helping
the country complete the transition in a timely manner.
Although the transition is over, today ECCAS remains
seized of the situation in the Central African Republic
and wishes to be associated with any international
initiative, whether it be by the United Nations or some
other entity, that strives to help that member State to
finally get out of the spiral of violence.

With regard to maritime safety and security,
ECCAS was the first regional economic community
in Africa to adopt a strategy to secure its maritime
space, pursuant to resolutions 2018 (2011) and 2039
(2012). The Central African subregion is now home,
in Yaounde, to the Interregional Coordination Centre
for Maritime Safety and Security in the Gulf of Guinea
(ICC), the body responsible for the implementation
of this strategy in the States of the Gulf of Guinea,
which, through their regional institutions - ECCAS,
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and the Commission of the Gulf of Guinea
(CGG) - are now finalizing the operationalization
process. ECCAS, ECOWAS and the CGG have
committed to fully supporting the budget for the
ICC from July to December 2016. For the year 2017,
I would like to appeal to all that are using Gulf of
Guinea sea routes and resources - States, institutions,
maritime operators, fishing companies, oil companies,
ship owners -to announce their contributions at the
conference for partners and third-party contributors
that we will hold in Yaounde on 26 to 27 July.

With respect to the fight against terrorism, ECCAS
has taken important initiatives to support its two
member States - Cameroon and Chad - involved
in the fight against the terrorist group Boko Haram.
Financial assistance to both countries in the amount of
$100 million was granted at a summit on the issue. The
fight against the terrorist group Boko Haram is heavy
burden on the meagre resources of States engaged
in it. It is therefore essential that the international
community substantially strengthen its multifaceted
support to enable the Multinational Joint Task Force to
become fully operational in order to achieve its goal of
eliminating Boko Haram.

As to the political, security and humanitarian
situation in general, ECCAS remains particularly
affected by electoral and post-electoral conflicts, the
crises in Burundi and in eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the legacy of the great social,
political and humanitarian crisis in the Central African
Republic and the terrorist activities of Boko Haram,
the Lord's Resistance Army and terrorist groups in
Libya. In that regard, I commend the excellent report
(S/2016/482)of the Secretary-General on the situation
in Central Africa, submitted by Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Abdoulaye Bathily.
Nevertheless, certain political aspects of the report
could be more nuanced, as the countries of Central
Africa are in a transitional phase towards building
States based on the rule of law and democracy. In this
phase, the international community's support should
not fail them, with a view to improving and building
the capacity of their institutions.

Despite our efforts and successes, real difficulties,
mainly of a structural, financial and technical order,
impede the proper functioning of ECCAS. To remedy
the situation, we are actively working to bring about
institutional reform at ECCAS by updating our
constitutive documents - our Treaty dates back to
1983 - in harmony with those of the African Union,
renewable funding instruments, an organizational
model, efficient decision-making and management
procedures consistent with international standards, and
policies, strategies and programmes compatible with
Agenda 2063 of the African Union.

In this context, support and renewed support on
the part of the international community are needed,
in particular by the United Nations. The outstanding
cooperation between the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa and the General Secretariat
of ECCAS represents a solid foundation for further
strengthening and diversifying the partnership with the
United Nations system as a whole.

To conclude, allow me to underscore the central
role that the regional economic communities play in the
prevention and resolution of conflicts, in peacebuilding
and in strengthening security and governance in Africa.
ECCAS is playing a leading role in this context and
will continue to do so. Our ultimate wish is that United
Nations and all bilateral and multilateral partners will
continue to trust ECCAS, support it and enhance its
cooperation with it in its various activities.

