Mr. Bamba (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): As
I am speaking for the first time during the French
presidency of the Security Council this month, it is
my pleasant duty to congratulate you warmly, Sir,
on assuming the prestigious responsibility assigned
to you. I also wish to extend our thanks for allowing
us to discuss the multidimensional aspects of peace
and security in Africa, in particular the issue of drug
trafficking and organized crime, the importance
of which is clear to all. That has been shown by the
weighty statements been made today, including by the
Secretary-General; Mr. Fedotov, the Executive Director
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC); Mr. Said Djinnit, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Office for West Africa; the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Guatemala; and all the members of the Security
Council, including your very important statement, Sir.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of 15 States
members of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), which associates itself with the
statement made by Ambassador Te'te Antonio on behalf
of the African Union.

ECOWAS also welcomes the presidential statement
adopted earlier (S/PRST/2013/22).

The representatives who have spoken before me, as
well as the reports of the UNODC and the International
Narcotics Control Board, all agree on three points with
respect to West Africa. The first is that West Africa has
become a favoured transit zone for drug trafficking.
Secondly, the drug problem has been internalized in
West Africa, in particular via the spread of local drug
use through the consumption of cocaine and other
stimulants such as amphetamines. The third and most
alarming point is the exploitation of the West African
region as a transit zone by drug cartels, which benefit
from its chronic instability, weak rule of law and porous
borders to undertake their illegal activities in its vast
spaces in all impunity.

The most glaring manifestations of this state of
affairs are clearly the coups d'etat in Guinea-Bissau
and in Mali in early 2012. Those two countries were
targeted by international drug traffickers for specific
reasons. Guinea-Bissau has become a hub for the traffic
in cocaine, and Mali has become a transit country for
cocaine and cannabis resin, as reflected in the report
of the International Narcotics Control Board. That is
why ECOWAS, with the backing of the African Union
and its international partners, including France, has
launched parallel initiatives that have made a significant
contribution to restoring some degree of stability in
those countries. They deserve to be supported.

In that situation, West Africa had established an
action plan to combat drugs for the period 2008-2012.
The ECOWAS Heads of State and Government, at their
forty-first ordinary session, held in Yamoussoukro,
reiterated their political commitment to the fight against
drugs and instructed the ECOWAS Commission to
reactivate the action plan on an urgent basis. I also note
the firm resolve ofour Heads ofState, as reaffirmed at the
regional maritime security conference held in Yaounde
on 24 and 25 June, to do their utmost to eliminate that
scourge. With respect to the action plan, I note that in
February the ECOWAS Heads of State endorsed the
Commission memorandum to extend the plan by two
years so as to finalize the drafting and official adoption
of the documents for the tenth European Development
Fund Regional Indicative Programme.

I will conclude by indicating that for January 2014,
the ECOWAS Commission has organized in Cotonou
the tenth meeting of the Inter-Ministerial Coordinating
Committee of ECOWAS member States concerning
the issue of drugs. Given the persistent and emerging
problems oftrafficking in cocaine, methamphetamines,
firearms and fraudulent medications and clandestine
migration in our subregion, the objective of this meeting
will be to identify new challenges and to propose ways
and means of accelerating the implementation of the
Regional Action Plan. We will try to identify, without
complacency, existing limitations and emerging
challenges with a view to laying the foundations for
formulating an action plan for 2015-2020 to combat
drugs in West Africa.

In conclusion, like previous speakers, I would like
to express our congratulations to Togo and Morocco,
from Africa, and all other departing members of
the Security Council. We have appreciated their
contributions to strengthening multilateralism, and we
particularly appreciate the way in which they dealt with
the questions of peace and security for our country.

