Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic):
Allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your election to
the presidency of the Council this month. I thank you
for your work, and I am grateful to the Permanent
Representative of Jamaica, Ambassador Patricia
Durrant, for her leadership last month.

The Government of Ariel Sharon announced last
Wednesday that it would sever all contact with the
Palestinian Authority and its elected leader, President
Yasser Arafat. This decision means the abandonment of
the negotiation process. It appears to be a prelude to
the abandonment of all existing arrangements between
the two sides. The Israeli Government has thus begun
to take official and public measures to prevent a final
settlement and revert the conflict between the two sides
to the era before the Oslo accords instead of resolving
the conflict and establishing peace in the region.

Despite the immense danger posed by such
measures which portend widespread confrontation that
could plunge the entire region into war, it would be
difficult to say that this came as a complete surprise. It
was obvious from the first day that Mr. Sharon and his
Government came to power that they were going in
that direction. Mr. Sharon has declared on more than
one occasion that he does not want a final settlement,
and that he wants only an agreement on a cessation of
hostilities. Also, Mr. Sharon has repeatedly stated his
animosity to the Mitchell Committee and then to its
recommendations. In fact, to avoid implementing those
recommendations, he concocted the condition of
having seven days of quiet - as though a period of
quiet would lead to the implementation of the
recommendations rather than the implementation of the
recommendations leading to a period of quiet, to an
end to the violence and to a resumption of the peace
process.

Once Mr. Sharon had succeeded in burying the
Mitchell recommendations for an extended period and
in thwarting any attempt to revive them, he came up
with a new declaration: that the Palestinian Authority
first had to combat and put an end to terrorism. In the
meantime, Israel would continue to assault the
Authority and its institutions, including its security
apparatus, thus making it impossible for them to
function. Most recently, he came up with the
announcement that he was boycotting the Palestinian
Authority.

Those are the basic political statements of the
Israeli Government and its leader, all of them firmly
conveying the determination of that Government to
continue its confrontation, its violence and its rejection
of any attempt to bring about peace.
I regret to have to say here that some have
attempted to provide cover for some of those positions,
either deliberately or unintentionally, thus encouraging
the Israeli Government to continue its destructive
policies and its aggression against our people.

For our part, we have repeatedly stated our
commitment to existing agreements and our full
acceptance of the Mitchell report, and we have called
for the comprehensive and speedy implementation of
the report's recommendations. Moreover, we have
always expressed our readiness to resume the
negotiations on the agreed basis, with a view to the
rapid achievement of a final settlement and to the
establishment of peace. That has been and remains our
position. The Israeli Government must stop doubting
that position and casting doubt on it. The Israeli
Government must also understand that any retreat from
mutual recognition and from existing agreements
cannot go in one direction only, and that this can only
prolong the pain and suffering of both our peoples, and
of all the peoples of the region - although our people
remain the principal victim.

On the question of terrorism, the Palestinian side
has taken a clear stand against international terrorism
and against terrorist groups with a global dimension.
The Palestinian side joined the international consensus
on this issue following the September disaster in the
United States. In line with that clear position - as well
as prior to those events ~ we have also rejected
suicide bombings carried out in Israel targeting Israeli
civilians. We condemn them as terrorist acts, and we
view them as incompatible with Palestinian
commitments and as acts that harm the national
interests of the Palestinian people. That position
remains clear and fair, in spite of all the crimes and all
the State terrorism perpetrated against our people by
official Israel - not just by Israeli groups or
organizations. I shall return later to this question.

Despite our clear position, the ability of the
Palestinians to confront and put an end to that
phenomenon depends, first and foremost, on the
capabilities of the security apparatus, including its
freedom of movement. And secondly, and perhaps
more important, it depends on a halt to the suffering of
the Palestinian people and on the restoration of their
hope and belief that the process of negotiations will
actually lead to an end to occupation and to the
establishment of peace.

Regrettably, the present Israeli Government has
persistently worked to destroy both of those
requirements. It has violently assaulted the Palestinian
security apparatus, virtually preventing it from
functioning. At the same time, it has continued to
impose its siege and closures, causing the suffocation,
destruction and killing of our people. It has persisted in
sending the message that there is no hope of a final
settlement or of peace.

Let me speak now of acts of violence committed
in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
Jerusalem. We do not support or condone such acts,
because we are trying to reach a peaceful negotiated
solution. Moreover, we affirm that those acts are
incompatible with our commitments, including our
commitment to the ceasefire. But we absolutely do not
accept any attempt to label those acts as terrorist acts.
Over the years, resistance to foreign occupation has
been, and it remains, a legitimate right under
international law and international humanitarian law. In
the Palestinian case, there are no protected Israeli
civilians in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
Jerusalem. Israeli settlers are there illegally, and were
sent in grave breach of the Fourth Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War and of the first Protocol Additional to the
Conventions. They came to colonize Palestinian lands
and thus to deny the rights and the existence of our
people. I would add that most of the settlers are armed,
which makes them illegal combatants or members of
militias. Over the years, they have terrorized and
attacked Palestinian civilians. One example was the
massacre committed by a settler at Al-Haram
Al-Ibrahimi at Hebron.

I speak of this because some parties seem to be
trying to lend legitimacy to the presence of the settlers.
The Israeli settlers will remain illegal until they depart
with the end of the occupation of our land.

Recently, Israel, the occupying Power, viciously
escalated its bloody military campaign against our
people and against the Palestinian Authority. It has
made intensive use of F-l6 warplanes, helicopter
gunships, tanks and other weaponry. It has re-occupied
some areas that are under full Palestinian control; it has
tightened its siege of Palestinian cities and has
destroyed many Palestinian institutions and symbols of
the Authority, including important facilities such as the
Gaza international airport and the Voice of Palestine
radio station.

All of this, of course, has been accompanied by
significant loss of life and by widespread fear and
terror among Palestinian civilians. Today the Israeli
forces of occupation killed at least eight Palestinians;
yesterday they killed another six. Regrettably, we heard
nothing from the circles that had spoken out before
under different circumstances. Prior to this escalation,
the Israeli campaign had not ceased since the infamous
visit of Ariel Sharon to Al-Haram al-Sharif on
28 September 2000. Since then, Israeli forces of
occupation have killed more than 800 Palestinians, in
addition to the hundreds of Palestinian who have been
martyred by the occupation in different ways, such as
through preventing the movement of ambulances.
Israeli forces of occupation have also injured
approximately 30,000 Palestinians, many of whom
have been permanently disabled, and have caused
tremendous suffering among all Palestinians.

The occupying forces have committed deliberate
killings, and Israel - the occupying Power - has
adopted an official policy of extra-judicial executions.
Israel has also caused the widespread destruction of
private and public property, including economic
institutions; the uprooting of thousands of trees; and
the despoiling of agricultural land. All of these actions
represent serious breaches of the Fourth Geneva
Convention. The occupying Power has also committed
other serious violations of the Convention, including
the imposition of severe restrictions on the movement
of persons and goods and the imposition of closure and
of collective punishment.

We should also refer here to the Conference of
High Contracting Parties to the Fourth Geneva
Convention, which was reconvened on 5 December and
unanimously adopted an extremely important
declaration calling on the occupying Power, inter alia,
immediately to cease committing grave breaches of the
Convention, including any of the acts mentioned in
article 147, and to refrain from any other violations of
the Convention.

Regrettably, Israel has continued and escalated
these violations. On the basis of the clear provisions of
the Fourth Geneva Convention and its first Additional
Protocol, we charge the Government of Mr. Ariel
Sharon, the Government of the occupying Power, with
war crimes committed against the Palestinian people,
pursuant to the official policies of that Government.
Further, we hold it responsible for all other war crimes
committed by members of the occupying army and by
Israeli settlers, in accordance with article 29 of the
Convention.

The responsibilities of the High Contracting
Parties to the Convention are very clear, as defined in
common article 1 and article 148. The responsibilities
of the Security Council are also clear.
We also charge Israel, the occupying Power, with
carrying out State terrorism against our people. It has
engaged in the killing of civilians and in the vast
destruction of property, with the aim of instilling fear
and terror in the population and forcing it to submit to
its political will.

The responsibility of the international community
is perfectly clear, as are the responsibilities of the
Security Council, particularly in the light of the
campaign against international terrorism. The peoples
of our region, as are many throughout the world, are
looking to see how the international community deals
with this grave and tragic matter.

In any case, the Israeli occupation of our land and
our people remains the main problem and the source of
all of these disastrous events. The only solution to the
situation is an end to the occupation and the realization
of the rights of our people, including the establishment
of an independent state, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its
capital. Only the realization of the rights of the
Palestinians and coexistence between the two States of
Palestine and Israel will bring security, stability and
peace for both sides and for the region.

In this regard, we would like to express our
appreciation for what was stated by President George
Bush before the General Assembly as well as the
statement made by Secretary of State Colin Powell on
19 November with regard to the Middle East. We
accept the content of that statement as a basis for
moving forward, with regard both to dealing with the
current situation on the ground and to the final
settlement between the two sides.

We also express our appreciation for the envoys
sent by certain concerned parties, including the United
States, the Russian Federation, the European Union,
the United Nations Secretary-General, and, of course,
to all of our friends, including the Organization of the
Islamic Conference and the Non-Aligned Movement,
for their principled and continuous support.

The Security Council has convened today to
consider the grave situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories and to attempt to take the necessary action in
this regard. There is no doubt that, tragically, this step
is extremely late in coming, due in particular to the
Council's inability to take any action since the
adoption of resolution 1322 (2000) on 7 October 2000,
even if only to follow up on the implementation of the
resolution. No one can deny that the Council's inability
to act in this regard has had a major impact on its
credibility and possibly affected its ability to take
action in other areas.
The important question here - one that is
relevant to international relations as a whole and
perhaps even to the future of the Organization - is
whether the Council is being used by some only when
it suits them, or whether it is representative, acting on
behalf of all of the members of the international
community, and is actually responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security.

Today, regrettably, it appears that the Security
Council will be prevented once again from assuming its
responsibilities under the Charter because of the
negative stance of one of its members. But at least a
serious attempt was made by the members to deal with
this grave situation. We appreciate this attempt.

We wish to express our sincere thanks and
appreciation to all of those members of the Security
Council who have expressed their support for the draft
resolution, and we wish also to thank our Arab brothers
who asked for this meeting, co-sponsored the draft
resolution and presented it to the Council -
particularly Tunisia, the Arab member of the Security
Council, and Egypt, the Chairman of the Arab Group
for this month.

