Mr. Mohib (Afghanistan): At the outset, I would
like to express the deepest condolences of the people
and the Government of Afghanistan over the recent
tragic crash of the Ethiopian airliner, which resulted in
many lives lost, including United Nations personnel.

I would like to thank you, Madam President,
for convening today's meeting on the situation in
Afghanistan. It is an honour for me to represent my
country today in delivering my first address to the
Security Council. I would like to congratulate France
on assuming the presidency of the Council, as well
as to thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres for
his report (S/2019/193). We also recognize his Special
Representative, Ambassador Tadamichi Yamamoto,
for his leadership of the work of the United Nations in
Afghanistan. I would also like to recognize Ms. Storai
Tapesh, Deputy Executive Director of the Afghan
Women's Network, who joins us today via video-
teleconference.

As we approach the extension of the mandate of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) this week, I would like to acknowledge
the United Nations strategic engagement and support
for Afghanistan's stability. The United Nations has a
supportive role to play in working with the Afghan
Government and people to bring about peace. Today I
will share with members an update on where we are
and the road ahead towards peace. To understand our
approach to peace, the Council first has to understand
the many new realities in Afghanistan today.

First of all, Afghanistan has undergone an era of
social transformation. Seventy-five per cent of our
population is under the age of 35, has grown up in a
democracy and has a different set of expectations
and principles than their parents' and grandparents'
generations. Our generation was born in war and grew
up in conflict or exile. We yearn for peace and wish for
peace to complement what we have built over the past
18 years, not reverse it. We must safeguard our future.

Millions of Afghans have benefited from the best
of national and international education opportunities,
and members of this generation are now in positions
of leadership and senior management. We have also
experienced the transformation of our female citizens
from victims of institutionalized discrimination under
the Taliban regime to active, empowered, engaged
contributors to all spheres of society and politics.
Women also collectively play a vital role in our
economic growth and national security. I would like
to congratulate my colleague Ambassador Adela Raz
on presenting her credentials last week to Secretary-
General Guterres and becoming the first Afghan
women to hold that post. Ambassador Raz, as a child,
studied in a secret school during the Taliban regime.
She symbolizes the transformation that women and
girls have fought to achieve over the past 18 years.

Against the backdrop of those two social
transformations, President Ghani introduced the
decade of transformation when he took office in
2014 - a comprehensive, whole-of-Government
reform agenda to implement the rule of law, tackle
corruption systemically, implement more efficient
and effective national development programmes and
increase economic growth and revenue collection. We
are moving the country towards self-reliance. It is a
reform package designed to meet the demands of the
new generation of Afghans for fair, clean and merit-
based governance that is focused on the needs of the
citizen, not the pockets of the political elite.

Five years into the decade of transformation, we
have accomplished a tremendous amount, despite the
competing priorities of war, elections and drought, as
well as considerable resistance from those who are
benefiting from corrupt systems. To name just a few
highlights, last year the indicators of the World Bank's
Doing Business 2018 report recognized Afghanistan as
the top reforming country for improving the business
climate. Our access to information law was recognized
as the best in the world. The Government increased
domestic revenue by 91 per cent from 2014 to 2018 and
met every benchmark of the International Monetary
Fund during the same period. We have set a new tone of
intolerance towards corruption. Since inaugurating our
national strategy to counter corruption in 2017, we have
already completed well over half of the goals and are
now working towards a new set of benchmarks that will
expose and address the next layer of problems in this
long-term process of rooting out corruption.

We have invested tremendously in efforts to connect
our region through trade and by addressing regional
energy needs. Our farmers, producers, entrepreneurs,
businessmen and businesswomen are now able to
look outwards to export their products via the Lapis
Lazuli Corridor to Europe, the Chabahar port in Iran
to India and air corridors to Turkey, Saudi Arabia,
China and beyond. We exported nearly $1 billion-worth
of products last year. We are moving from an aid to a
trade economy.

The result of the past five years is that we have laid
a legal foundation for a modern economy, society and
State. We have also changed the tone of governance in
Afghanistan. We have achieved all this thanks to the
creativity, perseverance and bravery of the Afghan
people and the Afghan National Defence and Security
Forces. We are grateful to the international community
for the support and assistance they have provided.
Continuing support for the decade of transformation
will allow us to see the fruits of our sacrifices in
both blood and treasure, but as Afghans we have the
primary responsibility. We own the problems, and we
are implementing solutions. The past five years have
delivered us to the doorstep of peace. The country, and
indeed the world, are abuzz with both the excitement
of its possibilities and the concerns and uncertainties
that surround it. Two years ago, peace was not part of
the vocabulary when we spoke of Afghanistan. The
National Unity Government made it a priority and
took risks for peace, and today it is something we are
working towards.

Let me give some insight as to where we stand with
regard to peace today and where we are heading. After
President Ghani's unconditional peace talks offer in
February 2018, followed by the ceasefire in June 2018
and the announcement of an Afghan negotiating team
and peace road map in November 2018, we have been
working to build consensus across the country over the
past few months. In December 2018, the Government
hosted a jirga, with the participation of 2,500 young
people from 34 provinces. In February, the country's
first women's gathering was held in the Loya Jirga tent,
in which 3,500 women gathered from all provinces to
reach a consensus on what they expect from the peace
process. They represented the voices of 15,000 women
who had been consulted over a six-month period. This
spring, the Government will convene a consultative
loya jirga, which will further bond the collective voice
ofthe Afghan people. That will be followed by the third
Kabul process conference, where we will be looking
practically at implementing a post-peace plan.

Peace is imperative and urgently needed, but not
at any cost. The Constitution must be respected, as
must be the democratic State and elected Government
that it constitutes. The process must be inclusive and
representative of the new Afghanistan, not a deal made
among elites. If peace is going to belong to and be
maintained by Afghans, it must ultimately be owned by
Afghans themselves. The Afghan Government and the
Afghan people have made commitments to peace. Now
it is up to the Taliban to prove its commitment. It has so
far failed to seize opportunities for peace, yet we stand
ready to engage in direct talks. If the Taliban genuinely
wants peace, it should demonstrate it through positive

deeds, not by continued attacks on innocent people and
our security forces.

Peace also goes hand in hand with elections. We
thank the United Nations for its steadfast support
for the democratic process in Afghanistan and count
on its continued technical support for the upcoming
polls. The Afghan people have, time and again, gone
to the polls to reinforce and strengthen their belief in
democracy. In October 2018, 2,565 candidates, most of
them of a younger generation, contested 249 seats in the
Parliament. More than 4 million Afghans came out to
vote, of whom more than 35 per cent were women.

It is the Government's responsibility to match our
people's trust in their democracy with reforms and
uphold, strengthen and protect our democratic systems.
Since mismanagement, poor administration and
organization were exposed during our parliamentary
elections, we have been working to add further
credibility and transparency to the process. After the
Cabinet approved amendments to the electoral law, an
unprecedented initiative took place two weeks ago.
Current presidential candidates came together to elect
new commissioners of both the Independent Election
Commission and the Electoral Complaints Commission.
I will add that, in another first for our country, both
newly elected Commission heads are women, elected
by their predominately male colleagues. The Afghan
people and our international partners have made
enormous sacrifices to build our democracy, and the
Afghan people are counting on the elections. I would
like to emphasize that we welcome international
monitors in every phase of the elections this year.

As we pursue peace, we are also simultaneously
maintaining military operations and implementing
reforms to strengthen our Afghan National Defence
and Security Forces (ANDSF). The ANDSF defied
predictions of collapse and failure when it took over in
2014, by protecting not only Afghanistan's sovereignty
but also safeguarding the world from the threat of
global terror. After the implementation of new policies
and strategies, we have seen improved operational
output on the battlefield and a substantial increase in
offensive operations. Our security forces have not only
held ground, but solidified control over territories and
weakened pockets of enemy contingents, including
Da'esh elements in the eastern and northern parts of
the country.

While fighting a war on several battlefields, with
a shortage of needed equipment and capabilities, the
Government implemented a complete overhaul of the
security sector, which allowed for a much-needed
generational change in leadership. I was honoured
to witness the promotion of one of those new, young
leaders on Armed Forces Day at the Ministry of
Defence - Ms. Mursal Afshar was promoted from
the rank of first lieutenant to that of captain. I was
impressed with her professionalism, dedication and
patriotism. I feel emboldened to know that we have
young soldiers like Captain Afshar fighting the war for
Afghanistan and the world.

We must remember that peace with the Taliban in
Afghanistan will not mean an end to the threat of global
terrorism. Afghan forces will remain defiant in the face
of terrorism, but that responsibility does not belong
solely to Afghanistan - it is a long-term global threat
that requires a sustained global response.

A zero-tolerance approach, based on genuine and
sincere cooperation by all States, is key to success.
Strict enforcement of Security Council sanctions
measures set out in resolutions 1988 (2011) and 1267
(1999) should no longer be compromised. Any failure in
that regard would translate into a failure in the Security
Council's response to combat terrorist and extremist
groups effectively, and would also render those groups
capable of continuing their destructive activities.

Afghanistan will continue to pursue a sequential,
thoughtful peace process, which will lead to dialogue
between the Afghan Government and people and
the Taliban. We will continue to pursue military and
counter-terrorism objectives, and we remain absolutely
committed to holding presidential elections this year.
We ask our international partners to see Afghanistan
as a platform for regional and global cooperation, not
just for mutual economic benefit but also for the shared
objectives of peace and stability.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Afghanistan's
gratitude for the role that the Council has played in
galvanizing international partnership for Afghanistan,
dating back to 2001, when we opened a new chapter in
our modern history. The Council has been consistent in
its support over the years, helping us to make progress
towards self-reliance and peace. We are clear-eyed
about the challenges that remain, which still demand
the support of the Council and the international
community. Afghanistan remains a trusted partner
that is committed to our international obligations to
promote global peace, solidarity and stability.

