Mr. Sow (Guinea) (spoke in French): I should
like to thank you, Sir, for organizing this meeting,
which gives us an opportunity to assess recent
developments in Kosovo.

My delegation welcomes the presence among us
of the Deputy Prime Minister of the Republic of
Serbia, Mr. Covic, and thanks Mr. Michael Steiner for
his excellent work during his tenure. I also wish to
congratulate Mr. Harri Holkeri on his appointment to
lead the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and to assure him of our
full support.

Our consideration of the current situation in
Kosovo prompts me to offer a few comments on
pending issues. The crucial issues of security and the
restoration of trust among the various ethnic groups are
among the challenges to be faced.

The murder early this month of an UNMIK police
commander and the shooting of a group of young Serbs
on 13 August near Pec, following the massacre of an
entire family in Obilic last June, demonstrate the
precariousness of the security situation in Kosovo.
Furthermore, these tragic events emphasize the need
for all communities in Kosovo to become more
involved in seeking solutions to the problems of the
province so as to restore lasting peace there.

My delegation offers its condolences to the
bereaved families and to the Indian Government and
strongly condemns these criminal actions, the
perpetrators of which must be brought to justice. We
support ongoing efforts to improve the judicial system
and police services, which are essential to the
restoration of security.

In this regard, we welcome UNMIK's decision on
its programme to combat the proliferation and illicit
circulation of weapons in Kosovo. We urge all the
parties involved to do their utmost to ensure the
success of the programme, which is scheduled to start
on 1 September.

While the international community has a primary
role in normalizing the situation in Kosovo, it is
nonetheless true that the success of this undertaking
depends above all on the will and resolve of the
Kosovars themselves. They must demonstrate tolerance
and mutual respect in order to transcend their
differences and promote reconciliation and peace.

In the search for lasting peace, strengthening
cooperation among the various communities with
UNMIK and the Kosovo Force is an imperative need.

