Mr. Bante (Chad) (spoke in French): I thank you,
Madam President, for taking the initiative to organize
this debate. I would also like to thank Ms. Prost, the
Ombudsperson, and Ms. Bensouda, the Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court (ICC), for their
briefings.

Like every organization, the Security Council has
its own procedures and methods of work, which are
frequently reviewed with a view to adapting them and
also to take into account sanctions and the demands
of transparency and fairness. Thus, the principle of
targeted sanctions established in resolution 917 (1994),
on Haiti, has enabled their impact to be limited to those
targets and therefore made them more acceptable to
the international community. The criteria for listing
and delisting, which were criticized for their lack
of precision and fairness, have also been improved
as a result of recommendations made to the Council
at the 2005 World Summit of Heads and State and
Government.

The Council's creation of the Office of the
Ombudsperson of the Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida
and associated individuals and entities, charged with
delisting issues, has promoted communication and
transparency as well as the adoption of new procedures
for introducing the necessary corrections. Since 2013,
the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions, which is currently chaired
by Argentina, has also initiated several efforts aimed
at improving the Council's work that required the
consensus of the members as a whole. I should take
this opportunity to congratulate you and the members
of the Working Group, Madam President, for those
achievements.

However, they have not solved every problem,
for we continue to hear the voices of those who
condemn the lack of transparency and respect for due
process in the application of sanctions on persons and
organizations suspected of committing international
crimes, including acts of terrorism. Those reproaches,
largely well founded, speak to the need for a review
of the procedures, while taking into account the basic
rights of those targeted by the sanctions.

In that regard, the Office of the Ombudsperson,
which has been acknowledged today as representing a
step forward in this area, deserves to be strengthened
and would benefit from more support and resources.
We believe it should have greater independence if
that would enable it to bring more justice, fairness
and transparency to the job. We also believe that the
procedure instituted through resolutions 1267 (1999)
and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida should be
expanded to the other Sanctions Committees and that
supplementary steps should be taken to enable States
and their tribunals whose citizens are targeted by the
sanctions to be adequately informed about the various
processes.

We have previously explained our country's
position on the issue of the Security Council's
referrals to institutions and the situation regarding its
cooperation with the ICC. Chad, which is a party to
the Rome Statute, believes that combating impunity
helps to protect innocent civilian populations during
armed conflicts, most of which, and many of them very
violent, take place today in Africa. The work of the ICC
can unquestionably help to limit the loss of human lives
and environmentcourage the parties to such conflicts
to abide by the principles and rules of human rights
and international humanitarian law. That is why States'
cooperation with the ICC remains essential.

However, as we have said, we must not lose sight
of security considerations when it comes to deferring
the investigation of certain high political officials
by the Court. In that regard, we have urged that the
views of regional organizations be taken into account
and a dialogue be initiated with them on the issue.
This question should normally be discussed within
the framework of the Conference of States Parties and
exclusively among States parties. We hope that in the
long run the States Parties will consider amending
articles 13 (b) and 16 of the Statute in order to enable
the Court to carry out its judicial mandate in complete
independence and free of any political influence.

Chad associates itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the Group of 77.

