Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
first like to warmly thank the Indonesian presidency
for organizing this vital debate on the occasion of the
twentieth anniversary of the inclusion of the protection
of civilians on the Security Council's agenda and to
welcome the presence of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Indonesia, who is presiding over our work.
The contributions of your country and troops to
peacekeeping and to the United Nations efforts to protect
civilians are invaluable, Madam President. This debate
is an excellent opportunity for all of us to take stock of
the Security Council's action and the progress that is
still to be made in this area. The Secretary-General's
report (S/2019/373) and his ambitious recommendations
should serve as our guide in that endeavour. I would
also like to welcome the other Ministers present at this
meeting and to thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Peter
Mauer, President of the International Committee of
the Red Cross, and Mr. Federico Borello, Executive
Director of the Center for Civilians in Conflict, for
their informative briefings.

Let us be clear about the facts. Conflicts last longer
and are becoming more complex, and their impact on
civilians is as severe as it was during the era of major
global conflicts. In Syria, South Sudan, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Libya, Yemen, Burma,
Afghanistan and Iraq, violence against civilians is being
perpetrated on a massive scale. To counter that trend,
the Security Council has adopted specific measures to
protect civilians over the past 20 years. I would like
to underscore two basic points, much of which my
colleagues have already discussed, and discussed well.

First, it is the mandates given to peacekeeping
operations that have the goal of protecting civilians
at their core. Thanks to the Secretary-General's
efforts, the protection of civilians is implemented by
all of the missions' components, military, police and
civilian, including their human rights divisions. Those
components are working in an increasingly integrated
way. With casualty tracking, the performance
measurement of peacekeeping operations takes the
protection of civilians fully into account. We should
build on that achievement by providing operations
with the means to act with robust mandates and
adequate resources.

My second point concerns the human rights due
diligence policy, which is aimed at ensuring that
peacekeeping actors are exemplars and encourages
the acceptance of United Nations forces by local
populations. That policy has taken on a new form in
the human rights and international humanitarian law
compliance framework of the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G-5 Sahel). In a very innovative fashion, the Security
Council has made the protection of civilians an integral
part of the operationalization of the G-5 Sahel Joint
Force. We welcome the technical assistance provided
by the Office ofthe United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights enabling the G-5 Sahel countries
to fulfil their obligations, and the financial support
of the European Union. The necessary resources will
have to be mobilized over time to support that kind
of protection framework. The United Nations has an
increasingly important role to play in that regard where
regional peace operations are concerned. Accordingly,
and without presuming to be exhaustive, France
believes that the Council must redouble its efforts in at
least five areas.

The first priority is ensuring compliance with
the relevant international conventions, foremost of
which are the Geneva Conventions, whose seventieth
anniversary we are celebrating. I am including human
rights conventions under the same rubric, in particular
the International Convention for the Protection of
All Persons from Enforced Disappearance and the
various treaties on arms control. In that regard, France
remains fully committed to the universalization of the
Arms Trade Treaty, which has become a major pillar
in the protection of civilians. France urges major arms
exporters and importers to take a responsible approach
to supporting the Treaty, which is key to curbing
such weapons' uncontrolled spread and their deadly
consequences for civilians.

The second priority is protecting humanitarian
and medical personnel and infrastructure. Just since
the beginning of this year, the Office of Mission
Support has reported more than 300 attacks on medical
infrastructure or personnel. In Syria, along with the
most recent strike on a health-care centre in Kafr Nabl
this past Sunday, a total of 19 hospitals were targeted
by a single offensive by the regime and its supporters in
Idlib. That is clearly unacceptable. In that regard, let me
recall what Jean-Yves Le Drian, France's Minister for
Europe and Foreign Affairs, said at an Arria Formula
meeting on 1 April, in the context of the French and
Germanjoint presidencies of the Security Council,

"Our responsibility is to find the operational means
to ensure the protection of the men and women who
embody the spirit of the 1949 Geneva Conventions
on a daily basis."

At the national level, France is committed to ensuring
that the protection of humanitarian and health personnel
is integrated into military operations, starting at the
planning stage. The use of force can be authorized
to protect them from hostile acts. With regard to
humanitarian aid workers, our armed forces list health-
care facilities in theatres of operation in order to protect
them against targeted operations.

Learning the rules of the protection of humanitarian

and medical personnel is also a key part of our training
programmes, including in Africa, based on the training
currently conducted by the International Committee of
the Red Cross at the Libreville Staff School. In Mali, the
legal advisers of Operation Barkhane have conducted
awareness-raising exercises for the Malian forces as
part of regular training in the area of the law of armed
conflict for several years. In accordance with resolution
2462 (2019), on countering the financing of terrorist
acts, which was adopted during the French presidency
of the Council, we are exercising great care to ensure
that the measures implemented to combat terrorism
do not adversely affect the activities of humanitarian
personnel. In that regard, we will continue to be
especially careful to ensure that such personnel are not
unduly prosecuted for activities carried out in strict
compliance with the principles of humanitarian law.

The third priority is to make the protection of
children and women on the ground more effective. Much
remains to be done in that major area. It calls for the
deployment of child protection and women's protection
advisers within peace operations. It also requires the
universal endorsement of the Principles and Guidelines
on Children Associated with Armed Forces or Armed
Groups, also known as the Paris Principles, the Safe
Schools Declaration and the Vancouver Principles on
Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment
and Use of Child Soldiers.

The fourth priority that should guide us is ensuring
the effective protection of journalists in situations of
armed conflict, in accordance with resolutions 1738
(2006) and 2222 (2015). In its multipronged efforts
in that regard, France sensitizes French and foreign
journalists to high-risk situations.

The fifth priority concerns the fight against
impunity and the necessary prosecution of violations.
First of all, civilians will be protected only if those
who target them are punished. The Council must make
more systematic use of individual sanctions against
those responsible for violations of humanitarian law
and human rights law, sexual Violence and serious
violations against children. Secondly, justice must be
done for the victims. In that regard, we must strengthen
national capacities, ensure systematic, impartial and
independent investigations, and in cases where national
mechanisms are insufficient or inadequate, resolutely
support the use of international mechanisms. They
must be provided with the necessary resources, be able
to rely on the full cooperation of States and include the
involvement of local communities.

On the twentieth anniversary of the inclusion of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict on the agenda
of the Security Council, clarity and determination are
therefore more important than ever. That is why Mr. Le
Drian and his German counterpart Heiko Maas decided
on 1 April (see S/PV.8499) to launch the international
initiative Humanitarian Call for Action, so that the
Council's resolutions can be transformed into concrete
actions on the ground. As the German Minister said
earlier, France and Germany hope that the Humanitarian
Call for Action will lead to the adoption ofa declaration
of commitment by States on the margins of the next
session of the General Assembly to ensure compliance

with international humanitarian law. We owe it to the
civilian populations whom it is our duty to protect.

