Mr. Nathon (Hungary): My delegation has aligned
itself with the European Union statement on demining in
the context of United Nations peace-keeping and shares
its conclusions. Let me, however, make some remarks on
this topic on behalf of the delegation of Hungary.

As was pointed out by several previous speakers, the
elimination of anti-personnel mines has become an
enormous global problem in recent years. My delegation
shares the concern that despite numerous and constant
efforts made by the international conununity, the
extensive use of anti-personnel mines, with its devastating
human and social consequences, is still playing a
significant role jeopardizing the solution of many
long-lasting regional conflicts. The tremendous
accumulation of anti-personnel mines has remained an
urgent problem, in fact a challenge, that requires a further
strong and coordinated international response.

Anti-personnel mines are especially dangerous in the
sense that these weapons do not discriminate between
soldiers and civilians, and virtually anyone can become a
victim. The facts are very sad: it is estimated that there
are more than 100 million uncleared land-mines on a vast

 

territory ranging from Angola to Bosnia, threatening the
lives of thousands of civilians, including many innocent
children.

United Nations personnel on duty are not immune
against mines either. Troop-contributing countries are very
well aware of the potential danger their soldiers, policemen,
civilian observers and other officials face when on various
missions in regions of conflict. Every year, some 20,000
peoples are killed or maimed by land-mines. Last year, a
Hungarian military observer suffered serious injuries in
Georgia.

I believe, therefore, that the time has come to
reinforce our efforts to seek a global, political and legal
solution to eliminate or at least decrease the danger
represented by anti-personnel mines.

The irresponsible and indiscriminate deployment of
anti-personnel mines can even have the negative effect of
slowing down, even blocking, the efforts of the
international community to implement the mandate of
peace-keeping missions, as we have seen, for instance, in
the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia. With a
limited capability for action, peace-keepers might easily
find themselves in situations where even preserving the
achievements of previous peace efforts proved to be
impossible, and where the conflict might even be escalated.

We cannot fail to mention in this regard the
responsibility of the parties involved in a conflict,
especially in cases when anti-personnel mines are used as
offensive weapons. It is not acceptable to my country that
anti-personnel land-mines are used during the
implementation of peace-keeping operations, when, instead
of seeking peaceful solutions, the aim of belligerents is to
provoke further hostilities.
But it is not only that. In times of post-conflict
rehabilitation, land-mines can obstruct the delivery of relief
supplies, the repatriation of the local population, and so
forth. The rebuilding of the infrastructure or the
implementation of economic recovery operations can also
be delayed. Countries that have suffered through war must
suffer further because of land-mines, which continue to
impede the process of national reconstruction.

We believe, therefore, that to expedite post-conflict
mine clearance activities, much more attention should be
paid to ways of encouraging local involvement and
management in mine clearance operations.

While recognizing that it is the primary
responsibility of the States directly affected to carry out
the bulk of mine-clearing activities, we are also convinced
that the United Nations has its own special function in
strengthening the international legal framework and in
assisting Member States to implement their mine
clearance programmes.

As regards the legal aspects of the land-mine
problem, Hungary welcomes the agreement reached in
Geneva last May, during the third phase of the Review
Conference of the States Parties to the Convention on
Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain
Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to Be
Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects.
It was certainly a promising step in the right direction. It
will further reinforce existing prohibitions and restrictions
on the use and transfer of those categories and types of
anti-personnel land-mines which present the greatest
danger to civilians.

In the view of my Government, the adoption of an
international ban on anti-personnel mines would surely
better serve the cause of relieving mankind of this
weapon. In this context, a recent initiative presented by
Mr. Klaus Kinkel, Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Germany, seems to us to be of particular value.

The United Nations has also undertaken considerable
efforts to reinforce the means at the disposal of the
international community. The Department of
Humanitarian Affairs and the Department of Peace-
keeping Operations should be highlighted as focal points
of this activity within the Secretariat.

The United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund for
Assistance in Mine Clearance has also increased United
Nations mine-clearance capacity through coordination
activities in the field and in the implementation of the
mandate of certain peace-keeping operations. At the same
time, one cannot hide a certain degree of concern over the
Fund's obviously insufficient financial resources. Clearly,
a solid, long-lasting solution should be found to finance
this most important activity.

Given the close interrelationship between peace-
keeping operations and the issue of demining, which I
tried to outline earlier in my contribution, one such
solution might be to integrate demining activities in the
overall mandate of peace-keeping operations.

 

To conclude, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, for
the timely idea of discussing the issue on the Council's
agenda. I am convinced that discussions of this kind are of
great importance both for the Council and for Member
States in general.

