Ms. Lalama (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation wishes to express its viewpoints on the
situation in the Middle East and the question of
Palestine, all the more so at this important stage, which
the Security Council must address. I would like to begin
by thanking the President for convening this debate. My
country appreciates the detailed briefing of the Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, Mr. Jeffrey
Feltman, on the situation in the Middle East, including
the question of Palestine.

The Government of Ecuador expresses its concern
once again, pursuant to the standards and principles
of international law, over the Security Council's
protracted handling of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
At this time of political and economic turmoil, it is
important to fight for an international system ofjustice.
In that context, the case of Palestine has awakened the
conscious of the international community about what
the United Nations should be. Member countries are
more interested than ever in complying with current
international legislation and resolutions, and call for an
end to Zionism in Palestine in all its forms.

Proof of that is the recognition of 133 States
Members of the Organization that support the request
of the President of the Palestinian Authority, on

23 September 2011, for Palestine to be considered a full

Member of the United Nations. However, due to the

anti-democratic right of veto enjoyed by the permanent

members of the Security Council, the rise in status of
Palestine in the United Nations has not taken place. It
is time to seek mechanisms to actively support progress
in the peace efforts and strengthen the capacity of the
Palestinian Authority so that it can meet the security
needs of its people.

The Charter of the United Nations was created to
emphasize the rights of the people, not those of States.
The Security Council therefore has responsibility
for Israel's violations of international law, which
have allowed it to operate in a state of immunity and
impunity. Israel has flouted resolution 242 (1967),
which rejects the acquisition of territory by war, while
its settlements on Palestinian territory are in full view
of the international community. Since 1992, it has built
a true wall of shame based on the pretext of security
concerns, althouth its purpose is actuallly to militarily
control the West Bank and impede the lives of the
Palestinians by controlling agriculture and 82 per cent
of the water. Many efforts and initiatives at the United
Nations, including creating new principles, have all
met with failure in the face of this conflict. But it is
important to emphasize that that also applies to the
Quartet grouping, which prepared a road map that has
had no effective results to date.

My country believes it is timely to implement the
Declaration of the High-level Meeting of the General
Assembly on the Rule of Law at the National and
International Levels (resolution 67/1), adopted at the
opening of the current session of the Assembly (see A/67/PV.3), which states that,

"the rule of law applies to all States equally,
and to international organizations, including
the United Nations and its principal organs, and
that respect for and promotion of the rule of law
and justice should guide all of their activities".
(resolution 67/1, para. 2)

In that context, my delegation calls for the Security
Council to drop its passive attitude when considering
Israeli abuses. It is not enough to denounce and
condemn Israel for its violations of international law,
since that path has not led to any positive results and, to
some degree, has resulted in complicity.

To conclude, Ecuador calls upon the international
community to support the request of Mr. Mahmoud
Abbas, President of the Palestinian Authority, to
accept Palestine as a State Member of the United
Nations with full rigths, within its 1967 borders and
with East Jerusalem as its capital. While the issue is
being studied, we call for the support of the General
Assembly to consider Palestine as an Observer State of
the Organization. Only in that manner will we achieve
peace and security in the Middle East, and thereby the
security of all States Members of the United Nations.

