Mrs. Albright (United States of America): I welcome
this opportunity to focus attention once more on the subject
of Somalia, and we congratulate you, Mr. President, on
holding this open meeting to allow a full exchange of
Views. We believe that these public meetings are most
useful.

At one time, the Council devoted its attention almost
daily to the subject of Somalia. The United States is proud
of its efforts in Somalia under the United Nations Unified
Task Force (UNITAF) and the United Nations Operation in
Somalia (UNOSOM). The United States and allied forces
entered Somalia in December 1992 to end a famine of epic
proportions. Several hundred thousand people had died. The
lives of many more were at risk. The United States-led
international intervention known as UNITAF quickly ended
the famine, saving thousands of lives. UNOSOM. continued
this undertaking. It is important to note here that almost all
Somalis, even those who are sharply critical of the
subsequent United Nations action in their country, express
gratitude for the international community's response to the
famine.

Just over one year has passed since UNOSOM. II
forces withdrew from Somalia, on 2 March 1995. We had
hoped that withdrawal would demonstrate to the Somali
leaders the need to resolve their differences. We are
disappointed that they have failed to make any significant
progress towards national political reconciliation over the
past year. Although Somalia experienced a sharp reduction
in interfactional fighting over the past year, hopes for
political reconciliation were dimmed by the seizure last
September of the provincial capital of Baidoa in central
Somalia, a city that was particularly hard hit during the
famine, when more than 500 people a day died.
Agriculturally rich Baidoa had become an area of relative
peace and stability, and its seizure was a political step
backwards. This episode has also made it more difficult for
the donor nations to provide aid to Somalia. As the political
stalemate and violence continue, the international donor
community must increasingly direct its limited resources to
more promising recipients.

Somalia remains a dangerous place, but predictions
that widespread inter-clan fighting would resume as soon as
the peace-keepers pulled out have not come true. Many
areas of the country are peaceful and have formed
functional, albeit rudimentary, local administrations.

In addition to the establishment of functional local
authorities in many parts of the country, the other most
promising development in Somalia has been the re-
emergence of the private-sector economy. Most commerce
in Somalia is on a small scale: tea shops, tailoring, petty
import-export, market farming and the like. Some of the
key pre-war exports have rebounded, and sectors
employing new technology have emerged.

Livestock exports, which historically have accounted
for some two thirds of hard-currency earnings, were at
record-high levels in both 1994 and 1995 . Banana exports
have resumed, with the United States firm Dole
challenging for a significant share of the market in this
sector. A number of domestic and foreign firms are
fishing along the Somali coast and exporting high-value
seafoods. Four telecommunications firms, two with United
States partners, operate cellular-telephone systems in
Somalia.

In short, economic activity is moving forward in
Somalia, a tribute to the Somali entrepreneurial class and
a few intrepid foreign investors. But this private economic
activity does little to support social services. Poverty still
limits the access of many to food in the market. Health
and education remain largely the purview of foreign
humanitarian agencies, which are unable to reach all the
population, especially the children.

The United Nations agencies have been addressing
the humanitarian, social and economic concerns of the
people of Somalia, who suffer at the hands of the
uncaring factional leaders. The United Nations Children's
Fund (UNICEF) is feeding malnourished children. The
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) is
looking at ways to help the impoverished earn the money
to afford food. Cholera is being fought. Medicines and
foodstuffs are being stockpiled. All this is being done
despite the insecurity that hampers efficient delivery of
humanitarian aid in many parts of Somalia. The port of
Mogadishu remains closed, even to shipments of relief
supplies, adding to the cost and time needed to deal with
urgent needs. The United Nations and non-governmental
organizations must be commended for their bravery,
perseverance and dedication to helping the helpless, who
have not been able to look to their indigenous leadership
for the basic necessities of life.

The United States has joined in the efforts of the
United Nations. We have not abandoned Somalia and do
not intend to. While we do not recognize or support any
Somali group or faction, we remain in communication
with all the political groups in the country. The United
States assistance programme for fiscal year 1995 totalled
about $25 million. We will continue our aid programme,

 

much of which consists of food. We are aware of the recent
reports of food shortages and drought in Somalia. The
United States and the international aid community are
closely monitoring the food situation in order to prevent
another famine. We call upon the factions in Somalia to
reopen the port and to ensure that it remains open so that
assistance can be delivered.

We join other members of the world community in
urging the Somalis to form a broad-based national
government that enjoys widespread support among all
segments of the population. The major stumbling block
remains the unwillingness of the major faction leaders to
compromise. The Somali power brokers themselves must
make the difficult decisions required to create a viable
reconciliation process.

We call upon all the Somali factions to end the
divisions that have pitted region against region and clan
against clan. Somalia's leaders can and must do better than
this. They must have the vision to set an example that
upholds the common good of the Somali people.

