Ms. Anderson (United States of America): Let
me, too, welcome President Guelleh and thank him for
his remarks and his important leadership on the many
critical issues facing Djibouti and the region, with a
focus on increasing the well-being of the people,
fighting piracy and working for peace.

The Horn of Africa faces many difficult political
and security challenges, from counter-terrorism to
urgent humanitarian issues. We welcome Djibouti's
constructive role in working with States of the region
and the international community to address them.
Today, I would like to focus on three points: Djibouti's
leadership in providing stability to the Horn of Africa,
the critical role played by the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) and the challenges facing the
Transitional Federal Government (TFG), and, finally
the unresolved border dispute between Djibouti and
Eritrea.

Djibouti has an important role to play in
promoting regional stability. Djibouti has hosted
important discussions on regional peace and security,
including through the Djibouti peace process and
International Maritime Organization conferences on
counter-piracy initiatives, among other things. Djibouti
has also committed 450 soldiers to AMISOM. and is
involved in training the Somali national security force.

Amid the complexity of the situation in Somalia,
the United States underscores its ongoing support for
the Djibouti peace process and the Transitional Federal
Government. Despite recent political events, the TFG
needs to be unified in its efforts to implement the
Djibouti peace process and to focus on the critical
issues at hand, including governance, security and the
provision of services to the Somali people in a
transparent and accountable manner. It is also
important that the TFG work to expand its base of
support, even as it makes every effort to include
women leaders in the political process.

The United States is committed to working with
those in Somalia who seek reconciliation, peace,
stability and economic development. We urge the TFG
to find creative ways to build a better future for
Somalia and its people. We look forward to the United
Nations development conference on Somalia that
begins in Istanbul on 21 May. That will be an
important opportunity to demonstrate the international
community's resolve to work with Somalis towards our
common goals.

The United States supports the development of a
capable professional national security force for the
TFG. We commend the Ugandan and Burundi troop
contributions to AMISOM, which now total 6,200
personnel. The United States has supported stability in
the region, with more than $174 million directed to
providing predeployment training, equipment and
logistical support to countries contributing troops to
AMISOM. We recognize that very difficult challenges
remain. Somalia's instability has encouraged extremism
and led to a growing refugee problem in the region.

Eritrea has failed to comply with resolution 1862
(2009). It has not withdrawn its troops from the
contested area, nor has it engaged in dialogue with
Djibouti or initiated discussions with the United
Nations. Moreover, the Monitoring Group of the
Security Council's Somalia-Eritrea sanctions Committee
has noted in past reports that Eritrea has provided
funding, weapons and training to armed insurgent
groups that perpetuate war in Somalia and thereby
violate resolution 1844 (2008). That threatens
international peace and security by destabilizing the
region, including Djibouti.

One reason why the United States supported last
year's resolution 1907 (2009) is because of those
violations and actions. That resolution created a robust
sanctions regime that includes an arms embargo, cargo
inspections and seizure in certain situations, and
targeted measures for individuals and entities listed by
the Council's Somalia-Eritrea sanctions Committee.
Resolution 1907 (2009) is a clear demonstration
of the international community's resolve to take action
against those who threaten the peace and security of
the region. The resolution is aimed at preventing
support to armed opposition groups seeking to
destabilize the region. It will also help prevent the

obstruction of resolution 1862 (2009) concerning
Djibouti. It will help prevent obstruction of the
Monitoring Group's work, violations of the arms
embargo and harbouring, financing, facilitating,
supporting, organizing, training or inciting individuals
or groups to commit acts of violence or terrorism
against other States or their citizens.

The United States is working with the sanctions
Committee to ensure that regional spoilers and
violators of the sanctions are held accountable. All
Member States have obligations under the sanctions
regime to enforce the arms embargoes, and we ask
Member States to share information on the designated
groups and individuals with the Committee.

We look forward to the continued good work of
the Monitoring Group. We hope that the Secretary-
General will be able to report to the Council, in his
upcoming report, on Eritrea's compliance with
resolution 1907 (2009) and that positive steps are being
taken with the States involved.

Eritrea should withdraw its troops from the
contested area, engage in dialogue with Djibouti and
stop financing and supporting armed insurgent groups
in Somalia. The United States calls on Eritrea to move
forward in resolving its border issues peacefully, in
accordance with resolution 1862 (2009), and to take
steps to avoid further conflict in a region that already
faces tremendous instability.

