Ms. Mudallali (Lebanon): I would like to
congratulate you, Madam President, on assuming the
presidency of the Council this month and thank you for
choosing the topic of reconciliation for today's debate.

Under its Chapter VI, on the pacific settlement of
disputes, the Charter of the United Nations allows for
the Security Council to call upon the parties to any
dispute to settle it by means of, inter alia, negotiation,
mediation and conciliation. These three tools for the
peaceful settlement of disputes are essential to the
preservation of international peace and security by
offering a peaceful alternative to resolving conflicts. But
reconciliation cannot happen in a vacuum and cannot
be an end in itself. It is a process that is indispensable
for the parties themselves to be able to turn the page on
conflict and open a door to understanding, forgiveness
and peace.

The Security Council has more than a dozen
conflicts on its agenda, and there are dozens of disputes
between countries and within societies around the
world today where the cycle of violence makes it seem
impossible to imagine that the people involved in such
disputes could live together in harmony again. But they
can: through a powerful reconciliation process, if it is
done correctly and in the proper conditions.

First, we have to acknowledge that no two disputes
are the same and no two peoples fit the same mould
when it comes to resolving disputes. But there are
universal values and principles that must be present
to offer the right conditions for a peaceful settlement
of an issue and a successful reconciliation process.
Accountability is an essential starting point for any
process of reconciliation as the journey down the long
road towards healing and peace begins. Justice must be
served, because without justice there is no peace. Truth
is very important for reconciliation.

You ask in your guiding concept note (S/2019/871, annex), Madam President, how the Security Council
and the United Nations can most effectively support
nationally owned reconciliation processes. The Security
Council must start by ending conflicts. In many parts
of the world conflicts are managed, not solved. The
Security Council needs to tackle the reasons that people
fight, and not focus only on how to stop the fighting.
Addressing the root causes of conflict can go a long way
in achieving durable peace and genuine reconciliation.
Ending occupation and oppression and guaranteeing
an equitable settlement are only a few examples of the
prerequisites for peace - not only for one generation,
but all future humankind.

Imposing settlements might work for a short
time, but the seeds of conflict remain and germinate
as soon as new conditions make it possible to resume.
Reconciliation cannot happen when grievances
persist and injustice lingers. Outside assistance for
homegrown reconciliation processes has to respect
cultural sensitivities and people's beliefs, instead of
imposing ready-made formulas on populations. Local
knowledge is very important. In multi-ethnic and
multicultural societies, one has to make sure that the
result of the reconciliation process is equitable, so that
no party feels aggrieved. In Lebanon, after what was
referred to as the 1958 revolution, the crisis ended with
a formula, "No victor, no vanquished", which assured
each party to the conflict that it had got what it wanted
and political life could resume.

Concepts like dignity are very important for
reconciliation. Settlements have to help people
preserve their dignity - the dignity of not feeling
humiliated by the conditions of any conflict resolution
or reconciliation. Dignity is also culturally sensitive. Its
meaning and scope are very much culturally defined,
and any reconciliation has to take that into consideration.

Nelson Mandela, when speaking about
reconciliation - a process he knew well - said that
true reconciliation does not consist in merely forgetting

the past. He was right. It is not about forgetting the past
and the pain; it is about imagining the future - a future
of peace.

