Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I would
also like to express my condolences to the Republic of
Turkey for the earthquake that has just struck it. We
also offer condolences to the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
on the death of Crown Prince Sultan Bin Abdulaziz
Al-Saud.

I thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe for his statement and I
would like to make the following points. First of all,
three months ago, France articulated here the desire
that the legitimate aspirations expressed by the peoples
of the region for freedom and democracy should be
translated into reality swiftly and peacefully. Today,
Egypt, Tunisia and Libya are facing the many
challenges involved in building a democracy in civil
harmony and with respect for pluralism, and France
will continue to provide them with all of its support.
We are pleased that Tunisians turned out to the polls in
great numbers yesterday to vote on the political future
of their country.
A new chapter is also opening for Libya. We call
on the National Transitional Council to continue to
work towards a democratic and pluralistic Libya in the
context of respect for the rule of law, the fight against
impunity and respect for fundamental freedoms.

We hope that a peaceful political transition will
soon take place in Yemen. The Council fulfilled its
responsibilities on Friday in calling on President Saleh
to carry out a peaceful transfer of power on the basis of
the initiative of the Gulf Cooperation Council (see resolution 2014 (2011)).

In Syria, leaders who have lost all legitimacy are
hanging on to power and dragging their country into a
bloody spiral of violence. The Syrian people are
already mourning more than 3,000 victims. Tens of
thousands of peaceful demonstrators have been torn
from their families, held in secret and tortured. Those
responsible for this violence will be held accountable
to justice for their actions. Repression must end so that
Syrian can engage in the peaceful transition sought by
the Syrian people. That is the only way to restore
stability to Syria and preserve stability in the region,
which is threatened by Syrian incursions in Lebanon,
the flow of refugees into neighbouring countries and
attempts by the Syrian regime to exploit Palestinian
claims.

The members of the Council that have opposed or
voted against a draft resolution of the Council will
have to explain to history and to Syrian, international
and domestic public opinion what they are offering
specifically to bring an end to the bloodshed. This is no
longer the time for words, to which the regime is not
listening in any case. We must take action. Opting for
Security Council paralysis is tantamount to supporting
the Al-Assad regime and taking his side. The Syrian
people understand that.

In this volatile context, parties must show the
greatest restraint with respect to Lebanon and continue
to cooperate within the framework of the Tripartite
Commission to prevent any new mishap along the Blue
Line. We reiterate our appeal to the Lebanese
Government to honour all its international obligations,
in particular those concerning the Special Tribunal and
resolution 1701 (2006).

The demands of the Palestinian people are every
bit as legitimate as those expressed throughout the
region. It is legitimate and natural for the Palestinian
people to ask for a Palestinian State to be established,
while the two-State solution and the Palestinian
people's right to self-determination enjoy the
consensus of the international community. It is in that
context that President Abbas submitted a request for
admission as a full Member of the United Nations on
23 September. I will not dwell on our consideration of
that request, which is under way in the Committee on
the Admission of New Members and will soon be
reported on to the Security Council.

Everyone knows, however, that the path to
admission to the United Nations is strewn with
obstacles. That is why, on 21 September, the President
of the French Republic proposed an intermediate stage
that could generate concrete progress for the
Palestinians by elevating the status of Palestine in the
United Nations to that of Observer State. That is the
best way currently available to emerge from the
impasse.

A concrete response to Palestinian demands will
require the establishment of political conditions that
would enable the emergence of the Palestinian State.
That is what we must work on as a priority. To that
end, the President of the French Republic called for a
change of methodology, on the basis of his conviction
that circumventing multilateral forums like the
Security Council or eschewing the support of regional
and European partners, inter alia, is not working. We
must also stress the need for a credible framework,
such as the parameters defined by the Europeans here
in February or those announced by President Obama in
May. Such a credible framework must be based on a
clear timeline for negotiations in order to allow the
parties to resume their talks on a sound basis and
remove all preconditions.

On 23 September, the Quartet set such a timeline
for negotiations. We welcome the parties' positive
response to it. In two days, Palestinian and Israeli
representatives will meet with members of the Quartet
in Jerusalem in a new attempt to relaunch direct
negotiations, which will begin with an initial phase on
borders and security and conclude with an agreement
on all of final status issues within a year. The chances
of success are slim because trust between the parties
has been deeply shaken. That is why the international
community must pool its efforts and unanimously call
on both parties to refrain from all provocation. France
proposes the convening of a donor conference in Paris
to help relaunch the process and strengthen Palestinian
institutions.

In that context, we condemn once again the
recent announcement of the expansion of Israeli
settlements, which undermine peace efforts and hinder
the achievement of the two-State solution. Following
the decision to build in Gilo, taken following the
Quartet declaration, a new project has been announced
for construction in Givat Hamatos. The project
threatens the contiguity of Palestinian territories
between East Jerusalem and the West Bank and directly
threatens the possible establishment of a two-State
solution, with Jerusalem as the capital of both States.
The announcement comes across not only as a
provocation aimed at undermining trust, but also as a
deliberate effort to make the creation of a Palestinian
State impossible. How often must we reiterate that the
construction of settlements in the West Bank and East
Jerusalem is a blatant violation of international law and
relevant Security Council resolutions. Israel must cease
all settlement activity and abandon the projects it has
announced. Similarly, we can only condemn a recent
decision to legalize the outposts.

The settlements have become a central symbol of
the conflict and the concrete denial of any discourse on
the quest for a peaceful solution. However, we
welcome the agreement that freed Gilad Shalit and
Palestinian prisoners. We hope that the agreement will
allow the Palestinian reconciliation process to move
forward under the authority of President Abbas and in
the context of commitments made by the Palestine
Liberation Organization and recalled on 21 September
before the General Assembly (see A/66/PV.11).

Gaza cannot be excised from the effort to
establish a concrete basis for a Palestinian State. In that
regard, the full implementation of resolution 1860
(2009) - including the lifting of the blockade imposed
on the people of Gaza and an end to the unacceptable
shelling of Israeli territory - remains necessary.

In conclusion, the peoples of the region are
demanding the right to express themselves and to
participate in shaping their own destinies. The Council
heard the appeals from the people of Libya and Yemen
and responded clearly. The situation in Syria can be
treated no differently, and the Council must break its
own silence, awake from its torpor and complacency,
and exert the necessary pressure on the Syrian regime.

I would echo the words of the President of the
French Republic to the General Assembly that the
"spring of the Arab peoples imposes on us the moral
and political obligation at last to find a solution to the
Middle East conflict" (A/66/PV.1], pp. 22-23). The
Council, mandated by the Charter to maintain
international peace and security, cannot be exempt
from that obligation.

