Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): Mr.
President, allow me to begin by conveying to you the
thanks of the Argentine delegation for having
organized this open debate of the Security Council on
the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
(WMD). And we wish to welcome the draft resolution
on this important issue that is now before us, because it
is a matter of concern which affects us all.

We note with interest the fact that the Security
Council is taking wide ranging measures to strengthen
its role in combating the proliferation of such weapons
which are a threat to international peace and security.
We take the view that the draft resolution placed before
the Council for its consideration sets out to respond to
the growing risk of a link between terrorism and WMD
- in particular because terrorists may succeed in
acquiring and using such weapons. It is plain that the
challenge inherent in terrorism, as a real and new threat
on the international scene, adds a new dimension to
disarmament, non-proliferation and arms control.

A new dimension does not necessarily mean that
there is a vacuum or a lacuna in the set of multilateral
agreements on disarmament, non-proliferation and
arms control. For we believe that they are clear, with
regard to the responsibilities undertaken by the States
parties. This new dimension should compel us to take
real and innovative actions, throughout the
international community, to address all situations
involving the proliferation of WMD. What is involved
here is ensuring that full implementation is given to all
disarmament and non-proliferation instruments,
working to strengthen them and make them universal.
The measures contained in the draft resolution, as we
see it, paves the way for this, and will give a fresh
political impetus to achieving this objective.

Cooperation with the United Nations and with
regional agencies is of vital importance to allow for the
efficiency of international endeavours to combat
terrorism and to help Member States to fulfil the
obligations embodied in legal instruments and in
relevant resolutions. We welcome the decision,
proposed in this draft resolution, to call for all States to
take the necessary measures to prevent WMD and their
component parts from falling into the possession of
terrorists and other non-State actors.

In this regard, we believe that since this
Organization plays a primary role in the preparation of
legal instruments for effective adoption and
implementation, it could provide assistance to States
that do not possess the appropriate legislation in
implementing the resolution. Through its regional
disarmament centres and with the cooperation of
specialized agencies, such as the International Atomic
Energy Agency and the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, the United Nations
could help prepare legislation that could serve as a
model to assist Member States in the adoption of
appropriate measures.

Lastly, in our view, it is strange and contradictory
that, just when we believed that the non-proliferation
and disarmament regime was well on track, new and
serious threats to it have emerged. Unfortunately, we
remain concerned about the persistence of situations
involving the risk of proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction because they threaten global stability and
the internal security of States.

In this millennium, renunciation of weapons of
mass destruction is a top priority. Argentina's active
commitment to disarmament, to the non-proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction and to arms control is
evidenced by our accession to all existing legal
instruments and control regimes in this field. We have
also established, together with our neighbour and
friend, Brazil, a Brazilian-Argentine Agency for
Accounting and Control of Nuclear Materials, which
has been an innovative reality in this area for over a
decade. In this regard, we believe it could serve as a
model to be applied in other areas of the world.

For this reason, Argentina, as we have already
stated, concurs with the spirit of the draft resolution,
since it would establish obligations that Argentina has
already assumed and implemented by means of a
national commission set up for that purpose. Argentina
is one of the countries that has completed the nuclear
fuel cycle. In this regard, we will continue to work
tirelessly to ensure that all States renounce the nuclear
option and give unequivocal guarantees that their nuclear
capacity will be used solely for peaceful purposes.

Likewise, Argentina will commit itself to
continue to work actively to fulfil strictly and in good
faith the obligations embodied in the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the
Bacteriological and Toxin Weapons Convention, the
Chemical Weapons Convention and the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty. Making these disarmament
and non-proliferation instruments universal is a
legitimate aspiration for my country and for the entire
international community, and is something that we are
actively pursuing.

