Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank you, Mr. President,
and your delegation for having convened this extremely
important open debate in the light of recent events and
the persistent situation in the Middle East. We also
express our gratitude to the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for
his briefing. We convey our appreciation and support for
his tireless efforts in the quest for just and sustainable
political solutions that will help bring the conflict to an
end and achieve peace in that tumultuous region.

Venezuela sees terrorism as one of the major threats
and destabilizing elements in the region. In that regard,
we categorically condemn all terrorist acts and groups,
whoever its perpetrators may be and whatever its goals.
Our statement will focus on the Palestinian question,
as that protracted conflict continues to be a significant
source of tension in the complicated panorama that
prevails in that region.

Resolution 2334 (2016), of23 December 2016, which
condemns the illegal Israeli settlements in the occupied
Palestinian territory, was adopted by consensus and
co-sponsored by my country at the end of our term in
the Security Council as a non-permament member, and
has undoubtedly contributed to bringing to the attention
of the international community the terrible impact of
the occupation of Palestinian territory on the hundreds
of thousands of men, women and children whose daily
lives and most fundamental rights are compromised by
the illegal Israeli policies, the occupying Power, which
arrogantly and cruelly oppresses them and denies them
their right to exist in a sovereign, independent and
viable State.

In that context, we regret the Violent, threatening
and arrogant reaction of the Israeli Government
to resolution 2334 (2016). Instead of heeding and
complying with the Council's resolutions and
mandates, as called for in the Charter of the United
Nations, that Government continues to defy the
international community, declaring that there will be
more settlements and threatening those countries that
continue to insist on the two-State solution and on
compliance with international law.

Nevertheless, Venezuela hopes that the Security
Council will continue to do its utmost to achieve the
effective implementation of that crucially important
resolution, which includes the requirement that Israel
immediately and totally cease all illegal settlement
activities in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, and that measures be adopted
to safeguard the Palestinian people from the continued
violations of international law and international
humanitarian law in the occupied Palestinian territory,
which have been occurring for 50 years, and in the
Gaza Strip, which for almost 10 years has been subject
to an inhumane and brutal blockade by Israel.

The two-State solution continues to be the only
possible way to resolve the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
In that regard, we welcome France's diplomatic efforts,

which culminated in the convening of 70 countries on
15 January at the Paris Middle East Peace Conference,
in which Venezuela participated with the strong desire
to join its voice with others who called for ajust, lasting
and comprehensive solution to the conflict, based on
the existence of two States, Israel and Palestine - as
a full-fledged United Nations Member and with East
Jerusalem as its capital - living in peace within secure
and internationally recognized pre-1967 borders. We
note the total consistency between the points agreed in
the joint statement adopted at the Paris Conference and
the provisions of resolution 2334 (2016), which shows
that the Council's document fully reflects the concerns
of the international community regarding the conflict
and its willingness to seek short-term solutions that
do not eliminate the possibility of reaching a political
solution in the form of a two-State solution.

We also commend the fact that the statement
adopted in Paris noted the importance of providing
ongoing financial support to the Palestinian Authority
so that it can build the necessary infrastructure
for a viable Palestinian economy. We welcome the
goodwill of the States and organizations that attended
the Conference, and we reiterate our support for that
collective effort to achieve peace in the Middle East,
as well as the work of the Middle East Quartet and
initiatives from countries like Egypt and Russia that
seek to promote political processes and conversations
between Israel and Palestine, with a View to reaching
agreements on the basis ofthe two-State solution, which
should take into account the Arab Peace Initiative, the
terms adopted at the Madrid Peace Conference and the
relevant resolutions of the United Nations.

We believe that Israel must stop turning its back
on international law and we demand that it do so. Israel
must heed the calls of so many in the international
community for the resumption of an open and honest
political discussion with the Palestinian Authority
based on the existence of two States in order to initiate
a process that will put an end to the tragedy of the
Palestinian people, that will put an end to the illegal
occupation of its territory, and that will put an end to put
an end to one of the greatest abuses committed against
a people in the contemporary history of the world.

Venezuela is waiting for Israel to listen. Venezuela
expects Israel to cease its arrogance and violence.
Venezuela expects and demands that Israel shall cease
to violate the human rights of hundreds of thousands
of Palestinians, including more than 700 children in
Israeli prisons. Not only do we reiterate the importance
and the need for the members of the Organization and
the Security Council, the organ responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security, to
remain attentive to future developments in the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict and to be an element of support
and assistance for the parties as they search for peace,
but we do so with special emphasis on the importance
of defending the weaker party, namely, the occupied
Palestinian people.

In this way, we will ensure that agreements
resulting from resolutions, declarations, discussions
and multilateral and direct negotiations go beyond
the population in question and open the way in 2017,
"the year of peace", in the words of Secretary-General
Antonio Guterres, for the end of the occupation,
in accordance with resolution 242 (1967), and the
emergence of a Palestinian State on an equal footing
with all the nations of the world.

