The President (spoke in French): As this is the
first meeting of the Security Council for the month of
December, I should like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute, on behalf of the Council, to Miss Mignonette
Patricia Durrant, Permanent Representative of Jamaica
to the United Nations, for her service as President of
the Security Council for the month of November. I am
sure that I speak for all members of the Council in
expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador Durrant
for the great diplomatic skill with which she conducted
the Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(S/ZOOl/ll32 and Corrl)

The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Belgium and Bosnia and
Herzegovina, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Kusljugic'
(Bosnia and Herzegovina) took a seat at the
Council table; Mr. De Ruyt (Belgium) took the
seat reserved for him at the side of the Council
Chamber.


The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Hedi Annabi, Assistant Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Annabi to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2001/ll32 and Corr.l, which contains the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

At this meeting, Mr. Hedi Annabi, Assistant
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, will
introduce the report.

I give him the floor.


