Mr. Zarif: The report before the Council details the
activities of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) during the latest quarterly
reporting period from 16 April to 15 July. Beyond
simply presenting the report, I will also reflect briefly
on the wider range of important achievements, as well
as challenges, facing Kosovo at this time.

I would like to begin by commending the critically
important step taken by the Kosovo institutions on
the third of this month, when the Assembly of Kosovo

passed the requisite constitutional amendment and the
laws on the establishment of the specialist court and
specialist prosecutor's office. These legislative acts
fully accord with the exchange of letters between
Kosovo and the European Union (EU) on the matter,
which were endorsed by the Assembly in April 2014.

As reflected in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2015/579), delays in finalizing the required
framework had been the subject of serious concern from
various quarters. However, the passage of necessary
formative acts and their promulgation yesterday by
President Jahjaga stand as a sign of Kosovo's increasing
determination to meet its fundamental obligations and
commitments, which imply full respect for the rule of
law and impartial justice, as well as accountability and
equality before the law.

The full establishment of the rule of law is facing
other important challenges, which merit mention today.
One of them is the legal protection of cultural and
religious heritage sites. In June, the Appellate Panel
of the Special Chamber of the Kosovo Supreme Court
issued decisions that, in effect, set aside a landmark
decision by the Trial Panel of the Special Chamber
in December 2012. That decision concerned property
within the special protective zone of the Visoki Decani
Orthodox Monastery. The 2012 decision rejected
claims of ownership by two socially owned enterprises
against the Visoki Decani Monastery. The resolution of
this outstanding dispute had been accepted by the two
parties to the dispute and hailed by the international
community. In contrast, the Appellate Panel's decision
applied highly questionable legal reasoning in order
to return the issue to a local court, which assuredly
will reopen the dispute and potentially lead to serious
new tensions surrounding that precious cultural and
religious heritage site.

Respect for and the protection and preservation
of the Serbian Orthodox cultural heritage in Kosovo
are fundamental duties and represent tests of the
responsibility of Kosovo's governing institutions.
Should those fail, many other important functions and
responsibilities may equally fall into question. It is
therefore a matter of utmost importance that the legal
framework of protection enshrined in the Constitution
of Kosovo be adhered to with conscientious rigour. That
includes but is not limited to the Assembly of Kosovo's
future consideration of a comprehensive law on cultural
heritage. I commend the firm assurances given to me
by Prime Minister Isa Mustafa that a revised version
of the draft law will not be approved by the Cabinet
and submitted to the Assembly unless it fully conforms
with the relevant provisions of the Constitution.

The enormous strides already taken both by Pristina
and Belgrade through the EU-facilitated dialogue
demand continuing commitment on the part of the
parties, and no less from the international community.
On 25 August, the top leaders from each side will
meet once again, seeking accord on issues where
differences - while narrowed - still remain. Among
those issues, setting forth a detailed framework for the
establishment of the future association/community
of Serb-majority municipalities is of paramount
importance. Several other matters are now equally
ripe for conclusion. Already, the implementation of
the arrangements on mutual recognition of vehicular
insurance, which began just this past week, is
providing evidence of the benefits accruing from the
normalization of relations.

It is important not to underestimate the potential
of this historic process, begun under the tenure of EU
High Representative Ashton and now in the capable
hands of her successor, Federica Mogherini. Reaching
equitable compromises that overcome legacies from the
conflict and produce tangible benefit to both sides is
not limited only to the terms of the First Agreement
reached on 19 April 2013. During the coming days, it
is my hope that dialogue will expand to include other
difficult issues that continue to burden relations.
Among those, I would highlight renewed effort to
determine the fate of missing persons and to provide
a scheme for compensating their families; to revitalize
transportation and commercial links; to address the
many complex issues surrounding property; to deal
with issues of the return and settlement of refugees and
internally displaced persons; and to discuss the status
of the Orthodox Church.

As Council membes are already aware, this will
be my last briefing to the Council in my capacity as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Kosovo. I therefore hope that they will permit me a
few brief reflections on the trends and processes I have
witnessed. When I arrived in Kosovo soon after the
events of July 2011, tension was extremely high on the
ground. Road barricades had been erected throughout
the north, and the international security presences had
been forced into a strong preventive posture. Public
political discourse among the communities in Kosovo, as
well as between Belgrade and Pristina, was adversarial
and confrontational. Few, if any, conciliatory messages
could be heard from any side.

Four years later, the situation differs dramatically.
Kosovo Serb mayors - elected for the first time under
a unified legal framework - now govern in all 10
Kosovo Serb-maj ority municipalities, including the four
municipalities in the north. Kosovo Serb Ministers and
Parliamentarians now serve actively in key positions
of the central institutions, promoting the vital interests
not only of their own community, but increasingly of
the electorate as a whole. Police structures are fully
integrated, and thereby more responsive. Significant
progress has been made towards the integration of all
components of the justice system. Through a process
of committed dialogue and political compromise, the
concrete needs and aspirations of people - perhaps for
the first time since the conflict itself- register more
loudly in the public discourse than do insinuations
about the past.

No progress is irreversible, of course. I do not
wish to suggest that the efforts made to date are yet
sufficient to guarantee headway. I do, however, firmly
believe that there is objective justification for cautious
optimism that this process will continue and produce
more tangible results in the interest of all.

It has been my privilege to serve during these past
four years, and I will depart the Mission with strong
confidence in the leadership I have observed on each
side, as well as from the people. Their future is being
built around a shared stake in creating the conditions
for long term peace and prosperity.

I conclude my remarks today by expressing my deep
gratitude to you, Madam President, and to all members
of the Council for their support to the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and me. Much has been achieved, and I am confident
that the positive progress will only accelerate in the
time ahead. The next period will bring not only further
challenges but also, I am confident and certain, further
progress, not least due to the Council's continuing
support and engagement. UNMIK, my successor and
the entire United Nations presence in Kosovo will
remain committed to contributing to that end.

