Mr. Kama] (Pakistan): It is with a sense of deep
shock and concern that the Government of Pakistan views
the recent measures taken by the Israeli authorities against
the Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian territories,
including the Holy City of Jerusalem/Al-Quds al-Sharif.
The Israeli measures of making Al-Quds al-Sharif off limits
to the Palestinian people and of imposing stringent
restrictions on their entry into the city have created
enormous problems, particularly in view of the special
status of the city as the religious, commercial and cultural
centre for the Palestinian people.

The complete details, as well as the serious
consequences of these measures on the Palestinian people
and their economy, have already been described by the
Permanent Observer of Palestine. As has been pointed out
by Ambassador Nasser Al-Kidwa, these actions are in
contravention of the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949, as
well as of the relevant resolutions of the Security Council,
the General Assembly and other organs of the United
Nations. They also violate the agreements reached with the
Palestine Liberation Organization. Furthermore, these
measures are particularly disturbing, as they have a direct
bearing on the peace process which had been arrived at
through bold and courageous initiatives taken earlier.

We fully share the belief that the peace process should
lead to the early exercise by the Palestinian people of their
right to self-determination through the establishment of an
independent homeland. This requires the withdrawal by
the Israeli authorities from all the occupied Palestinian
and Arab territories, including the Holy City of Al-Quds
al-Sharif.

Pakistan's support for the just struggle for the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people is well known.
We have consistently stated that Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) continue to
provide a viable and just framework for a durable and
comprehensive settlement of the Palestinian question.

It is imperative to maintain the present momentum
that has been achieved in the negotiating process. We
fully share the expectations of the international
community that there should be no delay in the
implementation of the agreements and accords concluded
so far. The provisions of these agreements and accords
should be complied with both in letter and in spirit. We
strongly urge the demonstration of the requisite flexibility
and accommodation, as well as a sincere commitment to
the achievement of a just, lasting and comprehensive
peace that will ensure security and stability for all the
peoples and States of the Middle East region.

The Government and the people of Pakistan are
deeply concerned at the latest policies, practices and
actions, which are seriously undermining this peace
process. It calls upon the Security Council to take urgent
measures to redress the current grave situation, as it
imperils the peace of the Holy City of Al-Quds al-Sharif.
We firmly believe that the Council has the duty to call
upon the Israeli authorities to immediately end these
unjust policies and practices and to desist from taking
similar measures in future.

I will be addressing the situation in Lebanon
separately in the debate which the Security Council will
have later today.

