Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): On
behalf of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, I would
like to express our sincere thanks to Cote d'Ivoire for
organizing this briefing. We wish to thank Assistant
Secretary-General Zerihoun and Ambassador Vieira
for their informative briefings.

Please allow me to focus on three important
points in relation to the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS)
and the situation in that country: first, a responsible
transition; secondly, political developments; and
thirdly, the role of international partners.

Regarding the possible transition of UNIOGBIS,
I would like to start by thanking Assistant Secretary-
General Zerihoun and the rest of the UNIOGBIS team
for the thorough report and its clear and honest analysis
(S/2018/1086). That is exactly the type of reporting
that we need in order for the Security Council to do
good work. The Kingdom of the Netherlands considers
that report to be an example of how the United Nations
can outline the evolution of peacekeeping and special
political missions and ensure a smooth transition. A
phased transition would definitely be necessary in any
possible UNIOGBIS exit scenario, which we do not
take as a given, based on resolution 2404 (2018).

Nevertheless, if the Council were to contemplate
an exit, it is imperative that benchmarks be set.
Benchmarks should not be linked to time but should
rather be based on the achievement of actual qualitative
benchmarks in the country. Those benchmarks
should include, at least, the successful completion of
the electoral cycle and the subsequent formation of a
Government. The Kingdom of the Netherlands would
like to emphasize the need for a responsible transition
strategy that takes into consideration the achievements
of the mission and the country and allows for the active
engagement of the Peacebuilding Commission. A
responsible exit and a coherent transition are essential
in order to both build and sustain peace in Guinea-
Bissau and to prevent Guinea-Bissau from sinking
deeper into political instability.

Secondly, the political situation in Guinea-Bissau is
extremely troubling. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
regrets the fact that the legislative elections scheduled
for 18 November did not take place. We take note of the
presidential decree of 20 December, in which the date
for elections has been set for 10 March 2019. While we
welcome the setting ofa date for elections, the Kingdom
of the Netherlands regrets the fact that the date is not
in line with the end-of-January deadline, as stipulated
in the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) communique of 12 December. Also, given
the near completion of the voter registration process,
it is difficult to comprehend why the new date is not
in conformity with that deadline. It remains imperative
that free, fair and credible elections take place prior to
the presidential elections. Combining those elections
remains unacceptable.

We therefore request the authorities of Guinea-
Bissau to base the date of elections on the ongoing
voter registration process and to adhere to the
timeline stipulated by ECOWAS in its communique
of 12 December. The Technical Office for Electoral
Processes Support should be able to continue its work
unhindered, and the legislative elections must take place
prior to the presidential elections. The organization
of free, inclusive, fair, transparent and credible
legislative and presidential elections is crucial for the
implementation of the Conakry Agreement and the
ECOWAS six-point road map, the full implementation
of which remains the only way to achieve lasting peace
and stability in Guinea-Bissau.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands would, therefore,
like to highlight two other elements in that regard:
the signing of a stability pact; and the urgent need for
constitutional reform. The stability pact must be further
deliberated on in an inclusive manner, and the signing
of the pact should occur prior to the organization of
legislative elections. Additionally, the sanctions regime
imposed under resolution 2048 (2012) remains linked
to the electoral cycle. Any reconsideration of the
sanctions - in any direction - should be based on the
conduct and completion of a full electoral cycle.

My third point concerns the indispensable role that
ECOWAS plays in building and sustaining peace in
Guinea-Bissau. We commend the efforts of ECOWAS
in Guinea-Bissau, particularly the visit to Bissau
on 12 December. We welcome the issuance of the
communique following the visit, in which ECOWAS
called on President Vaz to announce, prior to the
ECOWAS summit on 22 December, a new date for
elections before the end of January. We regret that the
authorities in Guinea-Bissau have not adhered to that
line. In addition to the role of ECOWAS, we also want
to stress the important role that the ECOWAS Mission
in Guinea-Bissau (ECOMIB) plays in Guinea-Bissau.
We support the European Union's decision to continue
to finance ECOMIB.

In conclusion, ECOWAS, the African Union,
the European Union, the Community of Portuguese
Language Countries and the United Nations remain
partners in building peace in Guinea-Bissau, with
UNIOGBIS as its main convener. We call upon the
Council to continue to monitor the situation closely
and base a possible reconfiguration of the tasks of
UNIOGBIS on clear benchmarks and achievements,
in consultation with relevant stakeholders and actors
on the ground. The Council's involvement in Guinea-
Bissau has a clear link to the prevention of the outbreak
of violence at a difficult political impasse. It remains
crucial to continue to support the Government of
Guinea-Bissau and other political stakeholders in
sustaining peace in Guinea-Bissau.

