Mr. Palous (Czech Republic): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union. The
candidate countries Turkey, Croatia and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro, Serbia, as well as Ukraine, the Republic
of Moldova and Armenia, align themselves with this
statement.

First, I would like to thank the Turkish
presidency for organizing this debate and for preparing
a concept paper focusing on the relationship between
the Security Council and the troop- and police-
contributing countries and those contributing
financially. We note that the Franco-British initiative
on peacekeeping called for quarterly briefings to the
Council by the Under-Secretaries-General for
Peacekeeping and for Field Support. We therefore

09-3860]
thank Alain Le Roy and Susana Malcorra for their
briefings and for introducing the Secretariat's
non-paper, and we hope that more briefings will follow
on a regular basis.

It is in our collective interest to ensure effective
and efficient United Nations peacekeeping. The
European Union has actively participated in the
discussions on how to address the challenges faced by
United Nations peacekeeping since the initiative was
launched in this Council last January by France and the
United Kingdom.

The resolve to review United Nations
peacekeeping and find solutions to its problems has
dynamically developed, and today's discussions should
contribute to the ongoing dialogue among all
stakeholders. The European Union appreciates the
efforts of the Japanese chairmanship of the Security
Council Working Group of the Whole on United
Nations Peacekeeping Operations, which has been
engaging troop-contributing countries, those
contributing financing and regional organizations in
discussions on how best to address gaps between
mandates and their implementation. We also welcome
the consultation process recently launched by Canada.

On the Secretariat side, the New Horizon project
has been launched, and this morning we heard a
briefing on the non-paper, which will provide us with a
comprehensive view by the Secretariat on how best to
cope with the current challenges to peacekeeping.

The European Union welcomes the momentum
that has been created and expects that all these
initiatives will bring substantial results in the coming
months. In this respect, we look forward to further
debate during the August United Kingdom presidency
of the Security Council, which will take stock of the
Council's efforts at putting its house in order. That
should spark wider debate within the United Nations
later in the year on issues pertaining to complex
mission mandates.

The challenges faced by the United Nations in
safeguarding international security are manifold. They
stem from conflict prevention initiatives, planning and
mandating peacekeeping operations and peacebuilding
initiatives, through resource constraints, military
expertise and effective oversight of the Security
Council, to the actual implementation of mandates and
the closing down of operations. As the complexity of
peacekeeping missions and their operational

environment has increased, it is important that
decisions about the appropriate United Nations
response be taken in consultations with those who
carry them out.

While recognizing that the primary responsibility
for maintaining international peace and security lies
with the Security Council, the European Union stresses
the need for improving and expanding existing
consultation mechanisms between those who plan and
manage operations and those who contribute troops and
finances. That would ensure more coherent and
integrated mission planning, improved command and
control of operations as well as smoother and more
effective implementation of mandates. The European
Union welcomes the meetings between troop- and
police-contributing countries and the Security Council
on specific peacekeeping missions in accordance with
resolution 1353 (2001), as well as the thematic
meetings of the Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations. Those meetings enhance mutual
confidence and cooperation. In order to achieve
tangible results, we believe that strengthened
commitment of both sides is desirable.

The European Union calls for further
improvement of cooperation between troop- and
police-contributing countries (TCCs/PCCs), the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Field Support. The European Union is
in favour of the Secretariat improving the quality of
information flow, organizing regular troop- and police-
contributing country meetings in a timely manner prior
to Security Council consultations and providing the
troop- and police-contributing countries with reports
on a regular basis on the political and military
situations of peacekeeping operations.

The concept of the strategic military cell, as it
exists within the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon, is one good example of a possible way
forward. Strengthened communication between the
TCCs and the Secretariat would also enhance
managerial efficiency, operational effectiveness and
accountability of United Nations peacekeeping
operations.

Another challenge for United Nations missions is
their peacebuilding tasks and ensuring a smooth
transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding, as well
as cooperation with other United Nations agencies and

actors in the field. Strengthened coordination is key to
our common ability to deliver.

The European Union welcomes the summary of
the Secretariat's New Horizon non-paper and looks
forward to the release of the non-paper itself. We
welcome the main focus of the non-paper on issues
such as strategy and direction, mission planning and
clarity of tasks, command and control, resource
availability and generation. The European Union shares
the view of the Secretariat that partnerships need to be
built to address the challenges of United Nations
peacekeeping.

Let me touch upon some of the Secretariat's
recommendations. The executive summary makes
widespread reference to a more proficient partnership
with regional organizations, also in planning, operating
and communicating together. The European Union has
a well-established partnership with the United Nations
in crisis management. It is also our priority to enhance
the capacity of other regional organizations, in
particular the African Union.

We fully agree with the need to strengthen
cooperation and reinforce interoperability with regional
organization as a key tool to maximize global capacity
of United Nations peacekeeping. In that regard, we
would draw attention to the need for the establishment
of effective transitional arrangements by the involved
organizations during any handover period.

The European Union agrees that there is a need to
broaden the base of contributors to United Nations
peacekeeping, and we would welcome better-calibrated
incentives for providing necessary capabilities. The
European Union collectively contributes over 40 per
cent of the peacekeeping budget and 12 per cent of
United Nations peacekeepers. Many European Union
member States provide significant financial resources
as well as capacities to United Nations blue-helmet
operations and to other United Nations-mandated
operations, including in Kosovo and Afghanistan.

But we recognize that there may be more that we
can do to make smarter use of available capabilities. In
that regard, the European Union urges efficient
management of available resources, which is more
important than ever at the time of the global financial
crisis. The European Union recognizes that robust
peacekeeping is sometimes needed and we have to
make sure that the United Nations is able to carry it
out.

For the European Union, protection of civilians is
a key aspect of United Nations peacekeeping that needs
to be consistently incorporated into all Security
Council mandates and effectively implemented.
Prioritization of mandates or sequencing of their
implementation needs further analysis and careful
consideration. We recognize the importance of
ensuring that deployed peacekeepers are fully capable
of fulfilling demanding mission mandates. Effective
implementation of resolutions 1325 (2000), 1820
(2008), protection of civilians and other key mandated
tasks require appropriate training. The European Union
provides substantial financial and technical support to
many troop- and police-contributing countries in those
areas.

In conclusion, let me assure you that the
European Union, as one of the leading contributors,
remains committed to making United Nations
peacekeeping more efficient and more effective. We
look forward to specific results based on the current
debates and to recommendations on how to move this
agenda forward.

