Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I express our
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for convening this
debate on a matter of immense importance to Palestine.
The Security Council's attention to the need for the
protection of civilians in armed conflict is both
appropriate and necessary. We also express
appreciation to you and your country, Turkey, for your
wise stewardship of the Council this month. I would
also like to add that I am delighted to see you, as a
good friend, presiding over the Security Council.

I also wish to thank Mr. John Holmes, Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, for his presentation of
the Secretary-General's report (S/2009/277) and for his
compelling statement. We hope that the Council will
continue its efforts to address this issue in an effective
manner until serious protection of civilians in armed
conflict is ensured in all cases, without selectivity or
inaction based on political considerations.

While the past 10 years of Security Council
efforts have contributed to increased awareness among
Member States and the broader international
community of the need to provide protection and to
respond to protection issues, the situation confronting
civilians in today's conflicts is tragically similar to that
which prevailed a decade ago. That can be primarily
attributed to the failure of parties to respect, and to
ensure respect of, their legal obligations to protect
civilians and spare them from the cruel consequences
of war and aggression.

The Palestinian people are all too familiar with
the failure of the international community to guarantee
the protection accorded to them under international
law, including humanitarian law and human rights law.
For more than four decades, the Palestinian people
have endured appalling levels of human suffering at the
hands of Israel, the occupying Power, in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem. We
reiterate our call, as we have in previous debates on
this issue, that the protection of peoples under foreign
occupation must be a priority undertaking of the
United Nations, in particular the Security Council,
which has clear responsibilities in that regard.

The international community's repeated inability
to hold Israel accountable for its violations and war
crimes has regrettably reinforced Israel's impunity and
lawlessness, permitting it to continue using military
force and collective punishment against the defenceless
Palestinian people under its occupation and, in essence,
absolving it from its legal obligations as an occupying
Power.

In that regard, it should be recalled that
protection provisions can be found in many
instruments of law, including the Geneva Conventions,
particularly the Fourth Geneva Convention, the
provisions of which explicitly aim to ensure the safety
of civilians in armed conflict, including specific
provisions for civilians under foreign occupation; the
Additional Protocols to the Geneva Conventions; the
human rights Covenants; the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court; and numerous United
Nations resolutions.

Never has the absence of protection for the
Palestinian civilian population been more evident than
it was during Israel's three-week aggression against the
Gaza Strip. More than 1,400 Palestinians were killed in
the Israeli onslaught, the overwhelming majority
civilians, including hundreds of children and women;
and more than 5,500 Palestinians, including more than
1,800 children, were injured as a result of the use of
excessive and indiscriminate force and lethal, and even
illegal, weaponry and ammunition by the occupying
forces against the civilian population. Civilian areas
and objects, including United Nations schools where
civilians were known to be sheltering from the
violence, were directly targeted by the occupying
Power, as confirmed by the number of casualties and
the extent of the destruction, as well as by several
investigations, including by the Secretary-General's
Board of Inquiry, the League of Arab States
Independent Fact Finding Committee on Gaza and
many human rights and humanitarian organizations on
the ground.

Among countless other violations, the occupying
Power also attacked humanitarian personnel and
clearly-marked ambulances, wantonly destroyed public
and civilian infrastructure, including thousands of
homes, targeted United Nations schools and buildings
and obstructed humanitarian access and access to
medical treatment for the wounded and sick, while
continuously denying an entire population their most
basic rights, including their rights to food and water.
Not only do all such actions constitute serious,
systematic violations of international law, but many
amount to war crimes, for which accountability must
be pursued.

In that regard, as the report rightly states, the
absence of accountability and, worse still, the lack in
many instances of any expectation thereof, are what
allow violations to thrive to a large extent. We thus
fully agree with the recommendations in the report, in
particular the recommendation that the Council
mandate commissions of inquiry to examine situations
where there are concerns regarding serious violations
of international humanitarian law and international
human rights law, including with a view to identifying
those responsible and prosecuting them at the national
level or referring the situation to the International
Criminal Court.

In this regard, the aforementioned independent
inquiries and investigations into Israel's military
aggression against the Gaza Strip clearly confirm that
Israel committed grave breaches of international law,
as it continues to do with its ongoing blockade of the
Gaza Strip in collective punishment of the entire
civilian population, and other illegal measures,
including colonization activities, throughout the
occupied Palestinian territory.

We persist in our calls for serious steps to pursue
accountability and justice with regard to Israel's crimes
against the Palestinian civilian population. That is
imperative for healing the deep physical and societal
wounds and trauma inflicted upon the Palestinian
people.

The international community, including the
Security Council, must follow up on the findings and
recommendations from United Nations-related
investigations, including the United Nations
Headquarters Board of Inquiry and the investigation

being undertaken by the Human Rights Council's fact-
finding commission. The Palestinian people will never
forget what happened, but, at the same time, the
international community must never let it happen
again. That can be guaranteed only if accountability
and the duty to make reparations for violations are
enforced.

At the same time, urgent measures must be
undertaken to end the unlawful Israeli blockade of the
Gaza Strip, which has driven socio-economic
conditions to deplorable levels. For two years now,
since June 2007, Israel, the occupying Power, has
deliberately obstructed humanitarian access, the
movement of persons, including sick persons needing
treatment unavailable in Gaza, and the movement of all
goods, including the most essential goods such as food
and medical and fuel supplies. This inhumane blockade
has perpetuated the dire humanitarian crisis, especially
among the most vulnerable, who continue to live amid
the destruction and trauma of Israel's aggression due to
its refusal to allow even the entry of materials essential
for reconstruction, leaving over 50,000 people
homeless and with wholly inadequate health care, clean
water, electricity and sanitation. This situation has
deepened the hardships and indignation of a civilian
population that is unquestionably entitled to protection
under humanitarian law and should not be left to the
mercy of the occupying Power.

As long as Israel continues to breach its legal
obligations towards the Palestinian civilian population,
the Security Council must act to uphold its
responsibilities under the Charter of the United Nations
and ensure compliance by Israel with international law
and United Nations resolutions. If Israel as the
occupying Power continues to defy the Council's calls,
the Council must take appropriate and concrete
measures to protect the civilian population and ensure
respect for the instruments of international law that are
supposed to provide civilians with protection from
human rights violations and crimes, including in
situations of foreign occupation. We are convinced that
the international community has no choice but to make
progress in this regard and create a different and safer
situation than that faced today by the Palestinian
civilian population under Israeli occupation.

