The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Israel, Lebanon and the Syrian Arab
Republic, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Gillerman
(Israel) took a seat at the Council table; the
representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side ofthe Council Chamber.

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 19 April
2007 from the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the
United Nations, which will be issued as document
S/2007/228 and which reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the meeting of the Security Council which will
be held on Wednesday, 25 April 2007, regarding
the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question."

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the meeting in accordance with the rules
of procedure and the previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mansour
(Palestine) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Lynn Pascoe,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs.

It is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, to whom I give the floor.


