Mr. Gambari (Nigeria): My delegation welcomes the
recent positive developments in the former Yugoslavia,
because we believe sincerely that they could usher in an era
of peace in a region that has been ravaged by war in the
last four years.

However, the prospect of peace may not fructify
unless there is justice for the many victims of the war. In
several instances, that war has been conducted with almost
total disregard for applicable international law, as well as
laws governing the treatment of civilians and of prisoners
of war in civil conflict.

In this regard, we have read with grave concern the
latest report of the Secretary-General, further confirming
earlier reports that there is overwhelming evidence of a
consistent pattern of summary executions, rape, mass
expulsions, arbitrary detentions, forced labour and large-
scale disappearances in the areas of Srebrenica, Zepa, Banja
Luka and Sanski Most, all in the territory of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

That report further highlights the fact that the Bosnian
Serb forces and their paramilitary allies were responsible
for the atrocities. More worrisome is the indication
contained in the report that the full scale of the horrors has
yet to be properly investigated and revealed.
We therefore reiterate our call on the Bosnian Serbs to
give immediate and full access to the relevant United
Nations agencies, as well as the International Committee of
the Red Cross (ICRC), to the areas where these atrocities
appear to have taken place, so that the whole truth may be
told. We further call on those concerned to do nothing to
tamper with evidence or attempt to conceal or damage such
evidence. Furthermore, we urge the parties in the former
Yugoslavia to cooperate fully with the Prosecutor and the
International Tribunal for the prosecution of those
responsible for serious war crimes.

The recent widespread looting, burning and
destruction of houses and other property, in particular, by
Bosnian Croat forces after the Dayton Agreement is
particularly regrettable and must stop immediately. These
acts also show that some of the parties have not got the
message that such activities and such atrocities will not be
tolerated by the international community and that, in any
case, they are clearly unhelpful to the future peaceful
coexistence of all ethnic groups in the territory. We
therefore call on the parties to turn a new page in the
history of the Balkans, one that will emphasize tolerance,
peaceful coexistence, diversity and accommodation. The
practical application of those virtues is long overdue in
that region of the world.

My delegation will vote in favour of the draft
resolution before us.

