Mr. Benmehidi (Algeria) (spoke in French): Algeria
is honoured to take part in this very important debate
tpresided over by His Excellency Mr. Faure Essozimna
Gnassingbe, President of the Togolese Republic. My
delegation is pleased to have been able to listen to the
points made in the important statement that he delivered
at the opening of this debate. Allow me to also express
my congratulations to the Permanent Mission of Togo
for the very excellent and wise initiative of having
organized, under its presidency, this high-level debate
on the challenges of the fight against terrorism in Africa
in the context of maintaining international peace and
security.
(spoke in English)

Terrorism has been spreading dangerously in
most of African subregions, through groups mainly
structured around the Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb,
the Movement for Unity and Jihad in Western Africa,
Boko Haram and Al-Shabaab. The Sahel subregion in
particular hosts a narrow and increasingly systematic
series of connections between terrorism and multiple
forms of organized crime, including drug trafficking.
That alarming situation should mobilize cooperation
among African countries, regional and international
organizations and other partners from the international
community on both security and development aspects.

The legal and institutional framework to combat
terrorism in Africa was put in place in anticipation
years ago, in particular under the auspices of the
African Union. Algeria took part in that process and
was among the countries that played a pioneering role
in that respect, as testified by the adoption in Algiers
in July 1999 of the Organization of African Unity's
Convention on the Prevention and Combating of
Terrorism, which was followed by the establishment of
implementing mechanisms and a plan of action adopted
in Addis Ababa and Algiers.

Among the mechanisms created, it is worth noting
the important work of the Centre for Studies and Research
on Terrorism (ACSRT), the headquarters of which is
in Algiers, which has made an important contribution,
inter alia, to preparing an African draft model law to
combat terrorism. ACSRT is an important partner of
the United Nations entities in charge of the struggle
against terrorism, including in strengthening African
countries' national capacities and in coordinating and
implementing subregional and regional projects.

The fight against terrorism cannot be effective
without eliminating its underlying resources and
disrupting all related criminal activities that are aimed
at financing the crimes of terrorist groups. Within
the framework of the African Union and the United
Nations, Algeria has spared no effort to raise awareness
ofthe dangers posed by hostage-taking and the payment
of ransoms, as well as of the importance of fighting
that scourge. Such criminal practices have provided
terrorist groups with an important source of financing,
which has enabled the expansion of their activities, as
was recently seen in the events in the Sahel region.

My delegation's efforts within the United Nations
have been geared to ensuring that provisions on that
issue are included in General Assembly and Security
Council resolutions. In that regard, we continue to
encourage United Nations entities working under the
auspices of the General Assembly to implement the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, as
well as those working under the Security Council to
apply greater efforts and resources to tackling the issue.

Algeria is fully committed to regional cooperation
in fighting the destabilization caused by terrorists
and organized crime groups in the Sahel region. Our
commitment is not new. As mentioned in the Togolese
presidency's concept note (S/2013/264, annex), regional
measures taken in Africa in that area were intended to
be preventive and coordinated and to rely on multiple
initiatives. In that spirit, the cooperation framework
established by the countries ofthe region is an important
milestone. It provides a forum for close and regular
political consultation. Accordingly, the most recent
meeting among Mali's neighbouring countries, held in
Nouakchott on 17 March, enhanced coordination and
the exchange of information, in particular on matters
related to political, financial and logistical assistance
for Mali, as well as border control issues. Other
components of the cooperation whose mechanisms
have already been implemented will need to be further
developed in the future.

Algeria notes with satisfaction the tasks
accomplished by the African-led International Support
Mission in Mali pursuant to the provisions of resolution
2085 (2012), in particular the reduction of the threat
of terrorist organizations, including Al-Qaida in the
Islamic Maghreb, the Movement for Unity and Jihad in
West Africa and Ansar Dine and associated extremist
groups, and in support of recovery by the Malian
authorities of areas under the control of those terrorist
groups.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to
highlight the important role played by the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011), concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities, which seeks to
combat terrorist activities in Africa in close collaboration
with Member States. The fruitful cooperation between
Algeria and the Committee has resulted in the listing
of individuals and entities. Noteworthy among recent
additions is the Movement of Unity and Jihad in West
Africa, a terrorist group that was added to the list upon
the initiative of my delegation.

