Miss Durrant (Jamaica): Mr. President, let me
join you in welcoming the Secretary-General to our
discussions this morning on the situation in Angola.
The 26-year-old war in that country is among the most
protracted conflicts on the continent of Africa, and we
are very pleased with the attention that the Secretary-
General and his Under-Secretary-General have devoted
to this issue. It is in this context that we wish to thank
you for convening this meeting to allow us to hear a
briefing from Under-Secretary-General Gambari on his
recent visit to Angola, which took place in early
December.

We can recall that, at the beginning of this year,
there were small signs of hope as an atmosphere more
conducive to dialogue and confidence-building began
to emerge between the Angolan authorities and the
United Nations. Within Angolan society, too, seeds of
peace were being sown, largely due to the influence of
civil society, including the church and humanitarian
and other organizations, which were agitating for
peace.

One of the most important outcomes of
Ambassador Gambari's visit is the fact that the United
Nations has been invited to become more fully
involved in the peace process. We think that this is an
extremely important development, because we believe
that the United Nations can play a role in bringing
together disparate elements of civil society in Angola
and in seeking to set the stage for dialogue with
UNITA.

We remain convinced that there can be no
military solution to the conflict in Angola and that
sustainable peace can be achieved only through
dialogue and negotiation. As we have stated time and
again in this Council, the primary responsibility for the
conflict resides with Mr. Savimbi and UNITA. We also
reaffirm that the Lusaka accords and the relevant
Security Council resolutions remain the most viable
basis upon which to build. It is time for all to accept
that a political solution is the only route to securing
peace in Angola. UNITA must play a more constructive
role in society if it expects to be part of the political
process. In this regard, we are pleased to hear from
Under-Secretary-General Gambari about the possible
willingness expressed by Mr. Savimbi to hold
discussions with the Government of Angola. We hope
that this can soon be authenticated.

The instrumental role of civil society also
provides a glimmer of hope which must be encouraged.
It is our view that such groups can provide a medium
through which negotiations between the warring parties
can find some common ground. Recent reports, which
have been borne out by Ambassador Gambari's
briefing, indicate that organizations including religious,
women's and other interest groups have been active in
demanding an immediate bilateral ceasefire and that
they have pledged to work for peace in Angola.
We have also noted the call for a mechanism
which will facilitate the integration of national non-
governmental organizations and civil society into the
political dialogue process. We agree that this is a very
useful initiative as Angola prepares for elections. We
have noted, however, that Ambassador Gambari has
pointed out that the timetable for elections might be
delayed. In this regard, we think that the assistance of
the United Nations - through its technical team,
which will be visiting Angola in January - is
extremely important, as it will be focusing on the
programme for civil registration and on the peace and
reconciliation programme, all of which will have to lay
the groundwork for elections.

Another area to which my delegation wishes to
refer is the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme. Ambassador Gambari has
pointed out that we will need to look more closely at
the present mandate of the United Nations Office in
Angola if it is going to be involved in this area; we
certainly believe that it is an area in which the United
Nations needs to become more fully involved,
including, possibly, through funding through the
regular budget.

Another area is the humanitarian situation. The
recent humanitarian report illustrates that there have
been no significant improvements in the humanitarian
situation in Angola in 2001. We welcome the launching
of the 2002 Consolidated Inter-Agency Appeal for
Angola, and note that $114 million is needed to provide
food security for some 4 million Angolans - 25 per
cent of the country's population - displaced by war.

We have taken note of the situation that
Ambassador Gambari referred to with regard to the
increasing numbers of internally displaced persons, and
we wish to commend the Government for the action it
is taking to resettle some 500,000 by early next year.
We have also noted that it has closed the transition
camps and is providing greater access for food
delivery. We also wish to commend the various
humanitarian agencies, particularly the World Food
Programme, for their efforts to bring relief to the
people of Angola.

Finally, as Jamaica prepares to leave the Security
Council, we wish to encourage the international
community and the parties in Angola to keep hope
alive in the peace process in Angola. It is time for the
parties involved to rise above narrow self-interest and
seek to promote what is good for the future
development of the country and the people as a whole.
In closing, I wish to place on record our
commendation of the Secretary-General, and also of
Under-Secretary-General Gambari for his own sterling
efforts at promoting the cause of peace in Angola. We
also wish to express our appreciation to the Secretary-
General for reappointing Ambassador Gambari for
another year as Special Adviser of the Secretary-
General for Special Assignments in Africa.

