Mr. Merimee (France) (interpretation from French):
I have the honour of speaking on behalf of the European
Union.

The European Union would like first of all to welcome
to the Security Council the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Mozambique, Mr. Leonardo Santos Simao, who has
honoured us with his presence here today.

In the past year, after nearly 20 years of conflict,
Mozambique has experienced notable events. For the people
of Mozambique, the elections held on 27 to
29 October 1994 were a decisive step forward and the
culmination of the lengthy peace process that had started in
earnest with the signing of the Rome Agreement on
4 October 1992.

In all, 88 per cent of the 6.4 million Mozambicans
who had registered to vote went to the polls over three days
to elect their President and their legislators. This shows
how eager the Mozambicans, voting for the first time, were
to turn a new page in their history.

This success resulted from a set of factors that deserve
to be emphasized. First, the tale of Mozambique would not
have had this happy ending without the determination to
succeed displayed by the President of Mozambique,
Mr. Chissano, and the President of RENAMO,
Mr. Dhlakama, both of whom were motivated and
encouraged by the Mozambican people's desire for peace.

Secondly, the European Union wishes to pay tribute
to all who participated in the United Nations Operation in
Mozambique (ONUMOZ), and in particular to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Aldo Ajello,
who supported the efforts of the Mozambicans to make
the elections succeed by adapting ONUMOZ to the
situation as required.

Finally, we must emphasize that the management of
the case of Mozambique was exemplary with respect to
efforts by the countries of the region and by the troop-
contributing countries, and with respect to the
involvement of donors in the process of implementing the
Peace Agreement.

The European Union spared no effort on the
Community-wide and bilateral levels to enable us today
to say that the United Nations Operation in Mozambique
has been a complete success. Suffice it to recall that
80 per cent of the election expenses were defrayed by the
European Union, which during the balloting provided 200
observers in addition to those serving as United Nations
international observers.

The European Union intends to continue its
Community-wide and bilateral efforts to promote peace-
building in Mozambique. In its resolution 957 (1994) of
15 November 1994, the Security Council set
31 January 1995 for the withdrawal of ONUMOZ.
Clearly, the Mozambicans will not be abandoned after
that date. United Nations specialized agencies will replace
the blue helmets to coordinate the development and
growth of the country in order to consolidate the new
peace. We appeal to the Secretary-General to ensure that
this takes place.

It is for that very purpose that the European Union
will continue its assistance. All Mozambicans must be
able to see their ballot transformed into a road map to
democracy and progress.

In that connection, the European Union attaches
great importance to true national reconciliation. We hope
that sincere cooperation between the majority and the
opposition will be among the new Government's
priorities. We think the opposition ought to be represented
both at the governmental and at the local level. The
European Union stresses that peace in Mozambique
deserves participation by all Mozambicans in its
consolidation.

 

More broadly speaking, the European Union notes that
the success of the operation in Mozambique, following the
elections in South Africa, is a source of encouragement for
the process of democratization and progress throughout
southern Africa. We hope that Angola will follow
Mozambique's example and soon rejoin the ranks of
democratic countries advancing towards political renewal
and economic and social development.

