Mr. Augusto (Angola): At the outset, I wish to thank
His Excellency Mr. Rodolfo Nin Novoa for presiding
over this important and timely debate. We commend
the delegation of Uruguay for its excellent work in
presiding over the Security Council. We also seize this
opportunity to welcome the five new members of the
Council, with whom we look forward to constructive
cooperation. We commend Secretary General Ban
Ki-moon for his relentless efforts to foster dialogue
and the peaceful resolution of conflicts affecting the
Middle East at this critical juncture.

In 2011, with the so-called Arab Spring, the world
witnessed the events occurring in some countries of
North Africa and the Middle East, and the prospects of a
new era of peace, democracy and economic development.
Unfortunately, the outcome of those events did not
deliver greater freedom and democracy; instead, they
brought about the collapse of State authority, new and
extreme forms of authoritarianism and the breakdown
of national borders. The collapse of State authority
further aggravated sectarian divisions, with people, in
times of insecurity and uncertainty, leaning towards
their ethnic and religious affiliations. That is the case
with Syria, which has become a fractured State, no
longer corresponding to its recognized borders, its
territory divided into areas controlled by the legitimate
Government, on one hand, and by non-State armed
groups and the terrorists of the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Sham (ISIS) and the Al-Nusra Front, among
others, on the other, thus poised for an uncertain future.
The only window of opportunity lies in a decisive and
sincere push by regional and world Powers to crush
terrorism and embrace all Syrians in the search for a
political settlement to the conflict.

The same applies to Iraq, a State broken apart, as
demonstrated by the current state of affairs. Baghdad
has little or no influence on the Kurdish region or in
the Sunni-majority Anbar or Ninawa provinces. The
disintegration of State structures in Libya and Yemen
is also a troubling reality, exacerbated by extremely
dire humanitarian conditions and the prospect of
territorial breakdown if a determined and concerted
effort on the part of the major Powers does not rescue
these countries from the deadly threat of terrorism.
Unfortunately, faced with such bleak scenarios, the
response of the international community to the growing
problems affecting the Middle East and North Africa
has not been directed towards tackling the root causes
of such conflicts and bridging the gaps among ethnic
communities and religious groups.

At present, the most pressing issue in the Middle
East is to defeat radical extremist groups in order to
facilitate the peaceful resolution of prevailing conflicts.
It is crucial to avoid the scenario in which the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Sham consolidates an extremist
rogue State in parts of Syria and Iraq, which would then
become a breeding ground for terrorists, spreading fear
and hatred. Political, diplomatic, military and economic
cooperation must be intensified in the search for peace
and stability in a region distressed by double standards
and inaction, and facing catastrophic political,
economic and humanitarian conditions.

On the basis of this viewpoint, we observe with
concern the fading prospects for peace between Israelis
and Palestinians - a situation that constitutes a chief
element of the current disorder in the Middle East and
an effective recruitment tool for radical extremists
in the region. We regret Israeli policies of settlement
expansion. As stated in unison by the international
community, Israeli settlement activities are a violation
of international law and in stark contradiction to the
public pronouncements of the Israeli Government on
the two-State solution to the conflict. In that regard,
we also appeal to Palestinians to persist in renouncing
violence, recognize the State of Israel and respect the
agreements concluded so far. We also remind Israel
that it cannot remain a secure Jewish and democratic
State while oppressing and illegally governing millions
of Palestinians against their will. In that regard, we
reiterate the relevant role the Security Council should
play on this issue by adopting a resolution, with
balanced and fair parameters, for a political solution
to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, based on our belief
that the Security Council has the political and moral
obligation to do so, and as soon as possible.

Diplomacy has suffered successive defeats in
attempts to find peaceful solutions to crises and
conflicts in the Middle East. After the long-overdue
accords between Egypt and Israel in 1979 and Jordan
and Israel in 1994, one case of success was the recent
diplomatic solution to the Iranian nuclear programme,
as an indication that any controversy, as complex and
difficult as it might be, can have negotiated outcomes if
the parties display the political will and commitment to
seeking political solutions to avoid recourse to military
means.

The adoption of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action on the Iranian nuclear programme and its entry
into force last week might work as a game-changer
if the permanent members of the Security Council
reach out with determination to regional Powers and
countries in the Middle East - Iran, Saudi Arabia,
Turkey, Egypt, Syria, Iraq, the Gulf States, Jordan,
Israel and Palestine - to address and resolve proxy
wars and serious crisis situations affecting the region,
including the fight against the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant, Al-Qaida and the terrorist constellation,
the wars in Syria and Yemen, the Palestinian question,
the fracture between the Sunni- and Shiite-majority
countries in the Middle East, and above all for the
establishment of a new era of cooperation and respect
and for the social and economic development of the
region.

