Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom greatly welcomes the adoption of resolution
1706 (2006) by the Council today. The United
Kingdom had the honour to introduce the draft
resolution to the Council as one of the co-sponsors.

The crisis in Darfur, which should never have
started, has gone on far too long. Over the past three
years, 2 million people have been displaced and
200,000 have been killed. After months of
negotiations, a peace deal - the Darfur Peace
Agreement (DPA) - was finally signed in April this
year. Three months ago, the Council met at the foreign-
minister level to welcome this and to look ahead to a
brighter future for the people of Darfur.

It is a great tragedy that that brighter future is not
materializing and that things, rather, have got worse,
not better. Violence against civilians and humanitarian
workers has increased. July was the worst month for
attacks on humanitarian workers, with nine deaths. To
date, humanitarian organizations have had to cut back
their activities, with many considering pulling out of
Darfur altogether. Much of the population is without
basic food and health services. There are more gender-
based acts of violence and robberies, and 50,000 new
internally displaced persons have been created in the
last few weeks alone. As a result, the DPA is under
increasing strain and in real danger of collapsing. As
the United States Permanent Representative said, we
cannot afford to delay any longer. Already today there
are more reports of the build-up of the Sudanese
military in Darfur.

Against this backdrop, the African Union Mission
in the Sudan (AMIS), which stepped in to Darfur when
the United Nations asked it to, and which has done an
extremely good job in exceptionally difficult
circumstances, is now struggling to cope - so much so
that the African Union has called for transition to a
United Nations operation. This resolution responds to
that call.

The test before the Council today was whether it
was prepared to act to mandate that United Nations
mission and assume its responsibilities towards the
people of Darfur. The adoption of the resolution shows
that it is. The resolution gives the United Nations force
in Darfur a clear Chapter VII mandate to use all
necessary means to protect civilians. We are heartened
06-48422

that, as shown by the vote today, there is broad
consensus among Council members that transition to a
United Nations operation is the only viable solution to
Darfur's problems. And if I may speak on behalf of
others for a moment, I would like to say confidently,
based on our conversations, that those countries that
abstained did not, I believe, have a fundamental
disagreement with the principle that United Nations
should take over; the issue was more one of timing.

The resolution adopted today does three clear
things. First, it authorizes much-needed United Nations
support for AMIS, which it makes clear must begin to
be deployed within the next 30 days. Secondly, it
mandates the United Nations to deploy additional
resources, as soon as possible thereafter, in preparation
for the third element: transition to a full United Nations
operation no later than 31 December.

A United Nations force operating in support of
the Darfur Peace Agreement remains the best vehicle
for the people of Darfur. The DPA is not perfect; no
one would claim that it is. But is the best - indeed, it
is the only - vehicle that we have to bring peace and
stability to Darfur. The plan that the Government of the
Sudan sent to the Security Council (see S/2006/665, annex) seeks to provide the military solution that Kofi
Annan warned against in his report to the Council. A
number of commentators have made the suggestion
that we should wait to see if the Sudanese plan can be
implemented and can provide a solution. We believe
very firmly that it cannot. It would be a military
solution imposed by one of the parties to the conflict,
and one that violated resolutions 1590 (2005) and 1591
(2005), as well as the Darfur Peace Agreement itself.

The adoption of resolution 1706 (2006) today
sends a clear message from the Council about the need
for an unbiased, well-equipped third party to
implement the DPA and ensure the protection of
Darfur's civilians.

That does not mean that we do not attach
importance to the consent and agreement of the
Government of the Sudan. It remains the case that the
United Nations cannot deploy in Darfur until we have
that agreement; that is not in dispute. We look forward
hopefully to the Government of the Sudan's giving its
acceptance soon. But in the vote today, the Council has
sent a crystal clear message that it wants that
agreement to be forthcoming quickly. Indeed, in the
3
text of its resolution, it explicitly invites the Sudan to
provide this.

We believe that if the Government of the Sudan is
genuinely concerned about the welfare and protection
of its citizens, there is no reason for it not to give its
consent. A United Nations force will act in support of
the Government of the Sudan by assisting it in
implementing the DPA, which the Government of the
Sudan signed and which it supports. I would like to
underscore that point once more: the United Nations
force is there to act in support of the Government of
the Sudan; we want to work cooperatively with it. This
is a United Nations force that will have a strong
African participation and character. It will no more
infringe on the Sudan's sovereignty than has the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) in southern
Sudan - and UNMIS is a force that the Government
of the Sudan has welcomed and has accepted.

We attach great importance to the continuation of
dialogue with the Sudan. The adoption of Security
Council resolution 1706 (2006) does not change this.
We want to do all we can to bring the Government in
Khartoum on board. The United Kingdom led a
Council mission to the Sudan in June for exactly that
purpose. The Council sought to consult again with the
Government before adopting today's resolution.
Unfortunately, it chose not to accept our invitation to
meet with us last Monday. We thank you,
Mr. President, for your efforts to bring that meeting
about. We very much regret the fact that the
Government of the Sudan chose not to attend.

The United Kingdom drafted the resolution in
such a way as to make it as acceptable as possible to
the Sudan. We listened to the concerns that President
Bashir expressed to the Council in Khartoum, and we
sought to respond to them accordingly. There is, for
example, no reference - although we would have
liked one - to the International Criminal Court in the
text. And while the resolution contains Chapter VII
elements on the protection of civilians and on the
United Nations force itself, it is not under Chapter VII
in its entirety. The text also states clearly and
categorically that the Council remains committed to the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Sudan,
which will be unaffected by transition to a United
Nations operation.

In doing this, we believe that we have sought to
meet the Sudanese Government's concerns to the
extent that we can reasonably do so. The United
Kingdom will play its part in seeking to secure the
Sudan's consent from now on. We sent a special envoy
last week, and I know that others did the same. A
British minister was standing by, ready to see President
Bashir today to discuss the resolution, but
unfortunately had to turn back after Bashir refused to
meet with him.

Almost one year ago, the heads of State of the
countries members of the Council signed the World
Summit Outcome document, noting the responsibility
of each United Nations Member State to protect its
citizens and the international community's
responsibility to assist in this if the State could not
provide for such protection alone. The United
Kingdom was at the forefront of efforts to secure this.
We are very pleased that this is the first Security
Council resolution mandating a United Nations
peacekeeping operation to make an explicit reference
to this responsibility. It has always been, and it
remains, the primary responsibility of the Government
of the Sudan to ensure the security of its own citizens.
Over the past few years, it manifestly has not done so.

By adopting resolution 1706 (2006) today, the
Council is appealing to the Government of the Sudan,
in the strongest possible terms, to allow the United
Nations to help it to do so. Such a decision would be in
the interests of the Sudanese Government, the
continent of Africa and the people of Darfur. The
Council is here to help the Sudan, not to threaten it; to
assist the Sudan, not to undermine it. The Government
of the Sudan has nothing to lose from a United Nations
operation in Darfur, and everything to gain. We hope to
assist it in that endeavour.

