The President (spoke in French): Following
consultations among the members of the Security
Council, I have been authorized to make the following
statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council, recalling its relevant
resolutions and the statements of its President,
emphasizes the importance of addressing the
continuing factors of instability in West Africa
within a regional framework. It recognizes the
need for a comprehensive and composite approach
for durable solutions to the complex crises and
conflicts in West Africa. Such an approach should
address the root causes of conflict and consider
means to promote sustainable peace and security,
including development and economic revival, good
governance and political reform.
"The Security Council takes note in this
regard of the report of the Secretary-General
dated 12 March 2004 (S/2004/200) and its
recommendations to address cross-border issues,
in particular the plight of child soldiers and the
use and proliferation of mercenaries and small
arms, within the context of a regional approach.
The Security Council believes action on the
report should be taken as part of a wider strategy
of conflict prevention, crisis management and
post-conflict stabilization in the subregion.

"The Security Council welcomes the
principles set out by the African Union and
NEPAD, which provide an important framework
for such action. It encourages ECOWAS member
States to ensure that these are fully implemented. It
consequently urges ECOWAS to work closely with
the United Nations system, the international
financial institutions and the other international
and regional organizations concerned, including
the newly established African Union Peace and
Security Council, as well as with interested States,
in drafting a regional conflict prevention policy
taking fully into account the recommendations of
the recent joint United Nations and European
Union mission to the region.

"The Security Council stresses the
importance of the role of the Secretary-General's
Special Representative for West Africa in
facilitating the coordination of a coherent United
Nations approach to cross-border and transnational
problems in the subregion.

"The Security Council encourages the
Secretary-General's Special Representative for
West Africa to continue to hold regular meetings
on coordination among the United Nations
missions in the region in the interest of improved
cohesion and maximum efficiency of United
Nations activities in West Africa. It also
encourages the greatest possible harmonization
among United Nations agencies within countries of
the subregion.

"The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to encourage the United Nations
missions in West Africa to share information and
their logistic and administrative resources as far as
possible, without impeding the satisfactory
execution of their respective mandates, in order to
increase their effectiveness and reduce costs.

"The Security Council expresses its
intention to consider the Secretary-General's

recommendations to facilitate cross-border
operations and to strengthen cooperation among
the United Nations missions in the region,
including the possibility of 'hot pursuit'
operations, joint air patrolling, shared border
responsibility, the possible reinforcement of
airspace monitoring and joint planning for the
repatriation of foreign combatants. It looks
forward to receiving as soon as possible the
Secretary-General's recommendations after due
consultation with the Governments concerned. It
also encourages the States in the subregion to
organize common patrols along their respective
borders, jointly if need be with the respective
United Nations peacekeeping operations.

"The Security Council invites the Secretary-
General and ECOWAS to take the requisite
practical decisions to improve the coordination of
United Nations and ECOWAS activities in West
Africa.

"The Security Council stresses the
importance of a regional approach in the
preparation and implementation of demobilization,
disarmament and reintegration (DDR)
programmes. To this end it invites the United
Nations missions in West Africa, the Governments
concerned, the appropriate financial institutions,
international development agencies and donor
countries to work together to harmonize individual
country DDR programmes within an overarching
regional strategy to design community
development programmes to be implemented
alongside DDR programmes, and to pay special
attention to the specific needs of children in armed
conflict.

"The Security Council reiterates the
importance of finding durable solutions to the
problem of refugees and displaced persons in the
subregion and urges the States in the region to
promote necessary conditions for their voluntary
and safe return with the support of relevant
international organizations and donor countries.

"The Security Council considers that illegal
trafficking in arms poses a threat to international
peace and security in the region. It, therefore,
urges the ECOWAS member States to fully
implement their moratorium on the import, export
and manufacture of light weapons signed in Abuja

on 31 October 1998. It also invites them to study

the possibility of strengthening its provisions.
"The Security Council invites the ECOWAS
member States to take all necessary steps to better
combat illegal trafficking in small arms and light
weapons in the region, such as the establishment of
a regional register of small arms and light
weapons. The Security Council calls on donor
countries to help the ECOWAS member States
implement these steps.

"The Security Council urges all States, in
particular those in the region and those with a
capacity to export arms, to ensure that arms
embargoes are fully implemented in the subregion.
It expresses its intention to pay close attention and
remain in consultation with ECOWAS and
Member States on steps to stop the illicit flows of
arms to conflict zones in the region.

"The Security Council recognizes the need to
address both the supply and demand side with
regard to private companies selling illegally small
arms or security services and invites the
Governments concerned to take appropriate steps
to prevent such illegal sales.

"The Security Council recalls the measures it
has implemented on the illegal exploitation and
trade of diamonds and timber in the subregion and
encourages ECOWAS and its member States to
promote transparent and sustainable exploitation of
these resources.

"The Security Council encourages ECOWAS
to publicly identify parties and actors who are
shown to engage in illicit trafficking of small arms
in the subregion and use mercenaries, and
expresses its intention to consider adopting such
practice in relation to the conflicts in West Africa.

"The Security Council recalls that the
existence of the many illegitimate checkpoints and
the practice of extortion at them in the region
harms the security of civilians and is a major
stumbling block to the economic development of
all West Africa. It therefore invites the
Governments concerned to take the necessary steps
to effectively address this impediment to regional
economic integration with the support of the
international community.

"The Security Council calls on the ECOWAS
member States to work together to agree a
coherent approach to the problem of foreign
combatants.

"The Security Council calls on the Mano
River Union States to resume dialogue and
consider holding a summit of heads of State and
meetings of ministers to develop a common
approach to their shared security issues and
confidence-building measures.

"The Security Council considers that civil
society actors, including the media, have an
important role to play in crisis management and
conflict prevention in the region and that their
efforts in this regard deserve to be actively
supported by the regional States, ECOWAS, the
international community and the United Nations
system. Increased support should be provided for
the media to raise awareness about the plight of
child soldiers, the use and proliferation of small
arms and the recruitment of mercenaries.

"The Security Council welcomes the
consideration being given in the International
Contact Group on Liberia (ICGL) to broadening its
mandate to the cross-border issues concerning
Liberia and its neighbouring countries.

"The Security Council considers reform of
the security sector an essential element for peace
and stability in West Africa and urgently calls on
donor countries and the international financial
community to coordinate their efforts to support
ECOWAS, in particular its Executive Secretariat,
and to assist the States in the subregion in their
efforts to reform the security sector.

"The Security Council, in the context of its
emphasis on the regional dimension of the
problems in West Africa, expresses its intention
to keep under review the implementation of the
above-mentioned recommendations and requests
the Secretary-General to report on them at the
occasion of his regular reports on the United
Nations missions in the subregion."

This statement will be issued as a document of

the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2004/7.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my

list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda. May I take this opportunity to thank all the
speakers for participating in this meeting.

The meeting rose at 1.35 p.m.
