Mr. Mutaboba (Rwanda): This is yet again
another opportunity to talk of an important matter that
is relevant to the historical successes and failures of
our Organization in general and of this Council in
particular. My delegation wishes to congratulate you,
Mr. President, for your inspiring paper and for calling
this debate. My delegation believes that this topic had
been conveniently ignored or left out during previous
meetings of the Council, not because members did not
think it has meaning, but probably because the topic
itself carries with it the need for a lot of introspection
and therefore more responsibilities to align and failures
to account for.

From peacekeeping to peace-building and from
peace-building to nation-building, a lot of things are
meant to happen and decisions must be taken.
However, things do not always happen as they should,
and when they do, consequent decisions are not taken
to make sure that such a rich background of experience
can serve as a basis for not repeating the same
mistakes. There are many examples to illustrate this.

The "no exit without strategy" debate therefore
comes as a good opportunity for all members to tell
each other the truth and nothing but the truth, and to
teach or learn from one another for practical and
obvious reasons. If there is an exit to refer to, then it
should refer to "let's go, job well done", and not refer
to a negative and cowardly ending of saying "Thank
God we have an easy way out. Let's get out fast".

It is imperative that members have and show the
same sense of responsibility in whatever you are doing
in this Chamber and in each peacekeeping situation you
are called to mount and lead to a successful exit. To do
so you need right strategies, and right strategies stem
from clear thinking, clear and achievable mandates,
adequate logistics and, most of all, a sustained political
will to take the entire membership of our Organization
on board.

If a member suggests or decides to go here or
there, just ask yourselves: For what purpose? What do
you want to achieve? Why this and not what we agreed
upon before? This systematic way of thinking, step by
step and phase by phase, cannot lead us to disasters or
failures. On the contrary, it will lead us to successes,
and that is what we collectively want to see happening,
with everyone's assistance wherever the action has to
take place.

Discrepancies in our recent history naturally lead
to double standards and limited popularity of the work
carried out by our Organization. While congratulating
the Security Council for the rapidity with which
peacekeeping forces have been put together for
Ethiopia and Eritrea, I wish to remind everyone that it
is occurring well after Sierra Leone and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Much as none of the
peacekeeping forces can expect to enjoy a soft landing
in any given country, it is certain that with good
strategies, those forces can avoid the worst and do the
bestjob of all.

Strategies are defined by clear objectives and
mandates, by adequate logistics and by political will,
the lack of which has caused, and is still causing,
repeated failures. Yes, we should exit. But the Council
must ask itself whether it has done what it had to do
and whether it is satisfied with its achievements. If the
answer is "no", then I am afraid that all strategies
ought to be thrown on the table and revised. The
Brahimi report undoubtedly shows that the situations in
Srebrenica and Rwanda could have been avoided
altogether.

My delegation hopes that, even though our loved
ones cannot be brought back, the lessons learned will at
least enable us to devise sound strategies to prevent
similar tragedies from occurring in the future. Words
alone do not serve any purpose. They have to be
followed by actions. Peace will then mean more to
people and to the world. Assistance for development in
post-conflict countries such as Rwanda is a necessity,
and such assistance has rightly been proposed by
reports on Rwanda, Srebrenica and other situations.
Failing to reduce poverty and ignorance will breed
injustice and result in a fragile peace, and we will have
to start all over again. From this Chamber and the
Secretariat of our Organization, we need strategies that
can help us to exit in a dignified manner.

