Mr. Sharma (Nepal): Allow me to congratulate
the great people of Singapore, its Government and,
personally, you, Mr. President, on Singapore's well-
deserved election last fall to the Security Council. It is
a happy coincidence that in the very first month of your
membership in the Security Council you are presiding
over the Council. My delegation particularly
appreciates your presence, Mr. Minister, at this open
debate.

We welcome other new members of the Security
Council and thank the outgoing members for their
diligent work on behalf of Member States.

I sincerely thank you, Sir, for selecting such a
topical and pertinent theme for the open debate. It is
our fervent hope that this debate will, as you have said
in your paper,

"lead to a better relationship between the troop-
contributing countries, the Security Council and
the Secretariat, and to a new spirit of cooperation
among the three partners". (S/2001/2], annex, para. 8)

Nepal has always felt, and rather deeply, that the
Security Council, troop-contributing countries (TCCs)
and the Secretariat should move from the present
uneasy symbiosis to a new era of cooperation and
partnership. It has been a long-standing necessity for
the success of peacekeeping operations. With this
conviction, we have always assiduously sought and
worked in good faith to enhance cooperation between
these actors. We welcome the current willingness of
Council members to hear the views of non-members on
this issue. This is very encouraging and augurs well for
improved dialogue and cooperation.

As a small country, we look to the United Nations
as a bulwark of our security. We believe that world
peace, under the United Nations initiative and
umbrella, is in the common interest of humanity. That
is why, since 1975, we have consistently contributed
our troops to peacekeeping operations. To date, Nepal
has contributed nearly 45,000 troops, and we are
currently the eleventh largest troop contributor. Our
military personnel and police have helped keep the
peace in Asia, Africa and Europe with impeccable
professionalism, and 41 of our brave young men have
lost their lives in their tour of duty.

Our stake in an improved peacekeeping
environment is therefore high. This is the reason why
we relentless seek, as our obligation and as a priority,
to strengthen the United Nations peacekeeping
capabilities. This was also evidenced by the fact that
we joining the consensus last month on creating 95
new posts for the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, in spite of some procedural reservations on
our part.
The Council is a prisoner of its past. Its
composition perpetuates the global power
configuration of 1945. It has failed to move in step
with the changing global scene. Some victors of the
Second World War have lost ground, and some of the
vanquished have gained remarkable political influence
or economic strength. Colonies in Asia, Africa and
Latin America have gained independence, if not full
freedom and equality, in a world dominated by a few,
and joined the United Nations. But the Council has
remained largely unrepresentative and become only
slightly more democratic over the years.

Although the Council is beset with structural,
functional and even attitudinal problems, there is still
much we can do, without changing the Charter or its
structure, to increase cooperation and forge an active
partnership between Council members, TCCs and the
Secretariat. Improving the performance of
peacekeeping operations is critical in order to keep
peace in the world, save lives, and prevent mission
failures.

The rationale for greater cooperation is
overwhelming. For instance, as of 31 December 2000,
out of 37,733 troops deployed in various missions, only
6 per cent of the troops came from the permanent
members of the Security Council; and the present
members of the Council, both permanent and non-
permanent, together had 23.8 per cent of the
peacekeepers. The rest, a whopping 76.2 per cent, came
from non-members.

Over the years, the Council has spelt out several
provisions, as contained in its presidential statements
of4 November 1994 and 28 March 1996, for meetings
between the Council and the TCCs, but their true spirit
has seldom been translated into practice. Often,
consultations and the sharing of information between
the Council and the TCCs have proved pro forma,
perfunctory and ritualistic.

The fundamental problem with those provisions is
that they are long on procedure and short on content.
More clearly enunciated substantive guidelines are
necessary to establish a well-defined modus operandi
for sharing information and conducting consultations.

I have found the Permanent Representatives of
troop-contributing countries to be a frustrated and
unhappy lot. Their capitals consistently ask for regular,
substantive briefings on the peacekeeping missions in
which their nationals are deployed. What they get from
the Council and the Secretariat is the kind of
information one can get from newspapers, or even less.
If I may ask, does anyone in the Council think that the
sort of information and consultation currently
apportioned to the troop-contributing countries is
sufficient when their troops' lives are at stake?

We ought to bear in mind that, if the Council and
the Secretariat extend more cooperation to troop-
contributing countries, then they can in turn expect an
equally willing quid pro quo from the latter. This
would result in a win-win scenario for all.

A successful peacekeeping operation entails a
sense of ownership on the part of TCCs, careful
cooperation and coordination among the main players,
deft management of discords, enhanced understanding
and the best possible collective performance in a team
spirit.

We do not need to wait for the High-level
Working Group to present a package of reforms to act.
Security Council reform ought to be seen as a work in
progress. We already have a framework laid out by the
Council, and Security Council resolution 1327 (2000)
reinforces and expands its scope considerably. The
report of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping and
subsequent General Assembly resolution 55/ 135 have
also marked a step forward.

The Brahimi Panel report is one of the strongest
testaments to the imperative need to enhance
cooperation between the Council, TCCs and the
Secretariat. Its recommendation 64(b) underlines the
imperative for consultation with TCCS before the
Council adopts a peacekeeping mission-launching
resolution and formulates or changes mission
mandates, and for substantive briefings.

Ideally, a holistic approach to building
partnership calls for a whole litany of measures to
remove the sharp edges and to forge seamless
cooperation between the Council, TCCs and the
Secretariat throughout the peacekeeping cycle, from
conception to implementation to the winding up of the
mission. Active partnership presupposes a clear head
and an open heart, as well as mutual trust among the
partners. To preserve the sanctity and vitality of
partnership, the rules of the game must be explicitly
and adequately spelled out, sincerely respected and
meticulously adhered to.

There ought to be a consistent flow of useful
information and constant consultations among the
partners. Information must be substantive,
comprehensive and systematic. Sensitive information
ought to be confidentially shared, in an appropriate
format, and confined to the partners only, so as not to
jeopardize the mission or the peacekeepers' safety and
integrity. The best format would be to ensure access by
troop-contributing countries to Secretariat briefings to
the Security Council.

Consultations need to take place at all stages,
before a decision affecting the safety and security of
peacekeepers is made. They should be active, specific,
interactive and productive, and be carried out in a
manner that ensures that TCCs' views and opinions are
given thorough and careful consideration when the
Council makes its decisions. If the views of TCCS
cannot be reflected in a decision, the Council should, to
preserve the confidence of TCCs in the process, take
pains to explain why.

The existing and the envisaged arrangements,
though they largely cover the questions of information
and consultation, completely fail to address a number
of other principal concerns of the TCCs. These
concerns mainly relate to such often-interrelated issues
as TCCs' involvement in mission planning and in
helping to write the rules of engagement, security
backing and exit strategies, and commitment gaps and
improved preparedness of TCCs.

Nepal strongly believes that TCCs must be
involved right from the start in missions they are to
engage in, beginning with mission planning and
helping draft the rules of engagement. As we know,
differences exist between the cultures, military
doctrines, command and control structures and social
environments of various TCCs. Bringing TCCs' senior
planners to the Secretariat on a short-term basis for
mission planning and to help write the rules of
engagement helps them bridge the differences and
understand each other better. This is vital for the
success of a mission.

Security back-up and exit strategies are sure to
work wonders, especially to bolster the confidence of
small, developing States like Nepal, whose capacity to
deal with emergencies is limited. But these elements
have always escaped the attention of the Council and
the Secretariat. Speaking from our own experience, the
safety and security of their personnel is paramount in
the minds of troop-contributing countries, even though
they are fully aware of the price they may eventually
have to pay for peace.

Obviously, not all TCCs' troops are equally
trained. Some do not have the luxury of sophisticated
weaponry and utmost military preparedness. Not
surprisingly, however, parties in conflict, including
some non-State actors in a globalized world, may
possess more deadly weapons or enjoy greater
readiness than peacekeepers from many developing
countries and even some developed countries. The
confidence that there is security to cover them if the
situations deteriorates or if reinforcement is needed,
together with exit strategies should they have to be
extricated from the conflict areas, would greatly boost
the morale of peacekeepers and bring out the best in
them. This would also deter the conflicting parties
from undermining or overrunning peacekeepers.

These measures also build confidence and
motivation for troop-contributing countries to
participate in peacekeeping more readily, helping to
remove commitment gaps. Gaps in commitment have
become a serious problem for troop-contributing
countries and the United Nations. Missions like the one
in Sierra Leone are facing a shortage of troop
commitment from troop-contributing countries. There
is an enduring anomaly here. Those who may
contribute their troops on a completely self-sustained
basis are not pledging their contribution for one reason
or another. Those who are contemplating contributing
troops do not have the resources to send their troops
fully equipped to the mission area. The Council and the
Secretariat, therefore, should facilitate cross-matching
of troops and equipment to diminish the commitment

gaps.

The other element of commitment gaps has to do
with lack of preparedness of troop-contributing
countries' forces for quick deployment. This particular
aspect calls for upgrading the standby arrangements
and for ensuring appropriate troop training at national
and regional levels. Support from or through the United
Nations to troop-contributing countries for earmarking
dedicated troops and imparting necessary training
could be effective in building moral commitment and
preparedness to contribute troops at relatively short
notice.

These are some thoughts that need to be
considered in depth and implemented to improve the
performance of peacekeeping operations and promote
genuine partnership between the Council, the troop-
contributing countries and the Secretariat. We echo the
proposal that the Security Council should form a
subsidiary organ to institutionalize its consultations
with troop-contributing countries on a timely and
regular basis.

Cooperation cannot be built overnight. We will
have to make efforts and invest resources in a
coordinated manner to make it happen. At the United
Nations we work in a complex environment of clashing
priorities, conflicting national interests and shifting turf
battles, compounded by national hubris and the
bureaucratic labyrinth. This makes cooperation and
compromise all the more necessary, and it is not
impossible if we consider the greater good of humanity.

The United Nations has helped avoid wars of
catastrophic proportions. Now it is faced with new
challenges: conflicts within States. Tackling new
challenges requires innovative thinking and new tools.
This is the time to reflect, accommodate and innovate.
TCCs are offering their utmost cooperation. The
Council should reciprocate. Working together with
open minds and strong hearts we can move away from
sketchy information and questionable consultations to
an era of constructive cooperation and partnership
between these principal actors. Cooperation,
understanding, common objectives and a cooperative
approach are the key to success. That, to my
delegation, is the whole raison d'etre of the United
Nations.

