Ms. Nkoana-Mashabane (South Africa): South
Africa would like to thank you, Mr. Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Nigeria, for inviting us to this very
important debate on the maintenance of peace and
security and optimizing the use of preventive
diplomacy. The topic you have chosen relates directly
to the decision of the African Union (AU) Assembly to
proclaim 2010 as the Year of Peace and Security in
Africa. We would also like to take this opportunity to
welcome the participation of the Deputy Secretary-
General and the representative of the World Bank in
this debate.
We have long recognized the importance of
preventive diplomacy as a critical tool to avert the
outbreak of conflicts. The escalation of peacekeeping
costs over the years, both in material terms and in
terms of human life, has also made it necessary for the
international community to focus more on conflict
prevention, both regionally and globally.

The African continent has borne the brunt of
violent conflict over the decades. It is for this reason
that, since its inception in 2002, the African Union has
worked tirelessly to establish a comprehensive Peace
and Security Architecture which is founded on a
paradigm that recognizes both preventive diplomacy
and post-conflict reconstruction and development as
key to eradicating conflict on our continent.

The mechanisms that the African Union has since
put in place in this regard bear testimony to the
commitment of our continent in addressing peace and
security challenges in a comprehensive manner. In our
subregion, the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) continues to play a critical role in
ensuring subregional stability. In that context, the
SADC Organ on Politics, Defence and Security has
undertaken mediation efforts in quelling potential
conflicts. SADC has also launched the SADC Brigade,
consisting of military, police and civilian components
from all SADC member States, which will form part of
the African Union Standby Force for rapid deployment
should the need arise.

All of these efforts are anchored in the Charter of
the United Nations, particularly Article 33, which
provides for mediation as one of the diplomatic
methods for the pacific settlement of disputes. With the
changed nature of conflicts from inter-State to intra-
State, preventive diplomacy has become an
indispensable tool used by both the United Nations and
regional organizations.

Efforts to bring about the consolidation of peace
and stability have been and remain a complex matter
that requires political will and commitment from all
parties involved, including support mechanisms. In the
past few years, we have witnessed a reduction in the
number of violent conflicts as a result of the collective
efforts of the United Nations, the international
community and regional organizations. African
Member States, through their subregional formations,
have taken responsibility, while at the same time
recognizing that the peaceful resolution of conflicts
remains a sovereign responsibility.

Also, the Secretary-General's good offices
continue to play an important role in mediation efforts.
One very important option in this regard is the
strengthening of the Mediation Support Unit and the
early warning capacity within the Department of
Political Affairs, which will help better provide

coordination, communication, support and guidance.
With this in mind, the African Union has always
striven to deepen its partnership with the United
Nations on matters relating to the maintenance of
international peace and security. Our efforts towards a
strategic partnership between the United Nations and
the African Union in the maintenance of peace and
security on our continent is informed by the reality that
regional organizations have a comparative advantage in
confronting such challenges within their regions.

This comparative advantage is increasingly
allowing the AU to respond proactively and in a rapid
manner, limiting the escalation of conflict and human
suffering. This is evident in the recent interventions by
the African Union in the Sudan and Somalia, as well as
in its mediation efforts and peace support operations,
thus clearly demonstrating its political will and its
commitment to confronting peace and security
challenges.

Dialogue is important to South Africa, and we
therefore hold the view that in preventing lapses and
relapses back into conflict, the importance of creating
and maintaining peace through inclusive dialogue,
reconciliation and reintegration must always be
underscored. Finding a global strategy for preventive
diplomacy, including the traditional means of
mediation, as well as peacekeeping and peacebuilding
methods deployed under the United Nations Charter, is
essential in this regard.

We firmly believe that, at the heart of preventive
diplomacy, socio-economic development is important
for the realization of sustainable peace and can indeed
create economic opportunities in countries affected by
conflict. The success of preventive diplomacy depends
not only on an effective early warning mechanism, but
also on the involvement of non-State actors. For
instance, community-based organizations have
demonstrated time and again that they can be a partner
with Governments and the international community in
providing early warning support and acting proactively
and decisively to prevent a potential conflict situation.

Preventive diplomacy is one good example of the
international community working together for lasting
peace and sustainable development. We therefore
heartily support you, Mr. President, in this noble
initiative.

