Mr. Heusgen (Germany): At the outset, I should like
to thank you, Sir, for putting the very important subject
of today's debate on the agenda. From my perspective,
it represents the culmination of your presidency, so
I reiterate my thanks. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his very pertinent statement this
morning. He began with the climate issue, focusing
attention on the effects of climate change on security.

I would also like to begin my statement on this
subject by quoting Chancellor Merkel, who, at the
twenty-third session of the Conference of the Parties to
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change, held in Bonn a month ago, said,

"On the one hand, we have melting glaciers,
rising sea levels and flooding; on the other, we have
storms, unbearable heat and severe droughts. No
one - no one - should or can ignore this. And if
we also think about the growing global population,
we know that increasing conflicts over natural
resources will be inevitable if we do nothing to
protect the climate."

Last Friday, we had an Arria Formula meeting chaired
by our Italian colleague. I found it very encouraging
that all delegations participating in this discussion
recognized that there was a direct link between climate
change and security.

However, we have all been following the
discussions today, and climate change is only one of
the many threats to peace and security that speakers
have mentioned. Climate change is only one driver of
conflict. Many other speakers mentioned human rights.
The representative of France mentioned in particular
the current situations in Syria and of the Rohingya in
Myanmar. Further issues include the shrinking space
for civil society, as highlighted by the Secretary-
General; underdevelopment, as highlighted by China;
gender inequality and violence against women, to which
I will return; terrorism; transnational organized crime
and trafficking in human beings and drugs; pandemics;
migration; cyberattacks, as our Lithuanian colleague
just mentioned; and the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction, as mentioned by others - and yet
that list does not capture them all.

Considering that all of these things have an effect
on peace and security, a body such as the Security
Council that is tasked with dealing with peace and
security must address these issues. We must not take an
isolated, narrow approach in the Security Council but
a holistic one, looking at all the root causes of conflict.
Of course, the Security Council is not the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.
We are not here to discuss how to stop climate change
or reduce carbon emissions but to talk about the effects
of climate change on peace and security. My Russian
colleague, with whom I already had a discussion during
the Arria Formula meeting, said we must always look
at the unique circumstances of each individual country,
and of course we could then look at climate change in
Mali. But climate change has an effect on the whole
region, on the Sahel and the Lake Chad region, and so
we must take a broader, regional View. We have a very
able Russian Under-Secretary-General for Counter-
Terrorism. There are many conflicts that are affected
by terrorism and where we must take a broader View.

I very much support the View expressed by the
representative of the United States and other colleagues
that the Secretary-General should regularly provide
the Security Council with early-warning assessments
to ensure that crises do not erupt and that the Security
Council begins dealing with these issues sooner. I think
that the Secretariat should conduct a more general
assessment with a view to informing the Security
Council at an early stage that something may be going
wrong in a country or region.

Germany therefore also fully supports the
Secretary-General's proposals for reform, particularly
in the area of peace and security, with the aim of
ensuring that the Secretariat looks at a conflict's
entire life cycle, from early prevention through to the
prevention of a relapse into conflict. We fully support
this idea, as well as encouraging closer links between
the Peacebuilding Commission and the Security
Council. Last week, for example, the Friends of the
Peacebuilding Commission, under the able chairship of
our Thai colleague, had a long discussion on the Sahel
and what can be done there. I think there should be a
direct link to the Security Council in such instances,
since the Security Council is also discussing the Sahel.
Why not make use of the Peacebuilding Commission's
efforts in a systematic approach to conflicts?

I have a few more points to make. Ithink that Ethiopia
mentioned the importance of partnerships, particularly
with the African Union, and I can only endorse that
view, which I think is very important indeed.

In conclusion, I would like to focus on one particular
driver of conflict, which is the use of sexual violence as
a tactic of war. Together with Iraq, Germany hosted a
meeting yesterday in the Economic and Social Council
Chamber to which we invited Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Patten, who discussed the fact
that sexual violence against women is used as a tactic of
war, as, for example, in the crimes committed against
the Yazidis by Da'esh, which are truly horrifying. We
must do everything we can to prevent such things
from happening. Unfortunately, Iraq is not the only
place where this goes on. There are others. We must
also consider it from the perspectives of prevention,
of social reconciliation and, importantly, of impunity.
That in particular must be prevented, because if it is not
it creates another root cause for the next conflict.

I thank you once again, Mr. President, for putting
this topic on the agenda. I hope there will be follow-up
on today's discussion over the coming year. Some have
indicated that they will take up the issue, and Germany
will support them.

