Mr. Emvula (Namibia): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing today's very important
debate, which affords the wider United Nations
membership an opportunity to contribute to the very
important deliberations on the situation in the Middle
East, including the question of Palestine. Likewise, we
thank the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs
for his comprehensive briefing on the situation in the
Middle East.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement made
by the Permanent Representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

The situation in the Middle East remains of
great concern to Namibia, as the occupation of the
Palestinian territories continues unabated and the
people of Palestine continue to live under subjugation.
Today's debate is taking place at a time when Namibia
is awaiting, with great anticipation, a positive outcome
of the recently resumed direct negotiations between
the Palestinians and the Israelis, following intensive
international efforts.

Over the years, Namibia has expressed its steadfast
support for and solidarity with the Palestinian people
in the pursuit of their inalienable right to self-
determination, independence and freedom. It is a matter
for which my delegation has persistently advocated ever
since we obtained our independence from the South
African apartheid regime, some 23 years ago; before
that, we had been in the same boat as the Palestinians.
We therefore cannot remain complacent while the
people of Palestine continue to suffer under the Israeli
occupation.

The people of Palestine have suffered and have
lived under occupation for too long. The denial of their
fundamental right to self-determination by the sustained
Israeli occupation continues to seriously affect their
socioeconomic wellbeing. They are not allowed to fully
exercise their fundamental human rights as enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations, to which we all
attach great value. Namibia is also opposed to the
blockade of the Gaza Strip that has caused so much
suffering to the Palestinian people.

Namibia wishes to reaffirm its call for Israel's
complete and unconditional withdrawal from the
occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, and calls on the international community to
facilitate the creation of the Palestinian State, on the
basis of the 1967 borders. The international community
has an obligation to ensure that the people of Palestine
realize their inalienable right to self-determination and
the creation of an independent and sovereign State of
Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital.

In this context, Namibia welcomes the reactivation
of the Working Group of the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, with
the mandate to foster and reinforce the Committee's
cooperation with civil society organizations, and pledges
to support the efforts of the Committee in mobilizing
the international community to facilitate the realization
of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people. Real
and lasting progress towards the freedom of Palestine
can be realized only through the implementation of all
relevant resolutions of the United Nations regarding the
peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine.

While we welcome the direct negotiations between
the Palestinians and the Israelis following intensive
international efforts, Namibia believes that peace in
the Middle East can only be achieved by addressing the
illegal occupation of the Palestinian territory by Israel.
A great deal of work therefore lies ahead in clearing the
path for the creation of the Palestinian State, ending
the conflict, and bringing lasting peace and security to
both Palestinians and Israelis.

Let me reiterate Namibia's strong support for the
ongoing peace process. We appeal to both parties to
commit themselves, to embrace this opportunity and
to abide by their previous agreements and obligations
to establish lasting peace between Israel and Palestine,
with their peoples living side by side, within secure
borders. Namibia is convinced that our deliberations
here today will contribute to the search for a
comprehensive, just and lasting solution - a solution
that will bring an end to the Israeli occupation, which
dates back to 1967, and enable the Palestinian people
to exercise their inalienable rights in an independent
State.

Let me conclude by reiterating once more Namibia's
unwavering support for and solidarity with the people
of Palestine in their cause for freedom, independence
and social justice, and our support for full membership
for Palestine in the United Nations and its specialized
agencies.

