Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): Allow me
at the outset to thank you, Mr. President, for having
convened this open debate addressing an extremely
important and timely issue that is having a severe impact
on the future of many countries. As the Secretary-
General has emphasized,

"Climate change is the defining issue ofour time
We face a direct existential threat."

Indeed, in many regions climate change is
damaging critical systems such as water, food and health
security and contributing to population displacement.
Climate-related disasters are also having an impact
on conflicts and undermining social and economic
development, in particular in countries that are heavily
dependent on certain sectors such as agriculture or
tourism. Moreover, slow-onset events such as sea-level
rise endanger the very existence of certain States in the
Pacific and Indian oceans. Those islands risk becoming
uninhabitable well before they are swallowed up by the
sea owing to the numerous types of storms affecting
them, land erosion and ocean acidification, which
erode their means of livelihood and undermine the
agriculture, fishing and tourism sectors. It is therefore
essential that the negative impacts of climate change
be addressed not only because of their direct impact
on food security but also because they pose a threat to
international peace and security.

To that end, the international community must
redouble its efforts to address the threats of social and
political instability, insecurity and conflicts resulting
from the interaction between climate change and
social, economic, demographic and political factors. It
is equally necessary to invest more in strengthening the
capacity of communities to enhance their resilience in
the face of natural disasters.

In that context, measures are urgently required
in order to minimize and mitigate the potential
consequences of natural disasters. The private sector
should be called upon to step up its efforts and its
involvement in natural-disaster risk management
activities as well as humanitarian assistance, in order
to reduce needs and mobilize additional resources
through planned funding mechanisms.

The Kingdom of Morocco became aware early on
of the threats posed by climate change, including its
threat-multiplier aspect, and adopted a proactive policy
to address them. That commitment has been translated
into the adoption of several sectoral strategies that place
the well-being of citizens and women's empowerment
at the heart of their implementation and that promote
a balance between the environmental, economic and
social dimensions, in line with international standards.

The Africa Action Summit, held on the margins
of the twenty-second session of the Conference of the
Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change in Marrakech in November 2016,
was an opportunity for African leaders to coordinate
and harmonize their efforts to combat climate change
and to seek better solutions to the climate challenges
that our continent faces. That Summit led to several
initiatives, namely, the establishment of the Climate
Commission and the Congo Basin Blue Fund, on the
initiative of His Majesty King Mohammed VI.

During the Conference, the Security, Stability
and Sustainability (3S) in Africa initiative was also
launched. That initiative seeks to address the root
causes of instability, which are amplified by land
degradation and climate change. Through the 3S
initiative, our country intends to combine leadership
on climate-change issues with the African Union
mandate to coordinate the migration programme in
the context of African Union Commission. Moreover,
during the Marrakech Conference, the Adaptation of
African Agriculture initiative was also launched. It was
adopted by 27 African countries and establishes a true
coalition in order to better adapt African agriculture to
climate change.

Water and its proper management are also two
major priorities for Morocco. The world, and the
African region in particular, are facing the problem of
water scarcity. The Kingdom of Morocco continues to
invest in large-scale modern irrigation projects and to
set up drinking water supply programmes in the most
vulnerable areas. At the legislative level, the adoption
of a new water law, which establishes the rules for
comprehensive, participative and decentralized water
resource management, has enabled significant progress
to be made in anticipating and ensuring water security,
especially in times of drought.

Morocco aims to become, by 2030, one of the
main suppliers of renewable energies, particularly
solar and wind energy, not only in the Maghreb, but
also in Africa and the Euro-Mediterranean region.
Although it is a low emitter of greenhouse gases,
Morocco is making considerable efforts by devoting
64 per cent of the country's climate expenditure to
adaptation, which is equivalent to 9 per cent of overall
investment expenditure.

In that regard, the Noor power station in Ouarzazate,
Morocco's first solar energy project, is the largest
energy complex in the world, with a total capacity of
580 megawatts. Covering more than 3,000 hectares, the
Noor power station consists of four multi-technology
solar power plants. It was developed in full compliance
with international standards, both technological and
environmental, and is associated with a research and
development platform covering more than 150 hectares.

