Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The activities of the Security Council in
October have been marked by high intensity and
productivity, to a great extent thanks to the initiatives
and effective work of the Argentine presidency. I
congratulate Ambassador Perceval and the entire
delegation of Argentina on their success.

The Security Council continued to closely follow
the developments in the Middle East and North Africa.
The situation there continues to be marked by high
volatility, and its stabilization will be impossible
without achieving a political and diplomatic settlement
of the regional crises. That applies to new crises as
well as to those that have dragged on for decades.
Their sustainable solution will be possible only
through inclusive dialogue, without intervention or the
imposition of ready-made solutions from the outside.

Unfortunately, there is no reason for optimism in
the Middle East peace process. The situation in Yemen
remains volatile. Iraq and Libya have reached a boiling
point. As a result of blatant outside interference in Syria
and irresponsible pandering to the armed opposition, a
new regional threat has arisen in the form of the Islamic
State ofIraq and the Sham, which has even more global
ambitions. The zone of risk now includes United Nations
peacekeepers serving the region for decades. All ofthis
demonstrates the danger not only to Syria but to the
entire Middle East of pursuing the reckless destruction
of the foundations of society and governance. We are
encouraged by the first briefing of the Security Council
by the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria,
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, and by his assessments of the
situation. We shall provide firm support to his efforts to
move forward a political settlement to the Syrian crisis.

Africa remained in our focus this month. On
24 October (see S/PV.7286), the Security Council
adopted the comprehensive resolution 2182 (2014)
on the situation in Somalia and Eritrea. In spite of
its significant shortcomings, which made it hard for
us to support it, we hope that the resolution will help
facilitate peace in the Horn of Africa.
The meeting on the situation in Ukraine (see S/PV.7287) underscored that it is only through inclusive,
nationwide dialogue based on the Minsk protocol,
the Minsk memorandum and the Geneva document
of 17 April that the fractured Ukrainian society will
overcome the far-reaching internal crisis and return to
sustainable harmonious development in the interests
of all political, regional and ethnic groups. Today,
Ukraine is navigating a most crucial period that will
require careful and balanced action and the Ukrainian
sides to continue the political dialogue. In that regard,
we call on all internal and outside actors to refrain from
ill-considered, much less provocative declarations or
activities.

We note the meeting on the working methods of the
Security Council (see S/PV.7285), which is traditionally
a matter of great interest to the broader United Nations
membership. It makes perfect sense that it was convened
by the Argentine presidency, as Argentina heads the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions. Indeed, in the past month the
Working Group continued its active work.

For our part, we actively participate in those
endeavours, consistently call for increased transparency
in the Council's working methods, and encourage the
implementation of useful initiatives. Due in large part to
the unwavering efforts of the Argentine chairmanship
in overcoming attempts at obstruction made by other
Council members, the Working Group agreed upon an
item initiated two years earlier, namely, a note by the
President concerning statements made in the Council.
It is our hope that the activities of the Working Group to
strengthen transparency and democracy in the Council
will continue. Some relevant initiatives remain on
the table, including on the topic of conducting Arria
Formula meetings and procedures for preparing the
Council's annual report to the General Assembly.

In conclusion, I wish every success to the Australian
delegation in harmoniously guiding the Council in the
month of November.

