Mr. Ferrarin (Italy): At the outset, Sir, allow me,
through you, to congratulate Ambassador Li Zhaoxing on
the wise and skilful way in which he has guided the work
of the Council during the month of March. Our appreciation
and thanks go also to his predecessor, Ambassador
Legwaila.

Italy welcomes the consideration today of the three
draft resolutions that it helped to draft and that it joins in
sponsoring. While confirming the vital importance of the
continued presence of United Nations forces in the former
Yugoslavia, the draft resolutions would modify the general
architecture of that presence in conformity with the specific
requests by the Governments of Croatia and of the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia that the forces deployed
in those two countries should be given autonomous profiles,
and with the consequent recommendations contained in
paragraph 84 of the Secretary-General's report (S/1995/222 and Corr.1).

While fully understanding the political reasons at the
origin of the requests of the countries concerned, Italy has
always believed in the need to maintain unity of political
direction and military command in the field for the three
separate but interlinked forces. Thus, I wish to emphasize
the importance of the reference in operative paragraph 1 of
all three draft resolutions to the arrangements set out in
paragraph 84 of the Secretary-General's report, which
respond to this need in a manner that we find fully
satisfactory.

Turning to the United Nations Confidence Restoration
Operation in Croatia (UNCRO), paragraph 3 of draft
resolution S/1995/242 gives the outlines of its mandate,
which is based on the recent agreement between the
Government of the Republic of Croatia and the United
States, and on the statement issued in Copenhagen by
President Tudjman. It is essential that the Security Council
approve the general architecture of the mandate today, that
is, before the expiration of the mandate of the United
Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR), although the new
mandate cannot become operative until the end of the
consultations currently under way between Mr. Stoltenberg,
the Government of the Republic of Croatia, and the local
Serbian authorities.

 

These consultations must proceed quickly and
constructively to take advantage of the momentum that
will be created by today's adoption of the outlines of the
mandate. For this reason, paragraph 4 of draft resolution
S/1995/242 indicates the not-too-distant date of 21 April,
by when the Secretary-General is to have reported to the
Council on the results of the consultations, for its
approval.

The transition period between the expiration of
UNPROFOR's mandate today and the effective
deployment of the new United Nations force in Croatia
will be quite delicate. Paragraph 4 of draft resolution
S/1995/243 is very important because, on a basis of the
willingness shown by the Croatian Government for
UNPROFOR to do so, it would decide that UNPROFOR
shall continue to perform its functions during the interim
period.
It must be stressed that UNCRO and the other two
peace-keeping operations in the former Yugoslavia cannot
be an end in themselves or a final solution. Paragraph 5
of draft resolution S/1995/242 duly states that UNCRO
shall be an interim arrangement to create the conditions
that will facilitate a comprehensive negotiated settlement
consistent with the territorial integrity of the Republic of
Croatia and with the security and rights of all its
communities. Thus, it is not and cannot be seen as an
instrument that would freeze and perpetuate a de facto
situation which we consider unacceptable.

As for Bosnia and Herzegovina, I wish to emphasize
the importance of the appeal to the Bosnian parties
contained in paragraph 7 of draft resolution S/1995/243,
to fully implement their agreements of December 1994 on
a cease-fire and on a complete cessation of hostilities,
agreements which the Council hopes will be extended
past 30 April in order to create conditions favourable to
the negotiation of an overall peaceful settlement on the
basis of the acceptance of the Contact Group's peace plan
as a starting point.

We must remember that the Government of Bosnia
and Herzegovina has already accepted this peace plan,
while the Bosnian Serb party has not. One month before
the expiration of these agreements, we are very concerned
by the new escalation of the conflict in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and by its potentially negative effects on the
peace process. Both the Government of the Republic of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Bosnian Serb authorities
must exercise the maximum restraint and must realize
once and for all that there can be no military solution to

 

the conflict, only a comprehensive political solution such as
will restore the peaceful coexistence of the various ethnic,
cultural and religious components that have lived together
in Bosnia and Herzegovina for centuries. We are sincerely
convinced that the presence of UNPROFOR in that country
can ultimately contribute to achieving that goal.

Turning to The Former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, I wish to express my country's appreciation for
the important function of political stabilization that
UNPROFOR has thus far carried out in that country, a
function recognized in the Secretary-General's report and
reflected in the third draft resolution (S/1995/244). This is
a first example of the preventive deployment of United
Nations forces, which has helped to prevent the spillover of
the conflict to other areas in former Yugoslavia, and to
defuse the tensions existing in that multi-ethnic and multi-
cultural society. Keeping those forces in the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, although under the
different name of the United Nations Preventive
Deployment Force (UNPREDEP), is essential to the search
for a definitive, stable and prosperous model of coexistence
and cooperation between the various components of that
country's population.

Finally, I wish to pay a special tribute to all members
of UNPROFOR, who have shown great courage and
dedication in the accomplishment of their duties, and
especially to those who have lost their lives in the cause of
peace in the former Yugoslavia.

