Mr. Vinay Kumar (India): At the outset, I would
like to thank the Force Commanders of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon, the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS) and the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti for their statements. I
also thank Mr. Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, for arranging to introduce
them to us. We have carefully noted their views and
think that their perspectives, which are based on
experience gained on the ground while implementing
the Council's resolutions, are important and will help
the Council in its work.

As threats to international peace and security have
changed over the decades, so have the challenges facing
peacekeeping missions. Three of today's briefers head
missions that were not deployed to keep peace between
States, but within States. They must keep peace not
between two conventional armies, but rather must deal
with threats posed by armed groups in cases where it is
not easy to distinguish a combatant from a civilian. They
have to neutralize threats not to an easily identifiable
boundary, but to State institutions and civilians.

Moreover, they are called upon not only to keep
peace but to help to build national institutions and carry
out functions normally within the purview of national
Governments. For their operations to be effective, they
must gain the confidence not only of host Governments
but also of the communities in which they are deployed.

Under those circumstances, the rules of engagement
and concepts of operations have to be adjusted to suit
the particular circumstances of the host country. As
it is said, one size cannot fit all situations. The need
to maintain objectivity, neutrality, impartiality and
fairness assumes even greater importance. With
respect to the missions, standardization should aim at
achieving optimum performance rather than acquiring
the same equipment.

In that connection, it is important to keep in
mind that several United Nations peacekeeping
mandates have included tasks that raise questions
on the fundamental tenet of consent. They can place
peacekeepers in difficult legal circumstances, as the
UNMISS Force Commander has mentioned, thereby
sometimes hampering their effectiveness. The principle
of national ownership must inform all of our tasks
under the peacekeeping and peacebuilding activities of
the United Nations.

Today's peacekeeping missions are tasked with
mandates that have been compared to Christmas trees.
Peacekeepers are asked to achieve what many of our
States have struggled for decades, if not centuries, to
achieve, while the gap in resources continues to be the
singular reality constraining the reach and ambit of
peacekeeping operations.

We must therefore keep in mind that providing
human and material resources commensurate with
the mandate is necessary not only for the operational
effectiveness of peacekeeping missions, but also has
a direct bearing on the credibility of the Council's
mandates. Today, UNMISS Force Commanders gave a
concrete example of the resource constraints during the
Jonglei crisis in December 2011.

Peacekeeping missions of today form part of the
overall composite efforts of the international community
to pool the resources of its various institutions and
organizations in order to mount the operations. As the
Force Commanders have underscored, the vastness of
their job requires the coherence of all efforts, and the
success of the missions will depend not only on the
peacekeepers' performance, but on the collaborative
nature of the venture. Therefore, an assessment of the
peacekeepers' performance cannot be isolated from the
efficacy of the overall peace process.

Leadership at Headquarters and in the field and
coherent objectives among various stakeholders will
therefore determine the overall performance and
achievement of the tasks mandated to peacekeeping
missions. In that connection, we have noted the idea of
composite force formations. Although it appears to be
a logical option, the need for contingents to function as
coherent units must be borne in mind. Our policies in
that regard must evolve gradually, with reality checks
at each step.

Preserving and supervising peace agreements,
restoring basic governance and establishing the
skeleton for a national institutional framework are
peacekeeping's chief accomplishments. The larger
peace process must contribute to and capitalize on the
stabilization achieved by the military components.
Tasks ranging from establishing law and order and
the rule of law to national institution-building cannot
be entrusted to military components alone. Strategies
must be devised with sufficient details, resources and
implementation plans to address each phase of the
peace process.

United Nations peacekeeping is truly a unique
enterprise, involving global burden-sharing. The
partnership between the Secretariat, troop- and
police-contributing countries and the Security Council
underpins that exercise. It derives its sustenance from
our respective abilities to contribute positively to this
venture. It requires a great deal of willingness to take
account of and accommodate the views and concerns
of all. The protection of civilians in order to assure
them a life of dignity, security and opportunity is
unquestionably a task that deserves much more than
the international community has committed to thus
far. Leaving it in the hands of peacekeepers alone is
a half-measure at best. Our efforts in that regard must
begin from where we have faltered rather than by
attempting to create universal thematic constructs.

As the largest contributor of peacekeepers in
United Nations history, India is conscious that much
has changed since the first peacekeeping missions were
launched more than five decades ago. The challenge
before us is to build on the legacy of peacekeeping and
ensure its relevance to current realities. We must remind
ourselves that it is a small cost in the face of the noble
goals we have set ourselves to achieve. Our capacity to
effectively implement the mandates of United Nations
missions will depend on providing adequate resources,
generating rational mandates and sourcing expertise
from countries that have the most relevant experience
for the conditions in which peacekeepers are deployed.
We must keep this in mind and act accordingly.

Before I conclude, I would like to pay homage to the
peacekeepers, including those from my own country,
who have laid down their lives while serving in United
Nations missions.

