Mr. Flores (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation endorses the statement made by the
representative of Finland on behalf of the European Union
and emphasizes the importance of this debate, convened
by the British presidency of the Security Council, as a
wake-up call to the international community on the
magnitude of Africa's problems and the need to devote
the same interest and resources to them that are devoted
to other parts of the world.

With respect to conflict prevention, the fact that the
Security Council is preventively addressing any particular
problem is in and of itself a powerful deterrent. The
instruments available are familiar to all. In all such
Security Council action, we believe that it is crucial to

 

preserve three action-oriented criteria. We must maintain
the unity of the Security Council to prevent differences
among members from leading to stalemates. We must
improve the transparency of the Council's working
methods - this debate being a good example thereof - in
order to broaden the basis of support for its decisions. The
mechanisms of the Charter must be fully respected, in
particular the role set aside for the Security Council and for
the Secretary-General's preventive diplomacy.

With regard to peacekeeping operations, what is
crucial is United Nations coordination with the African
regional and subregional organizations and cooperation by
the international community to strengthen the African
capacities in these operations. In this context, Spain has
participated in the Gabon 2000 exercise and has recently
signed a memorandum with the Secretariat to make rapid
deployment forces available to the United Nations.

Finally, concerning conflict resolution, the processes
for disarming and reintegrating combatants into civil and
political life of the country are fundamental. The case of
Central America provides a good example of what can be
achieved when these reconciliation and reconstruction
measures are correctly implemented. Strengthening
democratic institutions and modernizing the police and civil
safety are also important.

