Mr. Lie Cheng (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Zarrougui and the President of the Conference
episcopale nationale du Congo, Monseigneur Utembi,
for their briefings. We also listened carefully to the
statement of Ms. Furaha on behalf of civil society.

Peace, stability and the political process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has attracted the
attention of the international community, particularly
that of the countries of the region. Lately, the situation
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo has been
generally stable, and the preparations for the general
elections are progressing steadily. The Security Council
should fully recognize and support the elections and
provide constructive assistance to the country. The
forthcoming general elections constitute a critical step
in the political process of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. The electoral support provided by the
international community should respect the genuine
needs of the country and correspond to the real situation
on the ground.

China has always believed that a political solution
is the only way to resolve the issues of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The Security Council should
continue to support the African Union, the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region and other
regional and subregional organizations, as well as
countries in the region, by playing a leading role in
mediation and by encouraging those organizations and
countries to enhance communication and engagement
with Congolese parties through their respective
channels. In particular, the focus should be on listening
to the views of the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and respecting its ownership of
the political process, while also encouraging all parties
to take concrete actions to return to a path of political
settlement through dialogue and consultations and on
effectively implementing the political agreement of
31 December 2016.

While providing assistance to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the international community
should ensure that its sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity are fully respected. We should help
the country to strengthen its own security capabilities
so that it can achieve peace and stability independently.

The United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
should function strictly in accordance with its mandate
and strengthen consultations with the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

China has always played an active and constructive
role with regard to matters concerning peace and
security in Africa and has always supported African
countries in seeking African solutions to African
issues. The 2018 Forum on China-Africa Cooperation
summit will be held in Beijing on 3 and 4 September
under the theme "Towards an even stronger community
with a shared future through win-win cooperation".
Leaders from China and African countries will meet
in Beijing to discuss plans for future cooperation and
to propose new measures to strengthen comprehensive
cooperation between China and Africa.

China has always supported the peace process in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and has actively
participated in peacekeeping operations there. We
have also provided humanitarian assistance, including
medicine and food, to the country and have actively
participated in its socioeconomic development. China
stands ready to work with the international community
to continue to play a constructive role in achieving
peace, stability and development in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

