Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): As this is my
first statement in the Council for this month, please
accept my congratulations - to Argentina and you
personally, Madam - on your assumption of the
presidency. I thank you for convening this open debate
on the very important topic of the situation in the
Middle East. I also thank the Secretary-General for his
briefing and for his tireless efforts to promote peace in
the Middle East.

Along with the entire international community, we
are alarmed that terrorist groups are creating quasi-
State entities to fight against legitimate Governments
and sow enmity and hatred. Kazakhstan strongly
condemns the attacks by the so-called Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and associated armed
groups in the Middle East, which pose a major threat
to the region and beyond, including our part of the
world, and Central Asia in particular. They must be
held accountable for their violations and atrocities and
brought to justice by the international community.
We stress that terrorism can be defeated only by a
sustained and comprehensive approach involving the
active participation and cooperation of all States and
international and regional organizations, to impede,
impair, isolate and incapacitate the terrorist threat.

My delegation has already expressed to the
Council Kazakhstan's concern about the developments
in the Gaza Strip. Kazakhstan expresses its deepest
condolences and profound sympathy for the senseless
deaths among the civilian population of the Gaza Strip,
most of which were of women, children and the elderly.
We call for the immediate lifting of the Israeli blockade
on Gaza. We are also concerned about the continuing
settlement process on Palestinian territory.

It is clearly evident that the persistence of the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict continues to threaten regional
and international peace and security, and its negative
implications are not confined to just that region, but
are felt well beyond, across the globe. The ultimate
goal of the efforts of all parties involved should be the
restoration and promotion of the peace processes in all
directions. That should be in accordance with Security
Council resolutions, the Madrid principles and the
land-for-peace formula. All parties to the Middle East
conflict must fulfil their commitments, as stipulated by
the Road Map.

We support Egypt's peaceful initiative and welcome
the outcomes of the 12 October Cairo talks on the long-
term settlement conditions. Kazakhstan expresses its
hope that international actions, including those of the
Secretary-General, will contribute to the ceasefire
and resumption of further peace talks. My delegation
reiterates our recognition of the legitimate right of the
Palestinian people to self-determination, the creation
of an independent State of Palestine within the 1967
borders in peaceful co-existence with Israel and full-
fledged membership in the United Nations.

In conclusion, we again urgently call on all parties
to commit their political will to ensure lasting peace
and security, and freedom and justice for all people
through a genuine multilateral approach.

