Mr. Serry: Allow me to start by congratulating
the new members of the Security Council at the start
of their term. Let me also welcome the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Observer State of Palestine,
Mr. Riad Malki, and the Permanent Representative of
Israel, Mr. Ron Prosor.

We meet today against the backdrop of ongoing
events in the Middle East that could affect the peace
process itself. Israel held elections yesterday, and
Jordan is holding elections today. The United States
Administration also commenced a second term this
week.

While the process of forming a Government in
Israel could take weeks, we look forward to engaging
the next Israeli Government in the common pursuit
of peace. This is not a time to be idle. Instead, we are
entering a critical period in which concerted action
will be vital if we are to salvage the two-State solution.
The Secretary-General has repeatedly highlighted the
fact that 2013 will be a decisive year for the two-State
solution and that the parties must now show the political
will to cooperate with new renewed effort to achieve it.

I recently visited Egypt and Jordan - two key Arab
stakeholders with peace treaties with Israel - and my
interlocutors reiterated their direct interest in assisting
the parties to realize the two-State solution at long last,
and their concern over the dire regional consequences
if not movement is achieved. Regional and international
partners are increasingly alarmed that the only way to
resolve the Arab-Israeli conflict in accordance with
resolutions and international law is slipping away. They
have also questioned the effectiveness of international
efforts to bring about decisive results.

The Quartet envoys met again on 10 January in
Amman, Jordan. Everyone recognized the urgent need
for action, but I must express my genuine concern that
a clear and realistic path ahead is still lacking. The
United Nations will remain an integral part of efforts
to urgently address the dangerous political vacuum,
and we are willing to work with any initiative that will
achieve our common goal, including in the context of
the Quartet. We have also taken note of the European
Union (EU) Council decision of 10 December that
reaffirmed the EU's vision for a way forward. We
look forward in particular to renewed United States
engagement.

No international effort alone is sufficient for
progress absent the requisite will on the part ofthe parties
themselves. If they want to provide themselves and
others with the opportunity to get on track in the period
ahead, then now is not the time for actions that further
undermine mutual trust. As previously reported, after
the General Assembly accorded Palestine non-member
observer State status in the United Nations, we witnessed
developments such as a dramatic increase in Israeli
settlements announcements, including in the critical
E-l area, and the withholding and redirection by Israel
of tax revenues it collects on behalf of the Palestinian
Authority, which have been widely deplored, including
by the United Nations. President Abbas has warned that
building in E-l is a red line and that ifplans proceed he
would consider raising his opposition in international
forums, including the International Criminal Court. I
urge both sides to abstain from actions that will make
efforts to resume meaningful negotiations even harder
in the critical period ahead, and I call on Israel to restore
the timely, predictable and transparent transfers of tax
and customs revenues without further delay.

The withholding of clearance revenues has already
seriously weakened the capacity of the Palestinian
Government to meet its obligations. Key among these is
the payment of salaries to civil servants, who have only
received partial salaries since November and launched
strikes in protest since mid-December. The Government
also ended the refugee exemption from paying for
electricity, which resulted in protests and clashes with
Palestinian security on 1 January in Nablus.

In 2012, the recurrent budget deficit of
the Palestinian Authority exceeded $1 billion.
International contributions amounted to $600 million
in support of the recurrent budget last year, but
further timely disbursement of aid is essential to
sustain institution-building and prevent the disruption
of core operations. I welcome reports of the recent
contribution from Saudi Arabia and statements of
support by some Gulf States during yesterday's Riyadh
summit, but members of the League of Arab States
have yet to provide financial assistance pursuant to
their communique of 9 December, and I urge them
to do so urgently and to heed to the appeals of Prime
Minister Fayyad. At the same time, we should be under
no illusion - the viability of the Palestinian Authority
will be increasingly at stake if its standing is based on
political quicksand. Ultimately, there is no future for
the Palestinian Authority without a two-State solution.

All this is taking place amid worrying events and
trends on the ground, including continued settlement
construction and increased violence. In East Jerusalem,
on 19 December plans to approve 2,600 units in the
settlement of Givat Hamatos were advanced, and
1,242 units were approved on 25 December in the
settlement of Gilo. On 19 December, Israeli authorities
advanced a plan to build 523 units in the Gush Etzion
settlement south-west of Bethlehem. On 16 January,
there were further tenders issued for construction in
Efrat and Kiryat Arba, near Hebron. The reporting
period also witnessed continued activity in Palestinian
neighbourhoods ofEast Jerusalem, including Beit Safafa
and related to the construction of a military academy on
the Mount of Olives. Israeli security forces demolished
105 structures in the occupied West Bank during the
reporting period, resulting in the displacement of 170
Palestinians. Settlement construction in the West Bank,
including East Jerusalem, is contrary to international
law and cannot prejudge the outcome of final status
negotiations. Clashes between settlers and Palestinians
in the West Bank resulted in 14 Palestinian casualties,
including one girl who was shot dead this morning near
Hebron.

The reporting period has been characterized by
increased Israeli operations - a total of 379 - and
arrests in the West Bank, both of which are up nearly
90 per cent compared to the last reporting period, as well
as increased clashes and renewed protests over the fate
of Palestinian prisoners in Israeli jails. There are also
continuing signs of tensions in security coordination,
including the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) arrest of one
Palestinian security officer at a checkpoint near Nablus.
As a result ofthe operations, two Palestinians, including
a teenager, were killed, 158 injured and 379 arrested.
Four Israeli soldiers were also injured. Increased use of
live fire by Israeli security forces has been reported in
the West Bank and is of concern.

On 1 and 3 January, undercover Israeli operations,
in one instance to arrest a member of Islamic Jihad,
resulted in clashes with civilians injured by live
ammunition. On 25 December, Israeli security forces
arrested 10 members of the Popular Front for the
Liberation of Palestine (PFLP) in Ramallah and other
West Bank villages. Two ofthem allegedly confessed to
planning to kidnap Israelis in order to force the release
of PFLP leader Ahmad Saadat.

Palestinian attacks on Israeli security forces in
the West Bank included throwing stones and Molotov
cocktails, in one instance against an IDF post at
Rachel's Tomb in Bethlehem on 27 December. A repeat
attempt was thwarted by Palestinian security forces on
1 January. On 5 January, Palestinian security forces
arrested members of a Palestinian group in Hebron
that had announced a third intifada and threatened to
abduct IDF soldiers. Palestinian security forces also
intervened in several refugee camps to prevent some
members of Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigades from rearming
and reverting to armed resistance. Demonstrations
in Ramallah over the alleged Israeli mistreatment of
Palestinian prisoners led to clashes with Palestinian
security forces on 20 January. We continue to be
concerned about the fate of Palestinian prisoners on
administrative detention in Israeli jails, especially
those on prolonged hunger strike.

All ofthese events paints a grim picture and, absent
a new perspective on the political track, I fear that such
negative trends will only worsen.

Palestinian demonstrations continued to be
organized against the barrier, which deviates from the
Green Line in contravention to the advisory opinion
of the International Court of Justice. On 11 January,
over 100 Palestinians and international activists moved
to the E-1 area of the West Bank and established an
encampment named Bab al-Shams - or "Gateway to
the Sun" - consisting of over 20 large tents, aimed
at countering Israeli plans to expand settlement
construction there. Demonstrators were evicted in the
early hours of 13 January. On 18 January, the Secretariat
received a letter from Ambassador Prosor in which he
considered the incident as "a provocation staged against
Israel". The Secretary-General has expressed his grave
disappointment about the announced plans for Israeli
settlement construction in the so-called E-l area and
repeated his call that such plans must be rescinded.
The Secretary-General also stresses the importance
for protests to continue to remain peaceful and for the
right to peaceful protest to be fully respected. Another
encampment named Bab Al-Karamah - Gateway to
Dignity - was set up on 18 January in the Palestinian
village of Beit Iksa, between Jerusalem and Ramallah,
to impede the construction of the barrier on village
land. The encampment was subsequently dismantled by
Israeli security forces on 21 January.

In Gaza the calm brokered by Egypt in November
has largely held, but remains tenuous. It is significant
to report that no rockets or mortar shells landed in
Israel during the reporting period, and only one rocket
has landed in Israel since the end of November. Israeli
forces conducted three incursions into Gaza during this
period and fired six tank shells. One Palestinian civilian
was killed and 10 Palestinian civilians were injured by
Israeli fire, mostly while attempting to approach the
border fence. I traveled to Cairo last week to continue
our close work with Egyptian authorities to encourage
further progress on all aspects of the understanding for
the ceasefire.

As part of its commitments in the understanding
reached, Israel began to allow gravel for commercial
use through the Kerem Shalom crossing. In the
past month 551 trucks, carrying more than 38,000
tons of gravel, entered Gaza. Israel has also allowed
Palestinian farmers access up to 100 metres from the
fence with Israel, and Palestinian fishermen have
been able to access up to six nautical miles from
shore. That is important progress. However, a further
extension of the fishing limit to at least nine nautical
miles is necessary for a significant increase in the
catch of the fishermen. We also continue to call for
the unrestricted entry of all construction materials.
Assessments of damage to residential properties and
civilian infrastructure resulting from the escalation in
November 2012 highlight the urgent need to remove
the ongoing restrictions. Further measures to lift the
closure should include transfers of goods between Gaza
and the West Bank, exports to Israel and beyond and,
as needed, increased capacity at Kerem Shalom and
the reopening of the Sufa crossing. To further advance
that important agenda and address Israel's legitimate
security interests, it is essential that efforts continue in
parallel to enforce the calm and prevent the smuggling
of weapons into Gaza.

In a new development, since 29 December, Egypt
has allowed the entry of an average of 30 trucks per
day carrying construction materials through the Rafah
crossing for a range of Qatar-funded projects.

Implementing resolution 1860 (2009) in full
also means overcoming the Palestinian divide. In
that regard, President Abbas met with Hamas leader
Khaled Meshaal on 10 January in Cairo to discuss the
implementation of previous Palestinian reconciliation
deals. On 17 January, members of Fatah and Hamas
held in Cairo the first of what is intended to become
a series of regular meetings. The Palestine Liberation
Organization (PLO) temporary body that includes all
PLO factions as well as the leaders ofgroups outside ofthe
PLO is expected to meet in early February. In addition,
both sides have made positive gestures, as Fatah was
permitted to hold an anniversary rally in Gaza earlier
this month, following the Hamas anniversary rallies in
the West Bank during the previous reporting period.
Reconciliation and negotiations remain essential for
achieving the two-State solution. The peace process and
reconciliation is not an either-or proposition and must
be made compatible by advancing both in a mutually
reinforcing way. But for real progress to be made, the
time has come for Hamas to make clear where it stands
on the central issues at stake.

Turning now to Syria, I will be succinct, as the Joint
Special Representative of the United Nations and the
League of Arab States for Syria, Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi,
will brief the Council at the end of this month.

The conflict, now in its twenty-second month,
continues unabated. Nearly 60,000 persons were
killed between 15 March 2011 and 30 November 2012.
Thousands remain in detention. Many have suffered
torture and ill-treatment, including sexual violence.
Indiscriminate shelling, armed clashes and the general
state of insecurity have driven more than 670,000
Syrians outside the country. There are now more than
18,000 Palestinian refugees displaced from Syria being
hosted in Lebanon, assisted by the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East, up from 10,000 in early December, as well as
3,200 in Jordan. More than 67,000 Iraqi refugees from
Syria have had to return to Iraq. Since mid-December
Yarmouk Camp, a Palestinian refugee camp in
Damascus, has been the site of fighting between Syrian
rebels and gunmen loyal to the Government, leading to
massive displacement of the camp's population.

On 21 January, the Secretary-General and the Joint
Special Representative expressed deep disappointment
and anguish at the appalling levels of killing and
destruction carried out by both the Government and
the opposition, fuelled by outside Powers providing
weaponry to both sides. They also expressed their
consternation about the lack of a unified international
posture that could lead to a transition as agreed at
Geneva last June and put an end to the desperate
suffering of the Syrian people.

The United Nations is doing its utmost to assist all
in need inside and outside Syria. The Secretary-General
will chair a high-level donor conference in Kuwait on
30 January to support our humanitarian assistance
programmes. We are hopeful that Member States will
contribute generously to bridge the funding gap.

The situation in the area of operations of the
United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
(UNDOF) remains volatile. Armed clashes between
the Syrian army and armed opposition take place
sporadically inside the area of separation, posing risks
to the ceasefire between Israel and Syria as well as
to the safety and security of civilians and UNDOF
personnel. That situation clearly jeopardizes regional
stability and the ceasefire between the two countries.
We have repeatedly called on both sides to respect the
Disengagement Agreement.

The situation in Lebanon has been relatively quiet
since last month's briefing, in spite ofpersisting tensions
linked with the ongoing conflict in Syria. In Tripoli the
Lebanese Armed Forces continued to maintain calm
between the Sunni and Alawite communities of Bab
Al-Tabbaneh and Jabal Mohsen. There was, however,
an attack on the convoy of the Minister of Youth on
18 January, in which 11 were injured. One 11-year-old
Lebanese boy was killed by gunfire coming from Syria
on 25 December, but generally the bad weather and heavy
snow in the border region contributed to a decrease in
violence and in smuggling activity. The nine Lebanese
pilgrims who have remained in the custody of Syrian
opposition forces since May 2012 have still not been
released. The bodies of some 10 of the fighters killed in
the Tel Kalakh incident on 30 November were returned
for burial in Lebanon, and at least one Lebanese fighter
is believed to be held by Syrian Government forces.

As a result of the continued political stalemate
between the two main blocs, the session of the national
dialogue scheduled for 7 January was postponed
indefinitely by President Sleiman, who continues
to hold consultations with all parties. Members of
a parliamentary subcommittee started a series of
meetings on 8 January to discuss the different proposed
drafts of a new electoral law. It is a positive development
that the parties are working together constructively in
that manner. We hope that broad consensus will emerge
over a new law. It is important that elections be held on
time, in accordance with the Constitution and for the
stability of the country.

The situation in the area of operations of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon remained generally
quiet and stable. Israeli Violations of the Lebanese
airspace continued on a frequent basis.

In conclusion, given internal political calendars,
we have weeks to prepare for a new initiative. Israeli
and Palestinian leaders have stated, like us, that they
are convinced that the two-State solution is the only
path towards a durable peace. But they should realize
that, absent serious engagement, the peace process will
remain on life-support and stability on the ground will
be put at risk even further. The consequences ofinaction
could be dire for everyone. The parties must therefore
not only remain open to new initiatives to overcome
the current impasse, they must also demonstrate
their seriousness. If Israel is serious about the two-
State solution, it must recognize the negative impact
of continued settlement construction. Palestinian
seriousness could be demonstrated by pausing further
action in the international arena while talks begin.

Both parties must reaffirm their commitment to
a negotiated two-State solution consistent with the
Charter of the United Nations, one that would fulfil
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), resolve the
core issues - territory, security, Jerusalem, refugees,
settlements and water - and constitute the end of
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and all claims related
to it. As a result of negotiations, two States for two
peoples, Israel and Palestine, will live side-by-side
in peace, security and mutual recognition of each
other's legitimate rights, including the right to self-
determination. Each State will ensure equal civil rights
for all its citizens and will be committed to respect for
human rights and human dignity.

That, in our view, is in essence the vision ofa two-
State solution endorsed by the international community
and accepted in the Arab Peace Initiative as the basis for
ending the Arab-Israeli conflict and achieving regional
peace. None of the steps to realize that vision are easy,
but we cannot afford another year without courageous
action undertaken for the purpose of achieving a two-
State solution.

