Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): My
delegation is pleased to take part in this debate on an issue
of key importance to the United Nations and its States
Members and appeals to our collective conscience. It is
presided over by you, Sir, and represents a just tribute
to your commitment and efforts devoted to the matter.

Furthermore, I congratulate Ms. Leila Zerrougui
on her appointment as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict. I
wish to assure her of Morocco's commitment to support
her efforts as we have done with her predecessor,
Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy. Lastly, let me thank
Mr. Herve Ladsous, Mr. Anthony Lake and Mr. David
Tolbert for their briefings.

Today's debate gives us the opportunity to take
stock of the progress made in assessing the challenges
surrounding the protection of children, as well as the
scope and gravity of the violence committed against
this vulnerable sector of society, in violation ofthe most
basic principles of human rights and international law,
including international humanitarian and refugee law.
The magnitude of the atrocities endured by children in
these conflicts demands firm, unwavering commitment
on the part of the international community to ending
such things, with their devastating consequences for
the victims and their families.

We can only condemn and fight any exploitation of
children's innocence, vulnerability and ingenuousness
designed to induce them to take part directly or
indirectly in conflicts. No rationale or pretext can justify
recruiting children into armed conflict or mitigate the
criminal responsibility of those who encourage it or
force them to be involved. It goes without saying that
denouncing and prosecuting such practices, as has been
noted, must be supported with strategies and specific
measures aimed at preventing them.

As the Secretary-General's report (S/2012/261)
emphasizes, prevention strategies must address the
problems in a comprehensive manner, first at the
national level, by enacting laws that make recruiting
under-age children a crime; then, at the local level,
by improving measures designed to protect them
and raising family and community awareness; and
by establishing national re-education, training and
employment programmes that offer young people better
prospects. Such efforts should involve not only public
authorities but also non-governmental organizations,
national human rights institutions and civil society, and
should furthermore enjoy priority and significant donor
financing. In that regard, my delegation specifically
endorses the Secretary-General's recommendation that
Governments that ask be given help in implementing
prevention strategies. Here we can only welcome
the growing number of action plans signed or being
negotiated, as the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General mentioned, and that reflect the merit
of an approach that involves dialogue and cooperation.

The Child Protection Policy adoptedjointly in 2009
by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO)
and the Department of Field Support has helped to guide
United Nations activities regarding the protection of
children in armed conflict and to support the mandate
of child protection advisers in peacekeeping operations.
We welcome the steps the DPKO has taken to educate
and train United Nations forces in order to enable them
to protect children in situations of armed conflict. At
the same time, we believe it essential to strengthen the
capacity of the countries concerned, with the sustained
commitment of the United Nations to cooperation and
technical assistance, in order to help those countries
implement their action plans successfully.

Recruiting children into armed conflict is a crime
to be condemned by any and every standard. We are
all indisputably obliged to combat it, and we must do
everything to put an end to it. Coordinating the efforts
of the various stakeholders in the United Nations
system is a guarantee of effectiveness and success;
but, as has been widely emphasized and demonstrated,
primary responsibility for that lies with the parties to
conflicts, who must be prevailed on to respect the lives
and rights of children, as expressed in Security Council
resolutions and international conventions.
In conclusion, I voice the hope that the international
consensus on the importance of protecting children
in situations of armed conflict will be transformed,
through dialogue, cooperation and recognition of
different sensitivities, into a truly universal consensus,
fully endorsed by all parties, to be welcomed by every
child living in a situation of armed conflict.

