Mr. Sen (India): Let me begin by placing on
record India's commitment to working closely with
Ambassador Kai Eide and his colleagues in the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
as he takes on his new responsibilities as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. I wish him
every success in his new responsibilities.

Today's debate is opportune, as it is set in the
context of the Secretary-General's report on
Afghanistan and the Council's consideration of the
renewal of the mandate of UNAMA. Since this debate
is to contribute to the latter while drawing upon the
former, it is worthwhile to restate our goals in
Afghanistan and to rededicate ourselves to achieving
them in the most appropriate manner.

The central objective of the international
community is to assist Afghanistan to complete its re-
emergence from decades of war, civil strife and
privation. We have set ourselves the goal of assisting
Afghanistan to emerge as a modern democratic country
rooted in its unique culture, at peace with itself, secure
in its neighbourhood and on the path to sustainable
economic development.

Each of those processes needs to be
"Afghanized" at a pace and in a manner that is
acceptable to the Afghan people and their Government.
The prioritization of tasks in an environment as
challenging as it is in Afghanistan is a difficult task,
but we must let this be an Afghan-led process. As the
Secretary-General's report notes, efforts are needed to
ensure that "international assistance is driven by
demand rather than by supply" (S/2008/J 59, para. 4).
That is not to say that international partners should not
have input in drawing up a list of priorities; but, at the
end of the day, Afghan interlocutors should have the
final say on where scarce resources - manpower and
money - are allocated.

From that standpoint, our collective energies
must be directed towards what is very clearly the first
priority for the Afghan people, namely, security. As the
report of the Secretary-General notes, "Provinces not
affected by anti-Government violence have
demonstrated an increasing capacity for delivering
governance and economic development." (ibid., para. 11). India is convinced that effective, people-
centric administration closely follows robust efforts to
provide security. Development and security are closely
intertwined and, on both, the international community

and the United Nations must be in closer coordination
with each other and with relevant Afghan agencies.

To do so, on the one hand, while pressing forward
forcefully in terms of security operations, we must also
pay more attention to building capacity in the Afghan
National Army and the National Police. I have been
briefed by my colleague about what the Ambassador of
Afghanistan has said about security, anti-terrorism and
capacity-building. I share those views and would
support them very strongly. Both those institutions
require much more support in terms of training and the
provision of equipment. There is also a need to devise
new strategies to achieve optimum results in that
regard. We must also bolster the security effort through
stronger collective action, within Afghanistan and
outside it, in ensuring that terrorist groups and their
patrons are deprived of shelter, financing and
ideological support. We should neither underestimate
the Taliban and Al-Qaida nor fight terrorism with any
less military and political determination than in the
immediate post-2001 days.

The counter-narcotics effort is precisely at the
intersection of the effort to assist the Government to
establish its authority, the fight against terror and
organized crime and the challenge of poverty
alleviation and development.

The report of the Secretary-General exhorts the
Government to muster the political will on the issue of
eradication - sensitivities on this exist - and take
measures against erring public officials and large
landowners. That is part of the picture, but equally
important are effective disincentives against poppy
cultivation, in contrast to efforts to legitimize the
practice via so-called legal opiates. However,
international partners must also make corresponding
efforts to upgrade Afghan capacity to take more
effective action to prevent cross-border smuggling and
movements, and work in a united way in support of
actions by Afghan agencies, and internationally, to
stem demand for narcotics products.

We must also simultaneously ramp up efforts to
build local capacity across the board - from
administration to security, from civil engineering to
medical science. For India, capacity-building is a
priority area, as we believe that that is one area of
assistance that requires minimal investment but yields
maximal long-term benefits. Additionally, a core
capacity-building component can be added easily to all

our aid projects in Afghanistan. India is already
including a strong capacity-development component in
all infrastructure projects it is executing in
Afghanistan.

We must also reflect about the methods we
employ to achieve those goals. Any objective analysis
will tell us that despite the large investment in human
capital and treasury resources, the international
community is still faced with a significant challenge in
ensuring that our objectives are met in Afghanistan.
Quite clearly, apart from underlining our unshakeable
determination to stay the course in Afghanistan, we
need to improve the cohesion of our efforts.

To put it another way, to strengthen the
connection between the Afghan people and their
Government requires far more coordination among
international partners, and between us and the Afghan
Government. The United Nations is not only the best
qualified, but also the most appropriate body to do so.
However, we cannot achieve better coordination unless
we give UNAMA the tools to bring about greater
cohesion; and better cohesion is predicated upon more
comprehensive access to information. Therefore, in
providing a mandate for UNAMA to play a
coordinating role, it is important to clearly outline an
operational relationship between those two bodies, so
that information on aid flows and on projects under
implementation can be comprehensively mapped.

At the same time, UNAMA must also be
mandated to increasingly streamline international
assistance in support of a prioritized Afghan National
Development Strategy, once it is adopted, and the core
budget. That will have the effect of bringing credibility
to the Strategy while bolstering the budget, and at the
same time it will underscore that our assistance is in
line with priorities set by Afghanistan.

India is fully committed to implementing the
inter-related security, political and developmental
challenges facing Afghanistan. Our commitment to
reconstruction, development and capacity-building in
Afghanistan is unflinching. India's assistance
programme has now exceeded $750 million, and it
spans the gamut of requirements - ranging from
developing capacity to infrastructure and
reconstruction. As a committed development partner of
Afghanistan, India is willing to actively participate in
any United Nations-led effort to improve donor
cohesion, in support of Afghan-defined priorities.

In conclusion, let me also reiterate our abiding
belief in the determination of the Afghan people to
look beyond the tragedies of the past and to seize the
opportunities that the future holds, on which my
colleague the Afghan Ambassador spoke so eloquently.
The international community must not fail them by
displaying weakness of resolve, or by setting
unrealistic benchmarks of progress. Our approach
needs to be guided by the recognition of the distance
Afghanistan has traversed in the past six years, rather
than being derailed by the image of an idealized
version of what we would like Afghanistan to be. We
hope that the recognition of those realities will
increasingly inform discussions on the subject of
assistance to Afghanistan.

