Mr. Husain (Organization of the Islamic Conference): At the outset, I should like to join other
delegations in congratulating you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. We are confident that, under your
leadership, the proceedings and work of the Council
will be steered efficiently and successfully. I also wish
to pay tribute to your predecessor, Ambassador Jean-
Marc de La Sabliere of France, for his excellent
guidance of the Council's work last month. We also
wish to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this
important meeting on a subject to which the
Organization of the Islamic Conference attaches great
importance.

In flagrant disregard of the will of the
international community, the Israeli Government has
continued the construction of new stretches of the
apartheid wall, cutting deep into Palestinian land,
despite of the advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice (ICJ), which ruled on the illegality of
the construction of the wall and its resulting violation
of international law.

Israel has also violated General Assembly
resolution ES-lO/ 15 on the wall, which demanded that
it cease immediately its construction work, remove the
stretches that have been built and discharge its
obligations under the road map.

Israel has also started to build new stretches of
the apartheid wall around the Holy City of Jerusalem

and the surrounding areas of Bethlehem. Israel's
continued confiscation of Palestinian land with
impunity is isolating the Palestinian territories and
causing serious damage to the Palestinian economy,
depriving Palestinians of their farms, schools, hospitals
and places of worship.

Israel is pursuing the unilateral demarcation of
new borders in the West Bank, which amounts to an
effective annexation of Palestinian territories,
undermining the borders of the Palestinian State and
even annihilating the very possibility of its
establishment.

It will be recalled that, in early June, the
Secretary-General of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference, Mr. Ekmeleddin Ihsanoglu, addressed
communications to the members of the Quartet, raising
several issues of concern with regard to the ongoing
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. The OIC Secretary-General
has emphasized that the unlawful Israeli expansionist
and colonialist policies and practices and seriously
damaging and destroying the geographical contiguity
of the Palestinian territory, making the two-State
solution virtually impossible to achieve. He also stated
in his communications that East Jerusalem - the
centre, of course, of the Islamic world - has become
an occupied city, just like other territories occupied by
Israel in 1967.

Israel is bound under international law to refrain
from making any changes that prejudice the rights of
the Palestinians in the city of Jerusalem. Through you,
Mr. President, the OIC calls on the international
community, especially the Security Council and
the Quartet, to take the necessary measures to uphold
international law and to counter the establishment of
Israeli illegal settlements and the construction of the
wall and its damaging effects on the Palestinian people.

The OIC calls upon all States to impose punitive
measures against any public or private entities or
corporations that have been contributing to the
construction of the wall, and against settlers and all
those who are profiting from the settlement activity on
the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem.

With regard to the Israeli withdrawal from the
Gaza Strip, the OIC reiterates that this withdrawal must
be full and complete and must be followed by Israeli
withdrawal from the rest of the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem.

In conclusion, the OIC attaches the highest
importance to the need for a rapid resolution of the
question of Palestine and the achievement of a just,
lasting and comprehensive final peace settlement,
based on the road map, the Arab Peace Initiative, the
rules and principles of international law, and relevant
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions.
Progress in that direction will move us towards the
accomplishment of the two-State solution, whereby
Palestine and Israel would live side by side in an
environment of harmony and tranquillity. Peace and
security would then return to the region. We urge the
Council to do its utmost to initiate actions to move in
that direction.

