Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): First of all, I would like to thank the Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations for his briefing. Six months following the adoption of resolution 2480 (2019), our meeting today is an opportunity to assess the progress that has been made. I would like to make three points. My first point is related to the security situation in the Sahel, which has changed. We are now faced with geographical spread and an evolving threat. Terrorist groups continue to adapt to challenges. As they are unable to control territory, they seek to prevent the return of State authority. Although civilians are the primary victims, soldiers in the Sahel have also suffered heavy losses. I pay tribute to the memory of all victims, including soldiers. Given the situation, France believes that there is an urgent and important need to respond. France organized a summit with the countries of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), which was held on Monday in Pau, in which the Secretary-General and representatives of the European Union, the African Union and the International Organization of la Francophonie participated. At the end of the summit, we decided together to establish a coalition for the Sahel. The coalition's military objective will be to continue to weaken terrorist movements over time. Its political objective will be to ensure the return of State authority to all regions of the Sahel, including Kidal and northern Burkina Faso. France invites all interested countries and organizations to join the initiative. It will be organized around four pillars: the fight against terrorism; strengthening the capacity of the defence and security forces of the countries of the Sahel; support for the return of State authority; and economic and social development. Several initiatives that we conduct with our European Union partners, in particular Germany, are already part of that framework, such as the Alliance for the Sahel and the Partnership for Stability and Security in the Sahel. The aim is therefore to increase the support we provide to the countries of the G-5 Sahel and to encourage them to implement reforms in the area of security and also in the areas of governance and human rights. Once we have established those conditions, we will succeed in eradicating terrorism. The coalition will be based on effectiveness and results. Heads of State will meet in Nouakchott in June to closely monitor the implementation of the coalition and the fulfilment of mutual commitments. My second point pertains to the peace process and the political situation in Mali. The inclusive national dialogue was a milestone. The constructive nature of the exchanges between signatory movements and other signatories to the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali bodes well moving forward, and we welcome the fact that a number of women participated in that undertaking. Progress has been made in the implementation of the peace agreement. The redeployment to the north of the initial units of the reconstituted Malian army is presently under way; an initial step is to be deployment to the city of Kidal, from where the army and the Malian Administration have for too long been absent. France commends the holding of the meeting of the Agreement Monitoring Committee set for 19 January, as the Committee's work has been on hold since August. It is important to take advantage of this opportunity to achieve greater progress on other proposed measures, complete the transfer of 30 per cent of State resources to local authorities, carry out a pilot project for development in the north and ensure the participation of women in the process. The role of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) will remain vital in all these areas, and it is critical that it be provided with the resources necessary to discharge its duties. The Algiers agreement must remain our lodestar, as it provides the sole framework for lasting reconciliation among the Malian, which is a prerequisite for achievingthe stabilization of the country. As has been stated on several occasions by the Security Council, those who hinder its implementation risk the imposition of sanctions. I wish to conclude by touching on the criticism levelled against international partners and MINUSMA in particular. MINUSMA remains the linchpin of the international mechanism in Mali and carries out functions that no other actor can, from the protection of civilians, support for the implementation of the peace agreement to the provision of logistical support to the G-5 Sahel Joint Force. The Mission has sustained tremendous losses, and I would pay tribute here to the commitment made by the troop-contributing countries and their personnel. Given the circumstances, it is important that there be better communication vis-a-vis the respective actions of the various international stakeholders in Mali. It is also important to listen to criticism and to reflect on ways to make improvements. France therefore welcomes the adaptation plan of the MINUSMA force aimed at making it more mobile and agile so that it can better deliver on its mandate and protect civilians. It is an ambitious but timely plan, and France encourages all members of the Council to support it.
