Mr. Chambas: On behalf of the secretariat of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), I wish to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council.

Thank you, Sir, for inviting ECOWAS to this very
important meeting on ways to combat subregional and
cross-border problems in West Africa. We are grateful
that the Security Council has continued to devote
particular attention to the West African subregion, a
subregion that has had more than its fair share of
conflicts. I am confident that the enormous resources
and focus the international community is currently
investing in West Africa will yield commensurate
results.

This special meeting is being held on the heels of
an extraordinary summit of West African leaders with
the President of the World Bank, Mr. James
Wolfensohn, just held in Accra, Ghana, on 20 March
2004. The meeting was devoted to looking at the
challenges of development and integration and of the
implementation of the New Partnership for Africa's
Development (NEPAD) in West Africa. It came to an
important conclusion which is pertinent to today's
special session; namely, that the political and socio-
economic instabilities in West Africa have been
disruptive of the development process and have
discouraged long-term investment.

The summit also recognized the importance of a
regional approach to economic development,
emphasizing that the critical challenges of development
could not be faced and dealt with satisfactorily by
States acting individually and in isolation. The summit
therefore placed a high premium on integration,
cooperation and a regional approach to ramp up
economic growth and enhance the chances of meeting
the Millennium Development Goals in West Africa.
The message simply was that, working together with
shared responsibilities and mutual accountability, much
could be achieved.

That is why we fully share the conclusion reached
in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2004/200) that
cross-border problems cannot be solved at the national
level alone, but rather require a regional approach. We
commend the Secretary-General for the report and find
its recommendations to be useful and appropriate for
our collective action.

As in the economic field, a regional approach is
clearly called for if we are to adequately and
effectively deal with cross-border issues such as the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons,
trafficking in children, the illicit exploitation of natural
resources, the movement of mercenaries and non-State
armed groups, mass refugee movements and forced
displacement, among others.

The menace posed by the upsurge in the use of
mercenaries or soldiers of fortune and child soldiers
and in the illicit proliferation of small arms in West
Africa can no longer be overlooked. Even in countries
perceived to be relatively stable and peaceful, waves of
armed attacks and the growing activities of trans-
frontier criminal gangs are taking on an alarming
dimension. The spate of armed attacks and killings, and
the growing link among small-arms trafficking,
mercenary activities and armed banditry are seriously
undermining efforts to achieve economic development,
attract investment, ensure political and economic
stability, security and the rule of law and to guarantee
and protect human rights and freedoms.

The appalling phenomenon of the recruitment and
use of child soldiers is still rife, and remains
challenging, despite the international conventions and
protocols that are in place. Armed factions in West
Africa continue to abusively recruit children and
minors as combatants.

The war in Liberia came to an end with the
signing in August 2003 of the ECOWAS-brokered
Accra Peace Agreement and the subsequent departure
of former President Charles Taylor from power, paving
the way for a transitional Government. The 15,000-
strong United Nations Mission is bringing hope to
millions of war-afflicted Liberians.

Armed hostilities ended in Cote d'Ivoire with the
signing of ECOWAS-brokered ceasefire agreements
and the Linas-Marcoussis Accord. The announced
deployment of 6,431 Blue Helmets to consolidate
peace and stability there is being awaited with high
expectations and has now become even more crucial.

The United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL) is an example of a United Nations success
story and a clear demonstration of how international
concern and solidarity towards Africa can bring change
and hope in hitherto hopeless situations. We hope the
drawdown of that force will be aligned with the
duration of missions in neighbouring Liberia and Cote
d'Ivoire.

Hundreds of thousands of the small but lethal
arms and light weapons that fuelled those wars have
remained in circulation - and in the wrong hands. So,
too, have the hundreds of thousands of mercenaries,
who have become veritable veterans of West Africa's
armed conflicts. Those agents of destabilization have
been recruited to fight wars in which they have nothing
at stake but their wage - wars in Sierra Leone, Liberia
and Cote d'Ivoire, as well as the attempted invasion of
Guinea in 2000 and 2001. The United Nations Mission
in Sierra Leone reported the attempted crossing of the
Sierra Leonean border by armed fighters as hostilities
ceased in Liberia and as disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR) commenced. The Malian
authorities also announced the capture of arms-carrying
mercenaries of various West African nationalities along
its border with Cote d'Ivoire in early March this year.

ECOWAS is very concerned about the threat
posed by those cross-border problems and trans-
frontier criminal activities. In view of the enormous
challenges posed by such issues relating to cross-
border activities, various capacity-building initiatives
have been stepped up to strengthen and enhance the
skills of our staff in the ECOWAS secretariat to deal
with them. Thanks to the support of some of our
bilateral donors and partners, concrete moves are under
way to operationalize the ECOWAS early warning
system for conflict prevention so that we become more
proactive in dealing with actual and potential violent
conflicts through effective monitoring systems. We are
currently recruiting technically competent staff to
enhance our resolve to deliver in those areas and to
stay on top of the issues. In this regard, we look
forward to the report of the joint mission of the United
Nations and the European Union, which explored,
among other issues, support for capacity-building in
the ECOWAS secretariat.

West African leaders have renewed their
commitment to the Moratorium on the Importation,
Exportation and Manufacture of Small Arms, and have
tasked the ECOWAS secretariat to take necessary
measures for the full implementation of the plan of
action. In line with this, the secretariat, together with
the Governments of Canada, the Netherlands, Norway
and the United Kingdom, convened, from 22 to 24
March 2004, a conference in Abuja on combating
small-arms brokering and trafficking, to explore
appropriate strategies to address the dangers posed by
the illicit trade in small arms, which have become West
Africa's weapons of mass destruction.

As we work to set up a Small Arms Unit in the
secretariat to complement the Programme for
Coordination and Assistance for Security and
Development initiative for implementing the
Moratorium, what is now required is the political will
of West African leaders and the support of the
international community to transform the Moratorium
into a convention, if we are to make headway in
combating the nefarious phenomenon of illicit
trafficking in small arms and light weapons.

Twelve out of 15 national commissions are
already operational, and the projected DDR
programmes in Liberia and Cote d'Ivoire could provide
an opportunity for them to build their own national
commissions to combat the proliferation of illicit arms
and light weapons. Our collaboration with national
commissions and civil society organizations is as
strategic as it is vital.

The successful disarmament, demobilization,
resettlement and reintegration (DDRR) processes in
Liberia and Cote d'Ivoire will be critical in addressing
the daunting task of the proliferation of small arms and
light weapons in West Africa. We are aware that the
failed DDRR process in Liberia in 1997 paved the way
for the cycle of violence that subsequently unfolded,
leading to the second phase of the Liberian civil war.
The suggestion that the DDRR programmes in the
Mano River Union countries, including Cote d'Ivoire,
should be tackled and coordinated regionally ought to
be given greater consideration. Collaboration and
coordinated action among UNAMSIL, the United
Nations Mission in Liberia, the United Nations Mission
in Cote d'Ivoire, the United Nations Office for West
Africa and ECOWAS could be a great asset in the
endeavour to rid the Mano River basin of illicit arms,
mercenaries, trans-frontier drug and diamond traffickers
and armed marauders.

We want to see DDRR programmes go beyond
the local perception of the purchase of arms from
combatants to include the effective reintegration of ex-
combatants and their victims. The affected
communities must benefit from the process. It will not
suffice to limit our efforts on the DDRR processes; we
must begin to ask ourselves what it is that has pushed
young people to take up arms against constituted
authority, and we must work to eliminate the causes. I
am referring to the issue of youth unemployment in
failed States. In post-conflict reconstruction efforts,
priority must be given to retraining, to providing young
people with practical, technical skills, to supporting the
private sector as it seeks to regenerate its activities and
to make available micro-finance for self-employment
in agriculture, the trades and cottage industries. In the
same vein, capacity-building for economic
management and income-generating activities need to
be promoted.
Of no less importance are the problems of
extortion at roadblocks within and between States
members of ECOWAS; child trafficking for domestic
and plantation labour, as well as human trafficking for
commercial sex purposes; the HIV/AIDS pandemic that
is ravaging our communities and workforce; and the
dire need for reforms in the security sector. We cannot
adequately confront these ills without adequate
collaboration with civil society.

Interestingly, there are clear indications that West
African civil society is mobilizing and self-organizing.
ECOWAS has provided a space for civil society
mobilization and collaboration. The first-ever civil
society forum of all West African countries was held
on the eve of the annual summit of heads of State and
Government last December in Accra. ECOWAS is
willing to pay greater attention to the recommendations
of that particular historic forum. As structures and
frameworks for civil society participation in human
security issues are being set up at the national and
subregional levels, ECOWAS has moved ahead to
create a civil society focal point at the secretariat to
accommodate and facilitate the budding endeavours
and partnerships.

Civil society could play a great role in the drive
towards effective implementation of policy decisions,
conventions and grass-roots awareness-raising and
sensitization. There is no doubt that the "naming and
shaming" dissuasive strategy can best be performed
with the help of members of civil society who are
endowed with track-two diplomacy skills and
experience and are often recognized for their usually
frank and undiplomatic style.

To attain our common objectives, ECOWAS
looks forward to working closely with the international
community and, in particular, with the United Nations.
Indeed, the ECOWAS secretariat will work closely
with the United Nations Office for West Africa in order
to draw up a work programme that will include, among
other things, the questions of armed groups,
democracy, good governance and civil/military
relations, and that will contribute to the promotion of
lasting peace in West Africa.

I thank the Security Council once again for
devoting this special meeting to West Africa. ECOWAS
would support initiatives aimed at ridding our
subregion of illicit small arms, mercenaries and the
practice of child-soldiering and other related trans-
frontier vices and crime. I call on all of us to seize this
opportunity of renewed attention within the
international community, especially the United
Nations, to devise and implement concrete and
sustainable strategies to curb the daunting cross-border
problems in West Africa by establishing confidence-
building measures, especially in the Mano River Union
conflict system.

I look forward to fruitful, interactive and
deepening cooperation with the United Nations on
these pertinent issues of peace, security and
development in West Africa, and once again I wish
you, Sir, a successful tenure as President of the
Security Council.

