Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Haiti, Ambassador Sandra
Honore, for her briefing on the report of the Secretary-
General on the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (S/2014/162). I would also like to recognize her
work, her efforts and the results she is achieving as
she contributes to strengthening dialogue and, through
dialogue, Haiti's institutions.

I would like to welcome the presence of the
Permanent Representative of Haiti and his active
delegation. We would also like to acknowledge the work
of Lieutenant General Pujol as the head of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
and welcome Lieutenant General Jose Luiz J aborandy.
We would also like to thank General Guerrero for his
performance as Deputy Force Commander for the
Mission over the recent years.
On 14 March, we saw the conclusion of a historic
agreement in Haiti that could have a significant
impact on the institutional stability of Haiti and the
strengthening of democracy. It was an agreement
that was reached between Haitian men and women
and coordinated by the women and men of Haiti. We
welcome the expression of political will for the holding
of legislative, municipal and local elections in 2014.
We trust that MINUSTAH will provide the necessary
support for the elections to be held this year, and that the
holding of those elections will take place in a context
of safety and security and be free, fair and transparent.

We also note the progress of recent months in
the area of human rights. In that regard, we wish to
underscore the decision of the Port-au-Prince Court
of Appeal ordering investigations into charges of
crimes against humanity committed during Duvalier's
presidency. We understand that this is an important
step forward on the path towards justice, truth and
reparation for the victims. We are also encouraged
by the international accreditation on 4 December
2013 of the Haitian Office of the Ombudsperson as a
national human rights institution by the International
Coordinating Committee of National Institutions for
the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights, as
well as the coming into force of the interministerial
commission on human rights.

At the same time, we understand that Haiti
continues to face major challenges in that area. In
particular, we are concerned by the situation in the area
of sexual violence, violence against women and gender-
based violence, and the response of the judiciary and
the police to those cases. It is a fundamental issue in the
context of the training of the Haitian National Police,
among other institutions. We hope that the international
community will continue to support Haiti in building
the necessary capacity to ensure the appropriate
investigation of all cases and the necessary assistance
and follow-up for the victims.

We also wish to underscore that this is not a new
situation. Sexual violence, gender-based violence and
violence against women are not new or exclusive to
Haiti, but they also exist in Haiti. It is therefore a shared
challenge to train the people who are in or will become
part of the police force, as well as those in the justice
system and the prison system. All public institutions
must maintain a comprehensive and holistic View
that incorporates a focus on human rights and gender
equality. To that end, the democratic stabilization and
sustainable human development must prioritize the
economic, social, cultural and political independence
of women and youth - an institutional cultural change
that is needed in order to eradicate all forms ofviolence,
not only in Haiti, but in Haiti as well.

I would also like to underscore the progress made on
the humanitarian front as 90 per cent of the population
displaced by the earthquake of 2010 had left the camps
by late 2013 as a result of the return and relocation
programmes. Despite that, although we recognize that
the incidence of cholera has been reduced in the past
year, we are concerned that Haiti has the highest number
of cholera cases in the world. We call on the United
Nations and the international community to continue
supporting the Government of Haiti in its fight against
the epidemic.

The Secretary-General's report recognizes that
MINUSTAH has continued to assist the Haitian
Government in ensuring a secure and stable
environment, in addition to enabling the delivery of
humanitarian assistance and preparing for disaster
response, supporting the Haitian National Police and
conducting the tasks that the Council has entrusted it
with. The Secretary-General also highlights that work
has continued to be done with the Government of Haiti
to advance progress towards the four jointly agreed
stabilization benchmarks outlined in the Mission's
conditions-based consolidation plan.

We are therefore grateful to the Secretary-General
for his presentation of a series of options for the United
Nations presence in Haiti as elements for the discussion
on the future of the Mission, depending on conditions
on the ground. We understand that it is important to
consolidate the progress made in terms of security and
stability and to avoid jeopardizing those achievements
with hasty decisions that might be based solely on
budgetary considerations. In our region of Latin
America and the Caribbean, we know that when the
possibility of progress is considered from the viewpoint
of adjustments, we do not need to make adjustments;
rather, we need to consolidate and continue to make
progress in strengthening the institutions and the
political and security context in Haiti.

In conclusion, we are convinced that the future
presence of the United Nations in Haiti must be based
on a detailed assessment of the Mission's capacity and
should be carefully planned after we have analysed

the impact on the ground of any potential decision.
We understand that any future debate on the Mission
should enjoy the full participation of the Government,
as it is essential to take into account the position of any
country in which the United Nations is carrying out its
activities.
With regard to popular demonstrations, we are
seeing those throughout the world - in developed
countries, in emerging countries, in countries in
crisis, and in countries with stable institutions. These
demonstrations are calling for economic and social
rights and the right to education, so they do not have a
special significance in Haiti. But what should be taken
into account in Haiti is that legitimate demonstrations
in which citizens call for the exercise of their rights
must take place in a safe environment and settled
democratically, and that the institutions of the rule of
law must be respected.

When I was a national senator in 2005, after the
Security Council adopted resolution 1542 (2004)
establishing MINUSTAH, I accompanied our first
troop contingent to Port-au-Prince and Gona'i'ves.
Clearly, progress has been made by the people of Haiti
and MINUSTAH, and it should be recognized. It was a
major challenge for the region. A peace force went to
work in cooperation and solidarity with the people of
Haiti. It was a group formed in solidarity by the peoples
ofthe region. I believe that is one ofthe lessons learned.
Not everything has been resolved. The strategy of the
Mission was not to remain there forever, however. The
shared plan was to go to help to stabilize the country
and gradually withdraw, but also not prematurely.

The earthquake and the health problems have
without a doubt created difficulties for the Mission.
However, we Latin Americans and Caribbeans share
with the Haitian people two major passions: soccer
and democracy. Haiti was the first democracy in
Latin America. With that passion for football and for
democracy, I am sure that the United Nations and the
Council will, when the time is right, neither remain
forever nor withdraw too early but do so gradually,
thereby showing that it is possible for a United Nations
mission, working with the people and the Government
of the country in question, to achieve its goals:
democracy, human rights, security and peace - if it
also achieves equality, all the better.

