Ms. Sunday: I thank you, Mr. President, for inviting
us, representatives of the civil society of South Sudan,
to brief the Security Council on the current situation
in our country. It is important for those here to hear
directly from civil society in South Sudan, including
women's organizations, on the security threat that we
are facing and our recommendations for durable peace.

Today, I represent the Women's Monthly Forum,
which was founded in 2014. Women from all walks of
life come together to push for inclusion in the peace
processes and to coordinate our voices with that of the
negotiator during the peace negotiations in Addis Ababa.
Since then, we have continued to advocate for women's
inclusion in the implementation and monitoring of
the peace agreement. The security threats for South
Sudanese women continue to be extremely dangerous.
We cannot move freely to fetch water or get food owing
to the repeated incidents of rape and other human rights
violations. That is happening throughout the country,
including in the camps for the protection of civilians.
Women also continue to face challenges in their efforts
to be heard, even in Government institutions.

If the peace agreement were implemented, women
could go about their life without fear. Their children
could go to school, and they could collect food and
tend their gardens. The peace agreement cannot be
allowed to die. It is a very important document for
the South Sudanese. We have fought hard for it, and
now we want it to come to life. It contains provisions
that will enable women to play a role in determining
the peaceful future of the country. The political will
for the implementation of the peace agreement needs
to come from all sides within South Sudan, as well
as from the international community, including the
Security Council. South Sudan cannot do it alone. We,
civil society, need solution-oriented meetings, because
we have seen numerous meetings that end with the
adoption of position papers that are not action-oriented.
We urge the Council and the Government to cooperate
in seeking a peaceful and lasting solution to the political
crisis in our country.

We are here in the meeting today to urge the
Council to decide on action on the following key issues.
The first is the implementation of the Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan. The peace agreement offers great opportunities
for our political transformation, but the challenge is
that the parties to the agreement face issues of political
will and good faith, because they focus too much on
power-sharing. Secondly, thanks to the work of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, the Council is aware of
the incidences of sexual and gender-based violence in
South Sudan. We urge the Council and the Government
to cooperate to actualize the joint communique signed
by the President and the United Nations.

Thirdly, the current humanitarian situation,

including the famine in some parts of the country that
has been declared by the Government, is disturbing.
We therefore urge the Council to provide humanitarian
support to those in need with all possible speed, and we
urge our Government to provide the necessary support
for facilitating humanitarian access and protecting
humanitarian workers and property. Fourthly, the
announcement of a national dialogue by the President
of the Republic of South Sudan is a public call for full
participation by all citizens in the quest for a lasting
political solution to our country's political challenges.
We urge that the dialogue be inclusive and facilitated by
a reliable ceasefire that can ensure a secure environment
in which all citizens can participate safely.
Fifthly, as a member of the United Nations,
South Sudan has an obligation to fulfil its duties
and responsibilities under the Charter of the United
Nations. We are aware that the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS) is approaching the renewal
of its mandate. We ask that the new UNMISS mandate
enable it to provide capacity support to the Government
of South Sudan for human rights protection and the rule
oflaw, for compliance with resolutions 1325 (2000) and
1820 (2008) and for the professionalization of policing
services. Sixthly, we are pleased that the United Nations,
the African Union (AU) and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) have committed to
coordinating efforts to seek a political solution to the
challenges our country faces. We urge the Council to
partner with our Government with the aim of making
a reality of the stipulations in the AU-United Nations-
IGAD joint communique of 29 January.

We urge the Council to be proactive in engaging
the Government of South Sudan so as to realieze the
political expectations contained in the Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan, and we urge the conflicting partiesn to commit
to abiding by the decisions of the Council.

