Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like first of all, Mr. President, to congratulate you
on Guatemala's assumption of the presidency of the
Council for this month and to thank you for organizing
today's debate.

We hope that our deliberations today will achieve
the desired results by diagnosing and treating the root
causes of conflict, which in many instances leaves
behind civilian casualties and violates the rights of the
most vulnerable segments of society, especially women
and children. War is war, and wherever there is fighting
and use of arms, there will be casualties and violations
of human rights. Therefore, it is always best for the
Security Council to pay utmost attention to the root
causes of conflict and to work to address them.

As stated in Guatemala's concept paper (S/2012/731, annex), the Security Council and the International
Criminal Court have their own mandates, completely
independent of each other. Therefore, attempts to
confuse the two mandates have no logical basis. The
International Criminal Court is a judicial organ and its
constitutional framework is the Rome Statute, whereas
the Council is a political organ and its framework is
the United Nations Charter, which tasks the Council
with responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. In other words, the Security Council
is contrary to the International Criminal Court.

Therefore, promoting the rule of law within the
framework of the maintenance of international peace
and security must not be used as a pretext to politicize
international justice in a way that contravenes the
mandate of the Security Council as set out in the
Charter. That point has already been made repeatedly,
including at the founding Rome Conference. I refer
specifically to the statement made by the Arab Group. I
also want to draw attention to the fact that creating new
international laws and making them binding, without
giving the third party the right to adopt a national,
sovereign decision and position, is unacceptable and
contravenes the rules of international law, especially
the 1969 Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties.
Peace is the most transcendent value of justice.
Therefore the inseparability of peace and justice must
be taken into consideration when setting priorities.
For instance, peace should first be established on
the ground and then national machinery should be
mobilized to achieve justice and combat impunity,
provided that there is a parallel and complementary
effort at reconciliation, compensation and mending the
social fabric in post-conflict States. Perhaps the truth
and reconciliation commissions of South Africa are
the best example of how to overcome the bitterness of
struggle, conflict and fighting through reconciliation
and settlement committees in in a way that allows
different communities to regain the spirit of peaceful
coexistence.

The Sudan has managed to turn over a new leaf
after the Darfur conflict. Since the signing of the Doha
Peace Agreement, now in effect, the Sudan has made
great progress in achieving justice, settlement and
reconciliation. With the same determination that led us
to sign that Agreement, we will continue on our path
towards settlement and justice. What we expect of the
Council is for it to assume its natural role, which is to
support those efforts and to adopt the necessary firm
measures against the armed groups that have refused
to join the Doha peace process and that occasionally
launch attacks and carry out acts of sabotage in order
to create the illusion in the international community
that the conflict persists. It is the duty of the Security
Council to maintain peace and security and to promote
the rule and primacy of law. There is therefore a need
to respect the pillars and principles of international law,
especially as regards the sovereignty of States and the
principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of
States.

Many issues pertaining to the ICC's mandate and
application of the rules of its Statute, especially with
regard to its relationship with the Security Council,
remain the subject of international legal and political
contention, as was reiterated by many speakers during
today's debate.

In closing, I cannot fail to commend those members
of the Council who spoke today and warned of the
Security Council's haste in using its privileges under
Chapter VII in terms of its relationship with the ICC,
especially when security is related to issues of justice
and peace in post-conflict situations, and stressed also
the need to take into consideration the fact that peace
and justice are indissociable.

