Mr. Djani (Indonesia): We would like to thank
Mr. Karim Asad Ahmad Khan, Special Adviser and
Head of the United Nations Investigative Team to
Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, for his
briefing today, as well as his engagement with us
during our mission to Baghdad last month. I think we
learned a great deal from that mission. We commend
the efforts of the Investigative Team, as mandated by
resolution 2379 (2017), as an important first step in
fighting impunity and holding those responsible for the
atrocities carried out by the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant to account. We commend the work of the
Team and hope that it continues to perform consistently
within the mandate and framework agreed upon by
the Council.

Accountability is critical to delivering on the
Council's aims of reconciliation and sustaining peace.
Following the discussions in Baghdad last month, I
would like to make three points.

First, the Victory over the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant was the result of the commitment and
resilience of the Iraqi Government and people. Yet, in
some ways, that Victory is only the beginning of a long
road ahead. The hard work of healing the wounds left on
Iraqi society has just begun. The Iraqi Government and
people must now turn their attention to reconciliation
and to building an Iraqi State that represents all Iraqis.
Protecting and supporting survivors should be at the
centre of its work, as well as the importance of ensuring
evidence-based and witness-based investigation. Of
course, that will take political courage and cooperation.
We, the Council, must again stand with the Iraqi people
in that critical phase and not let crimes against humanity
happen again in the future.

Secondly, States have the primary responsibility
to protect all communities within their borders from
mass atrocity crimes. Indonesia continues to hold the
View that the primary jurisdiction for holding those
responsible for the atrocities committed within Iraqi
borders must lie with the Iraqi national authorities.
Therefore, we urge the Investigative Team to operate
in full respect for the sovereignty of Iraq and its
jurisdiction over crimes committed in its territory.
Fighting impunity is an urgent and imperative matter,
but we need to be fully aware that it must also respect
the principle of the sovereign equality and territorial
integrity of States. In that regard, I believe that the
international community should continue to support
Iraq in order to strengthen its judicial system and law
enforcement capabilities. That is a very crucial point.

Thirdly, cooperation and collaboration with all
relevant stakeholders are crucial. We believe that the
ability of the Investigative Team to successfully fulfil
its mandate will depend also on its ability to maintain
the trust and support not only of the Government of Iraq
but also of the people of Iraq, including relevant civil
society organizations and local community leaders.

Reflecting on that principle, we fully support the
efforts of the Investigative Team to engage and develop
relations with a broad range of religious community
groups, as reflected in the report (see S/2019/407).

We would further like the Team to engage Iraqi
national professional personnel. I also concur with the
point raised by my colleague from cote d'Ivoire on
including women in that regard, because, at the end of
the day, they are among those who are severely affected.
Moreover, there is a need to cooperate with the United
Nations on the ground. Such coordination has always
been the most important aspect.

Lastly, as the Team has now been able to begin
the collection of evidentiary material, a crucial phase
of its activities, allow me to close by once again
offering Indonesia's support for the work of the Team
and expressing our hope that the noble intentions of
UNITAD will contribute to healing the wounds of the
many survivors and to healing the pain of the past.

