Mr. Verbeke (Belgium) (spoke in French):
Belgium welcomes the organization of today's open
debate. We welcome, Mr. President, your country's
contribution to the efforts of the international
community in that area. Belgium supports the
statement to be made shortly by our colleague from
Germany on behalf of the European Union.

After the adoption of the fifth programme of
work by the 1540 Committee, today's debate will
enable us to take stock of one of the principal elements
of the fight against the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction: the need to enhance cooperation and
optimize coordination among the various international
organizations that are active in this area. Indeed, the
action of international organizations in this area is an
extension of the obligation of each of our States to
establish effective export control mechanisms to
prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction.

Resolution 1540 (2004) was the first formal
Security Council decision that described proliferation
as a threat to international peace and security. While
the resolution reaffirmed support for existing
multilateral instruments, it also established new
obligations addressing nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons and their means of delivery and, in particular,
covering non-State actors.

While numerous States have submitted their
national reports on the implementation of the
resolution to the 1540 Committee, many others have
not yet reached that point. Moreover, the submission of
a report does not automatically mean that all
obligations under the resolution have been fulfilled.
The resolution has launched a process. Its
implementation is a long-term task and will required
sustained effort.

Belgium is determined to provide its support to
those countries facing difficulties in establishing the
necessary administrative and legislative arsenals for
the implementation of the resolution. Like many
others, Belgium has worked with the various
international organizations of which it is a member to
ensure convergence among the actions of those
organizations by drawing on the respective lessons
learned, which would seem to be a clear necessity.
Ensuring that optimal use is made of the specific skills
of each organization remains a challenge that we must
continuously and repeatedly seek to meet.

The European Union's strategy against the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction stresses
the collective responsibility of States to combat
proliferation. The European Union has taken numerous
steps to encourage the submission of national reports,
holds regional seminars on the implementation of the
resolution, and supports the International Atomic
Energy Agency's assistance and cooperation
programmes and various projects to implement the
Chemical and Biological Weapons Conventions.

Finally, Belgium also wishes to recall the utility
of building bridges between the various export control
regimes whose expertise, experience and know-how
can be useful. While the autonomy of each instrument
must be respected, mutual reinforcement among the
various conventions and regimes could expedite
progress towards establishing effective national legal
systems.

