Ms. Sydnes (Norway): It is a pleasure to see you,
Mr. Foreign Minister, presiding over this important
meeting. I would also like to join in the tribute to
Ambassador Holbrooke. Norway greatly appreciates
the dedication of Ambassador Holbrooke on the
HIV/AIDS issue and other crucial issues. His eloquent
farewell speech in this Council is a testimony to his
important efforts as Ambassador to the United Nations.
Of course, I wish him all the best in his future career.

AIDS is a global problem, but Africa has been hit
the hardest. One year ago, AIDS was featured on the
agenda of the Security Council for the first time. That
represented a crucial recognition of the importance of
the HIV/AIDS epidemic for peace and security, in
particular in Africa. Refocusing on this issue today, we
demonstrate our common commitment to address AIDS
as a common security issue - a threat against
humanity. As Minister of International Development, I
am particularly pleased to address the Security Council
on this important issue. In doing so, I commend
Ambassador Holbrooke for his vision and leadership.

At the African Development Forum in Addis
Ababa in December, African political leaders
recommended that the HIV/AIDS pandemic be met
with the same vigour and the same mobilization of
human and financial resources as is the case when there
is a military threat to peace and stability. We echo this
urgency and applaud this commitment.

In Africa, the AIDS pandemic is more devastating
than war. AIDS kills 10 times more people than
conflict. In a growing number of countries, AIDS is
truly a matter of national security. Through its erosion
of human capital, AIDS has a serious destabilizing
impact. Just imagine what a high percentage of
orphaned children does to the long-term stability of a
society.

AIDS destroys the social fabric of society. Social
turmoil is fertile ground for conflict. Conflict breeds
civil strife and war, and armed conflicts in turn
accelerate the spread of AIDS. War and AIDS -
together they threaten to undo decades of economic and
social progress in many developing countries. We must
break this vicious circle.

I would like to thank Peter Piot and Jean-Marie
Guehenno for their excellent reports on the action
taken on this issue by the United Nations system over
the past year, in particular with regard to follow-up of
Security Council resolution 1308 (2000). Norway
welcomes the cooperation framework agreement signed
this morning between the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations on HIV/AIDS
prevention and care in peacekeeping operations.
Developing the capacity of peacekeepers to become
advocates and actors for the awareness and prevention
of HIV transmission is an important task.

We need a comprehensive strategy on how to
address responsible sexual behaviour and HIV/AIDS in
peacekeeping operations. Personnel should adhere to
the code of conduct for peacekeepers, but other strong
preventive measures are also required.

Testing is no panacea. Still, testing can help
reduce the risk of HIV transmission. We recommend
that all United Nations peacekeeping personnel be
offered voluntary and confidential counseling and
testing, both pre- and post-deployment. This is already
established practice in Norway. The counseling must be
detailed, frank and adapted to local circumstances and
sensitivities.

Every peacekeeping operation should have a focal
point for HIV/AIDS. Resident coordinators must
ensure that United Nations dispensary staff receive
regular training on all aspects of HIV/AIDS
prevention, overseen by designated staff members.
Male and female condoms should be freely available
on all United Nations premises.

The arrival of peacekeeping troops and staff may
also increase the danger of sexual exploitation and sex
trade. Young girls, with limited means of protecting
themselves against sexual abuse and sexually
transmitted diseases, are particularly vulnerable.
Peacekeeping operations should contribute to the
protection of the civilian population against conflict-
driven human rights abuses, including sexual violence.
The point is general and should be stressed. We
must focus not only on the risks associated with
peacekeeping operations, but also on the positive
potential of the peacekeepers. Provided they receive
appropriate training, peacekeeping personnel can
become important agents for change in local
communities.

HIV infection rates among military personnel are
often much higher than among the civilian population.
This must also be kept in mind in post-conflict
situations, when soldiers return to their communities. If
not, we risk seeing a further acceleration in the spread
of HIV/AIDS.

The World Bank-supported demobilization
programmes under way in Ethiopia and Eritrea must
give high priority to measures to reduce this risk.
Soldiers now being demobilized must, in a sense, be
remobilized for a different battle - the battle against
HIV/AIDS.

Through a number of initiatives taken to ensure
United Nations system-wide follow-up of resolution
1308 (2000), UNAIDS has demonstrated vigour and
leadership. UNAIDS has been charged with drawing up
a comprehensive plan of action on how to address
HIV/AIDS in conflict situations. Norway has decided
to grant 10 million Norwegian kroner - approximately
$1.2 million - in support of UNAIDS' activities in
this field, on top of our regular contribution to
UNAIDS. The grant is part of an overall doubling of
the resources we have earmarked for multilateral
HIV/AIDS activities within our budget for 2001-
from approximately $7.5 million to $15 million.

We fully realize that money is not enough. We
also need strong leadership and commitment. We must
find new and more effective ways to work together. We
must empower women and girls to make them less
vulnerable. We must involve men more actively to turn
the tide of the epidemic. We must promote individual
responsibility, and we must build broad alliances. The
Security Council - as in other matters of collective
security - should help guide the way.

The battle against AIDS is part of the battle
against poverty. It is a battle for education, for
information, for health systems development. It is a
battle for prevention, for care, for access to affordable
drugs, for vaccine development. The battle must be
joined on every front if we are to succeed.

A few months back, I met with Organization of
African Unity (OAU) Secretary General Salim A.
Salim in Addis Ababa. He described the fight against
AIDS in three words: "This is war". I could not agree
more.

