Mr. Djani (Indonesia): I would like to begin by
thanking Equatorial Guinea for convening this very
important meeting. I would also like to thank Ms. Ursula
Mueller, Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator of
the Office for the Coordination ofHumanitarian Affairs;
Ambassador Mr. Ertugrul Apakan, Chief Monitor
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine;
Ambassador Martin Sajdik, Special Representative
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe Chairperson-in-Office in Ukraine; as well as
Mr. Miroslav Jenca from the Department of Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs and the Department of Peace
Operations for their statements. All of the briefers have
provided us with a picture of the situation. For our part,
I would like to highlight the following points.

First, Indonesia reaffirms its principle and
consistent position that respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States, including the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Ukraine, is a fundamental
principle of relations among nations.

Secondly, Indonesia calls upon the conflicting
parties to fully adhere to and implement the Minsk
agreements in line with the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations. Doing so could
provide a crucial boost of confidence that ultimately
paves the way for a sustained political solution and
the restoration of peace and stability in the affected
areas. Furthermore, the faithful implementation of
the Minsk agreements is also vital to ensuring safe
access to and the delivery, storage and distribution of
humanitarian assistance to those in need, on the basis
of an international mechanism. While underlining the
imperative for sustained peaceful actions, Indonesia
encourages the withdrawal of all heavy weapons by the
States concerned by equal distances in order to create
a security zone. We take note of the work undertaken
by the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) and the Trilateral Contact Group in the
implementation of the agreements. We also encourage
the assurance of effective monitoring and verification
by the OSCE for the ceasefire regime and the withdrawal
of heavy weapons.

Thirdly, Indonesia reiterates its call on all the parties
concerned to exercise the utmost restraint, manage the
crisis responsibly, promote a peaceful settlement and
consistently uphold respect for international law. We
stress the importance of dialogue and diplomacy among
the States concerned to resolve the ongoing problems.
In doing so, Indonesia encourages the States concerned
to take the necessary measures to de-escalate tensions.
We are against any actions that exacerbate hostilities
and deteriorate the already fragile situation on the
ground. We might come from afar and from a different
geographical region, but we believe sincerely in
the value of dialogue and the need to settle disputes
amicably. Therefore, Indonesia further calls on the
Security Council to fully shoulder its responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security, in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.

For its part, Indonesia will fully support all
constructive efforts that are aimed at resolving the
conflict in Ukraine peacefully, in accordance with
international law and Charter principles.

Let me also end by reiterating that full respect for
non-interference in and the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of States are fundamental principles of
relations among nations and that each State Member of
the United Nations must abide by them, be it on this
issue or on others on the agenda of the Security Council.

