Ms. Tachco (United States of America): I very
much thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his
briefing. I welcome Foreign Minister Coulibaly.

(spoke in French)
It is a pleasure to see him here again in New York.
(spoke in English)

We are gravely concerned about the continued
deterioration of the security situation and the
corresponding worsening of the humanitarian situation
in Mali. We are alarmed about the fact that over the past
six months, nine peacekeepers and seven contractors
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) have
been killed and 36 peacekeepers injured. The ongoing
attacks against MINUSMA across central and northern
Mali present a serious challenge to the meaningful
implementation of MINUSMA's mandate. The number
of casualties, coupled with the limited progress on the
ground, highlight the need to think carefully about
what we ask of MINUSMA.

The strategic review that the Under-Secretary-
General briefed us on has provided an opening for
a difficult conversation. Looking at the Council's
observations over time and the helpful and specific
recommendations provided by the review team, it is
time to take action. This month, it is incumbent on the
Council to contemplate how we can enable MINUSMA
to support a more secure Mali and ensure that it makes
substantive progress towards the implementation of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali.

First, we look towards July, when we expect free,
fair, credible and transparent elections, with the full
and meaningful participation of women. Successful
elections will be essential to securing the gains that Mali
has achieved so far. Establishing a meaningful dialogue
among the Government, the political opposition and
civil society, and ensuring that the political space
is open for peaceful demonstration are important to
ensuring that all parties see the elections as credible.
We urge all stakeholders to resolve any disputes through
established mechanisms, in accordance with the law.
We express our sincere appreciation to the Prime
Minister and leadership of the signatory armed groups
for their efforts over the past few months to find common
ground and build momentum towards implementation
of the peace agreement. But all of the parties have
wasted far too much time over the past three years,
during which little progress has been made. We share
the Secretary-General's concern that there has not been
enough meaningful progress on the implementation of
the peace agreement, and we agree that MINUSMA
should focus more of its efforts and limited resources
on the political process. The Council should use all
available means to bring a sense of urgency to the
process and encourage quick progress in uniting the
Malian people around a common project. If we do not
see progress, then we should seriously consider how
long we can sustain the Mission without the serious and
active partnership of the parties.

MINUSMA operates in an incredibly challenging
security environment, with few resources available
to focus on initiatives beyond the protection of the
Mission itself. Given that reality, it is time to streamline
the mandate to increase support to political engagement
and scale down the Mission's focus on less critical
activities. Such streamlining will necessitate tough
choices as we seek to eliminate, refine or sequence
mandated tasks that are either not directly supporting
the political process or have stalled altogether.

We, like others, are also worried about growing
instability in central Mali, and we support the review's
recommendation that some reconfiguration of the force
in the north is necessary. The consolidation of bases
could reduce troop exposure and free MINUSMA
resources to complete tasks beyond force protection.
Such an undertaking ought to be conducted at the
discretion of the Mission leadership, with the safety of
the Mission and its personnel in mind.

We also share the assessment that failure to
contain the crisis in the central region could have a
significantly detrimental impact on the stabilization
and social cohesion of the country, risking a reversal
of the small gains realized so far. We want to see
MINUSMA prioritize the expansion of the force's
footprint and its community engagement in central
Mali to better address protection-of-civilian concerns.
The strategic review also raises the concern that we
share about the parameters of service provision to
non-United Nations entities. The report (S/2018/541)
rightly points out that support to non-United Nations
entities risks jeopardizing the Mission's impartiality
and its legitimacy in the political space.

Finally, the United States applauds the United
Nations for its continued attention to human rights
incidents, especially the investigations into numerous
and credible allegations of violations and abuses
of human rights and violations of international
humanitarian law. We would like to echo the concerns
regarding the Malian security forces, and we urge the
Government of Mali to swiftly investigate allegations
of human rights violations by its forces and hold
accountable those responsible. For Mali's peace
process to succeed and its population to unite around its
Government, the people must not fear the very security
forces that are sent to protect them.

As elections approach, Mali is at yet another
crossroads. We in the Council are united in our support
of Mali and in our desire to see the country's leaders
come together to make peace, govern the entire country
and ensure the Malian people's well-being, safety
and opportunity.

