Mr. Gombo (Chad) (spoke in French): I, too,
should like to thank the Chairman of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006),
Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi, for presenting the
quarterly report on the Committee's activities from
23 June to 14 September.

With respect to the settlement of the Iranian nuclear
issue, Chad notes the statement of support issued by
the European Union Foreign Affairs Council on 20 July
for the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, adopted
in Vienna on 14 July, and the adoption of resolution
2231 (2015). We also note the vote that took place in
the United States Senate on 10 September, endorsing
the Plan. We take note of the statement made by the
President of the United States that the vote represented
a victory for diplomacy. Moreover, Chad notes that
the Iranian Parliament has established a lS-member
committee to review the agreement and take a position
on it by the end of the month. Chad encourages all
parties to fully implement the Plan once all national
procedures have concluded.

We reiterate that, pursuant to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Iran has the
right, in accordance with paragraphs 1 and 2 of article
IV of the Treaty, to develop research, production and
use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes.

The agreement on the Iran nuclear issue
demonstrates that, when the international community
is determined to resolve a crisis, it can do so. Chad
reiterates its appreciation for the diplomatic efforts of
Germany, the five permanent members of the Security
Council, the High Representative of the European
Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy and the
Islamic Republic of Iran.

On the basis of the lessons learned in this matter,
Chad encourages all States, including the permanent
members of the Security Council, to urgently resolve
the issue of non-proliferation in the rest of the Middle
East. In that respect, it would be helpful to request the
States of the region that are rushing headlong into a
race for weapons of mass destruction or that already
possess such weapons, to cease such activities and to
establish a zone free of weapons of mass destruction in
the Middle East.

I turn now to the activities of the 1737 Committee.
Chad encourages Committee members to continue
to assist States and international organizations in the
implementation of measures called for by the Security
Council. We welcome the appointment by the Secretary-
General on 30 June of seven experts with a mandate
through July 2016, pursuant to resolution 2224 (2015).
We note the programme of work submitted by the Panel
of Experts on 28 August.

In conclusion, in the light of rising instability in
the region, which is exacerbated by the terrorist threat,
we underline the need for concerted efforts, including
on the part of Iran, to settle the various regional crises.

