Mr. Gonzalez de Linares Palou (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): Spain welcomes the adoption of resolution
2304 (2016) and warmly thanks the United States for
its efforts towards its adoption. The Security Council
has reacted swiftly to the clear and unambiguous call
from the region and addressed the serious concern of
the international community over the grave situation
in South Sudan by renewing its firm commitment to
peace, stability and the protection of civilians in that
country. We have done what is expected of us. We have
fulfilled our responsibility.

The resolution is not perfect. Spain believes that
we have squandered a good opportunity to establish
an immediate and unconditional arms embargo. We
truly do not understand the reasons not to do so; in any
case, no one has explained these reasons to us. Perhaps
they cannot be mentioned in public or private, but
what is certain is that the situation on the ground and
peace and security concerns have long necessitated an
arms embargo.

Even though the resolution is not the one we would
have desired, it does meets the minimum needs and,
given the urgency of the situation, we have supported it
unequivocally. These were not the right circumstances
for approving a more ambitious resolution, as any delay
in its adoption would have been unacceptable. When
a country is plunged in violence and instability, as is
South Sudan, our responsibility is to act with a sense of
urgency, especially when the regional actors, both the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
and the African Union, are unambiguously calling on
us to do so. We cannot err on the side of omission;
inaction is simply not an option.

Now, the Council, the African Union and IGAD must
maintain their unity of intention and action in order to
effectively and quickly deploy the regional protection
force. We trust that the Transitional Government
of National Unity will take note of the unswerving
commitment of the international community and the
region to the security of the people of South Sudan, set
aside its obstructive attitude and fully cooperate with
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan, the United
Nations, IGAD and the African Union. It is the primary
responsibility of the Government of South Sudan
to protect its own people. With this resolution, the
Security Council and the region are offering the help
and support that the people of South Sudan so urgently
need. It is an opportunity that the Government of South
Sudan cannot and must not pass up.

