Mr. Duale (Somalia): First and foremost,
Mr. President, I have the honour to reiterate to you my
Prime Minister's congratulations, which he expressed
in his statement at the Security Council's meeting on
Somalia on Wednesday 14 September (see S/PV.6614).

While I thank the Security Council for having
unanimously adopted resolution 2010 (2011), I must
say a few words, as we still have some concerns.

In a recent report on Somalia (S/2011/277), in the
letter contained in document S/2011/59l and in his
30 August report (S/201l/549), the Secretary-General
expresses concern about the critical gaps that remain in
the United Nations support package for the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), which continue
to adversely impact the Mission's effectiveness.

As most members of the Security Council are
aware, the Somali security forces are overextended at
present and contained to Mogadishu. It is therefore of
the utmost urgency to enlarge and improve the
capabilities of the Somali armed forces and police.
Furthermore, as the Secretary-General has also stated,
in order to consolidate and build on recent security
gains it is essential to also enlarge AMISOM. forces.
There is positive reference to that need in resolution
2010 (2011).

My Government also fully endorses and supports
the request made by the African Union Peace and
Security Council in its 13 September communique. I
very much wish that the Security Council, in the
resolution adopted today, had taken due consideration
of and positively act on that request.

My Prime Minister has already thanked the
Security Council for the continued generous support it
has given both to the Transitional Federal Government
and Institutions and to the AMISOM. peace support
mission, without whose assistance much of the
progress that we have made recently would not have
been possible. It is high time that the Security Council
looked into this issue once again, and that it not wait
another six months or one year.

Finally, on behalf of my Government, I wish to
pay tribute to the Governments of Burundi and Uganda
for their continued sacrifice and steadfast commitment
to the cause of peace in Somalia. We also extend our
most sincere condolences to the families of those
11-52546
valiant brothers who have lost their lives in the fight
for peace, security and stability in Somalia. I hope that
the Security Council will act in the near future on our
request.
11-52546
