Mr. Jenca: I thank Senegal for organizing this
briefing on the cooperation between the United Nations
and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC).

The holding of this meeting clearly demonstrates
that the two organizations are more than ever willing to
work together to address global and regional challenges.
The magnitude and complexity of those challenges are
simply too big for any country or organization to tackle
alone. To be successful in preventing and resolving
conflicts, we need to join forces with the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation to devise joint strategies and
draw on our comparative advantages.

In that regard, the Secretary-General has taken
note of OIC Programme of Action 2016-2025, adopted
by the Islamic Summit Conference in Istanbul in
April, and its Ten-Year Programme of Action, which
identified conflict situations as a major challenge
facing the Islamic Ummah in the twenty-first century.
The Secretary-General welcomes the communique
of the thirteenth Islamic Summit Conference and
its support for the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy and his Plan of Action to Prevent
Violent Extremism.

The United Nations has been working closely with
OIC for more than 20 years to promote a culture of
peace, tolerance and understanding. In the past years,
the United Nations, particularly through the Department
of Political Affairs, has stepped up its cooperation with
the regional organization and has engaged with it to
promote a deeper political dialogue. There is no doubt
that our cooperation has not been without challenges;
resources, capabilities and mandates vary, and our
memberships, although overlapping, are different.
The best approach to those challenges is to deepen
our strategic dialogue to forge common approaches to
emerging crises.

In that sense, cooperation between the United
Nations and OIC is reinforced through direct contact
between the secretariats of the two organizations, as
well as the specialized agencies and bodies ofthe United
Nations system and OIC. The United Nations Secretary-
General and the OIC Secretary General meet during
General Assembly sessions and on many other occasions.
The United Nations supports the OIC call to strengthen
its role in conflict prevention, confidence-building,
peacekeeping, conflict resolution and post-conflict
rehabilitation in Member States, as well as in conflict
situations involving Muslim communities.

The United Nations has taken a number of steps
to institutionalize its relationship with OIC by helping
to strengthen its capacity through mediation and
electoral assistance, and by holding desk-to-desk talks
with OIC on areas of mutual concern, such as peace
and security, economic cooperation and humanitarian
issues. The secretariats of the United Nations and the
OIC hold general cooperation meetings every two
years, as mandated by the General Assembly. Those
meetings are attended by a large number of agencies
from organizations, and set objectives and metrics
for implementing joint projects and activities. The
thirteenth General Cooperation Meeting took place in
May at the United Nations Office in Geneva.

The United Nations and OIC share common
objectives in promoting and facilitating the Middle
East peace process and the question of Palestine.
The Extraordinary OIC Summit on Palestine
and Al-Quds Al-Sharif held in Jakarta adopted a
resolution entitled "United for a Just Solution", which
reaffirmed the positions of Member States, as well
as the Jakarta declaration to pursue concrete steps in
support of Palestine and the protection of holy sites in
East Jerusalem. In addition, at the latest Security Council
open debate on the Middle East (see S/PV.7792), OIC
reiterated the need to preserve the two-State solution
and for the Council to act on the settlement.

On Yemen, the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the United
KingdomDepartmentforInternationalDevelopmentand
OIC co-chaired a high-level event on the humanitarian
situation in Yemen. The meeting generated more than
$100 million in additional funding for the 2016 Yemen
humanitarian response plan.

The United Nations appreciates OIC support for a
peace process in Afghanistan, the realization of which
is crucial to the long-term growth and stability of the
country. Despite some delays, the planned international
OIC Ulema Conference on Afghanistan is a positive step
towards constructive dialogue aimed at strengthening
the foundations of peace and national reconciliation
in Afghanistan.

In the Sudan, the partnership between the United
Nations and OIC remains an indispensable part of the
collective efforts of the international community to
bring peace, security and development to the country.
In Darfur, the core of the partnership has been OIC
support, under the leadership of Qatar, for the signing
and the implementation of the Doha Document for
Peace in Darfur. We need to continue this level of
engagement to achieve an all-inclusive peace process
that addresses the root causes of the conflict and
ensures durable solutions.

In Somalia, the United Nations and OIC maintain a
critical partnership in State-building and in promoting
comprehensive peace and security. The challenge now
is for the international community to harmonize its
support to achieve comprehensive progress towards
common objectives that include coordinated support
to the security sector, preventing violent extremism,
community recovery, and the extension of basic
services at the local level.

In Mali, OIC was a member of the international
mediation team during the 2014-2015 inter-Malian
dialogue, and remains a committed member of the
Agreement Monitoring Committee to this day. During
the electoral process in the Central African Republic
at the end of 2015, OIC played an instrumental role in
defusing tensions among rival political parties in the
country. In agreement with Chad, OIC successfully
called on the Front populaire pour la renaissance de la
Centrafrique to cease hostilities in the Central African
Republic and allow the elections to take place in areas
that were under its influence.

The United Nations appreciates OIC support for the
political dialogue process in Libya. We would welcome
a greater role of OIC in supporting the United Nations
mediation efforts in the country and in encouraging OIC
member States to use their leverage with Libyan parties
to make the compromise needed to fully implement the
Libyan Political Agreement.

OIC has played a key role in Sierra Leone's
recovery efforts since the civil war there, and more
recently in the aftermath of the Ebola outbreak. It is
worth mentioning that the last meeting of the OIC
Contact Group on Sierra Leone, which was held in New
York at the ministerial level on 19 September, focused,
inter alia, on progress made in the Ebola recovery. I
would also like to note the continued importance
of the still-active OIC Trust Fund for Sierra Leone,
which was established in 2002 to assist the process of
reconciliation and rehabilitation. The United Nations is
thankful to OIC members for their ongoing economic
cooperation with Sierra Leone, particularly in the areas
of agriculture, natural resources and energy.

The United Nations continues to collaborate and
strengthen its electoral engagement with OIC. That
involves the training of electoral staff and observers and
support towards the establishment of the database and
institutional memory of the organization. In addition,
the Electoral Assistance Division of the United Nations
Development Programme provides technical electoral
assistance to a number of OIC member States.

Let us use this valuable Security Council meeting
to reaffirm and deepen our common commitment to
promoting peace and respect for human rights and
to offer a better opportunity for all peoples of those
regions and the world.

