Mr. Moreno Fernandez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): I wish to begin by welcoming the presence at
this meeting of His Excellency Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta,
President of Timor-Leste, whom we thank for the
important statement he made this morning. We
remember the successful visit to Cuba by President
Ramos-Horta last year and in particular his statement
during the General Assembly debate on 25 September
2008 (see A/63/PV.10), when he courageously and
firmly requested the lifting of the inhumane and
criminal economic, commercial and financial blockade
which has been imposed on Cuba for over 50 years.

Although much remains to be done, Cuba
welcomes the significant progress made in the security
situation of Timor-Leste since the 2006 crisis.
Likewise, the country showed its great ability to
recover after the shock caused by the attacks of
11 February 2008. I also wish to welcome the fact that
despite the seriousness of his injuries, today President
Ramos-Horta is present among us and is well, active
and optimistic.

The people and leaders of Timor-Leste have
shown their strong will to continue the struggle to
create favourable conditions for long-term peace,
stability and development. The United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) has also
played an important role in assisting Timor-Leste in
various sectors.

Timor-Leste has stressed the need for UNMIT to
continue to maintain a strong presence in the country.
Cuba believes that the wishes and interests expressed
in that regard by the Government and the people of
Timor-Leste should be duly taken into account by the
Security Council.

In one opinion, in considering the situation in
Timor-Leste not enough emphasis has yet been placed
on the urgent attention required by the structural,
economic and social problems affecting that sister
nation, and on the need for greater support and
assistance on the part of the international community.
The eradication of poverty and underdevelopment is
essential in order to guarantee the achievement of
sustainable and durable peace and stability in Timor-
Leste. There will be no stability without development,
or development without stability.

The Government of Timor-Leste has adopted
important measures to tackle poverty, unemployment
and other pressing problems. The work carried out by
President Ramos-Horta in that respect is commendable.
Nonetheless, Timor-Leste will continue to require
considerable support from the international community,
in particular from the United Nations.

The current international financial and food crisis
raises other important challenges. As a country which
depends on the importation of basic food staples,
Timor-Leste is affected by the sharp increase in the
global price of foodstuffs such as rice. The challenges
to be overcome by the Timorese people and
Government in the coming years require considerable
resources which greatly exceed the capacity of a State
with limited resources. Furthermore, the international
community has the moral obligation to help Timor-
Leste train its human resources and create the
infrastructure that is so greatly needed by that country,
while continuing, of course, to fully respect its
sovereignty.
Cuba, a small besieged country with limited
resources, also continues its humble cooperation with
Timor-Leste through various vital social development
programmes which also play an important role in
strengthening the country's internal stability. Cuba
extends its cooperation in various sectors, principally
in the area of health. Since 2003, 546 Cuban physicians
and other health specialists have rendered service in
that country and provided 3,477,000 Timorese citizens
with health care. Cuban medical doctors have
performed 25,564 surgeries, of which 6,396 were
considered major surgery, and over 22,000 deliveries.

They have administered more than 52,000 doses of
vaccine. The lives of 12,418 people have been saved
throughout the rugged terrain of Timor.

The Cuban medical brigade in Timor-Leste
currently includes 233 physicians and other specialist
personnel and is an example of selfless cooperation.
Apart from providing basic and specialized health
services in difficult conditions, the Cuban doctors also
teach. Currently, 168 medical students from all districts
of Timor are being trained in the medical school of the
national university, and the medical professors are
Cuban. Complementing those efforts, around 700
Timorese young people are studying in Cuba, free of
charge, and most of them are studying medicine. This
year, the first 19 medical students will return to Timor
for their final year of internship; they will be directly
involved in addressing the health problems of their
respective communities. A total of 36 Cuban teachers
advised the national literacy campaign in Timor-Leste,
applying the Cuban literacy method called "Yes I Can",
through which 17,400 citizens of that country have
already learned to read and write.

If the international community, in particular some
developed countries, responds to the appeal made by
President Ramos-Horta and the Government of Timor-
Leste to contribute $8 million, then after only two
years the country will be able to declare itself free
from the scourge of illiteracy. We believe that this
would contribute significantly to internal peace and
stability. What Cuba is doing today for Timor-Leste is
just a modest example of how much could be achieved
in that country through international cooperation and
solidarity, in particular by States with greater economic
and financial resources.

I would like to conclude by expressing, on behalf
of the people and the Government of Cuba, our deepest
gratitude to the people and the Government of Timor-
Leste for the solidarity offered to our country in
difficult moments, including their significant assistance
in 2008 to repair the extensive damage caused in Cuba
by hurricanes Gustav and Ike. The people of Timor-
Leste can always count on the firm resolve of Cuba to
continue strengthening its assistance to and solidarity
with them. In this way, we fulfil our duty and honour a
debt of gratitude to Timor-Leste and to other third-
world peoples who have always expressed their firm
and unwavering friendship and solidarity with Cuba.
