Mr. J agne (Gambia): My delegation would like to pay
tribute to you, Mr. President, for according such a high
priority to the subject under consideration by the Security
Council today. In recent times, the Council has devoted a
considerable amount of time to the question of civilians in
armed conflict and other related issues. My delegation is
also grateful to the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report on the matter.

Over the years, the number of civilians affected by
conflicts has been increasing dramatically. The statistics
available to us are really frightening. Furthermore, it is now
well-known that civilians are increasingly becoming the
deliberate targets of combatants, and children, women and
other vulnerable groups bear the brunt of this growing
insanity. In a nutshell, they are the victims of all sorts of
atrocities, ranging from rape to mutilation and massacre.

Notwithstanding the plethora of international legal
instruments designed to protect civilians in situations of
armed conflict, it would appear that civilians caught in
such situations are more vulnerable today than ever
before. Clearly, therefore, these important international
legal instruments are more honoured in their breach than
in their observance, thus the pressing need to urge
Member States and non-State actors alike to redouble
their efforts in order to reverse the trend. It goes without
saying that the implementation of said instruments is the
key to success in our efforts to improve the situation. Life
would be much easier for Member States if only they
would make the best use of the technical services offered
by the United Nations and, indeed, other relevant
organizations.

There is no need to attempt to belabour all the points
raised in the Secretary-General's report on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. He has covered them very
well, including the attendant problems, and has made
recommendations. We agree with him that it would be
important to establish an agreed mechanism and timetable
for follow-up and review. That is the way forward.

Having said that, my delegation is of the View that,
while efforts are being made to improve the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, the issue of impunity should
be given added importance. The international community
must ensure that perpetrators of war crimes and violators
of international humanitarian and human rights law are
held accountable. In this connection, we reiterate our
support for the establishment of international ad hoc
tribunals, as and when necessary, to prosecute war
criminals.

In this context, we commend the excellent job being
done by both the Rwanda and former Yugoslavia
Tribunals. These two institutions constitute beacons of
hope in the crusade against the culture of impunity.

There is no doubt that there is adequate legal
protection for civilians in armed conflict. Attention should
therefore be directed to physical protection. The Security
Council should therefore devote its energies in this
direction.

In an earlier statement, we made reference to the old
saying that prevention is better than cure. That is why we
believe that greater attention should be given to conflict

 

prevention by addressing, first and foremost, the root causes
of conflict in an integrated and comprehensive manner.
Otherwise we fear very much that the vicious circle of the
recurrence of conflicts will continue for a very long time
and that in the process innocent civilians will continue
correspondingly to pay a heavy price.

The Secretary-General has done his part, for which we
are grateful. The recommendations contained in his report
require extensive and careful consideration. He has
identified important mechanisms and measures which can
help us in our efforts. The ball is now in our court. Since
this is what the draft resolution under consideration
attempts to do, my delegation will vote in its favour.

