Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I wish at the
outset to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), for presenting her
report and to commend her leadership.

Unfortunately, the security situation in Darfur,
despite a relative period of calm, remains characterized
by intercommunal violence, criminal acts and banditry,
resulting in ever more civilian victims and displaced
persons. Against a backdrop of war, insecurity and
instability, it is very difficult, nigh impossible, to
create the conditions for real justice so as to bring to
trial the alleged perpetrators of the crimes committed
in Darfur. That is why we have consistently recalled the
relevance of the approach of the African Union, which
involves addressing the issues of peace and justice
simultaneously.

Although the ongoing efforts of the Office of the
Prosecutor are deeply appreciated and welcomed, as
they seek to bring about justice in a context of war, to
date they have not, unfortunately, been fruitful. For
that reason, might it not be a good idea to integrate the
element ofjustice into the peace process, so as to put an
end to impunity?

Chad remains convinced that there can be no
military solution to the Darfur crisis and therefore
urges all members of the Council to support peace
initiatives such as the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur and the mediation of the African Union High-
level Implementation Panel, with a view to promoting
peace and justice through dialogue.

From that standpoint, the Security Council and the
African Union must speak the same language. They
must pool their efforts in order to restore lasting peace
in Darfur and to enable justice to be implemented in all
its aspects. To that end, we commend the convening on
10 October by the Sudanese Government of the national
dialogue conference, which, for the first time, brought
together all segments of society and a large number of
the country's political stakeholders, as well as three
Darfur armed factions.

We urge all Sudanese armed groups, without
distinction, to join the national dialogue process,
because a political solution open to all is crucial in
order to the restoration peace in the region, which has
been ravaged by war for more than a decade now.

Chad, which hosts many displaced persons from
Darfur, is being hit by the full force ofthe consequences
of the growing insecurity in that neighbouring area.
It therefore underscores the need to integrate efforts
to achieve justice into the overall approach aimed at
bringing peace, good governance and democracy to the
Sudan. In that context, we deem it timely to undertake
a serious joint process of reflection between the
Council and the African Union on how best to support
the International Criminal Court in accomplishing its
mission, drawing lessons from the lengthy and fruitless
approach taken so far and taking due consideration of
the pertinent, realistic concerns of the African Union
on this issue.

Chad, which is a State party to the Rome Statute,
reiterates its full support for the ICC and urges it to
step up its interaction with regional organizations, in
particular with the African Union, in order to enhance
the effectiveness of its action, with a focus on results.

