Mr. Moussa (spoke in French): I have the honour and
privilege to introduce the fifth report of the Secretary-
General on the activities of the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa and on the Lord's Resistance
Army-affected areas (8/2013/671).

In terms of peace and security, the situation in
Central Africa is dominated by concerns about growing
instability in the Central African Republic and the
proliferation of armed groups in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Those two situations are being
followed closely by this body.

In the Central African Republic, the security,
humanitarian and human rights situation is deteriorating
rapidly and significantly, while the political transition
arrangements remain fragile. The recent increase in
sectarian Violence is particularly alarming. There is an
urgent need to address this crisis before it spirals out of
control and leads to further loss of life.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, while the
defeat of the Mouvement du 23 mars by the Congolese
Armed Forces and the United Nations peacekeepers was
a victory in and of itself, a peace agreement has still not

been signed, and several other rebel groups continue to
operate in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo
and to threaten local communities with impunity.

The fifth report of the Secretary-General
(S/2013/67l) provides an overview of the political and
security situation in the subregion of Central Africa. It
also highlights the current challenges threatening the
peace and security of States and the subregion, and the
initiatives undertaken by the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa (UNOCA), Member States
and subregional organizations in response.

(spoke in English)

While the Specific issues are detailed in the report,
I would like to highlight three key threats with which
the Central Africa subregion is currently confronted.

First, insecurity and instability in the Central
African Republic continue to have security and
humanitarian implications for that country's neighbours.
The inability of a central State authority to control
elements of Seleka has led to border tensions between
the Central African Republic and Cameroon, and to
border closures that reduce bilateral vital economic
activity. Flows of refugees from the Central African
Republic into neighbouring countries are straining the
capacity ofa subregion already struggling to cope with
multitudes of displaced persons. The potential for the
crisis in the Central African Republic to spill over into
the wider subregion is real.

Secondly, transnational crime remains a serious
challenge to the security of Central Africa. In the
Gulf of Guinea, piracy and armed robbery now occur
with higher incidence than in the Gulf of Aden off the
Somali coast. Pirates and armed robbers have thrived
in these inconsistently controlled transboundary
waters, increasing the growth of cross-border criminal
networks and threatening the economic security of West
and Central Africa. On land, resource-rich areas in the
remote border regions of the Central African Republic
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo continue to
be exploited to support various forms of illicit trade,
including poaching.

Thirdly, Central African countries are vulnerable
to destabilization from looming threats posed by
terrorism and extremism outside the immediate
subregion. Chadian peacekeepers, deployed to support
the African-led and subsequent United Nations missions
in Mali, have been the target of recent terrorist attacks
in Tessalit. The recent joint visit of the Secretary-
General and the President of the World Bank to the
Sahel highlighted the security concerns on the very
doorstep of Central Africa. The Nigerian-based militant
group Boko Haram has exploited the porous and poorly
secured border between Nigeria and Cameroon, and just
last week abducted a French Catholic priest in northern
Cameroon. Conflict between the Nigerian army and
Boko Haram has driven an estimated 8,000 Nigerian
refugees into Cameroon, among whom are suspected
insurgents.

How has UNOCA supported the subregion in
addressing these considerable challenges? UNOCA
continues to prioritize its engagement with the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS), which
remains committed to playing an important role in the
subregion on security issues. ECCAS troops remain on
the ground in the Central African Republic, and the
ECCAS-appointed mediator, President Sassou Nguesso
of the Republic of Congo, has remained engaged in
addressing the crisis. ECCAS was reinvigorated by the
appointment in August of Secretary-General Ahmad
Allam-Mi. UNOCA's close collaboration with ECCAS
allowed us to facilitate increased dialogue between that
institution and the African Union over the deployment
of the African-led International Support Mission for the
Central African Republic.

On the critical issue of maritime insecurity in the
Gulf of Guinea, UNOCA, together with the United
Nations Office for West Africa (UNOWA), has been
a consistent and driving force behind the collective
efforts of numerous stakeholders. As a result, Central
African Heads of States and Government, along with
their counterparts in West Africa, acted decisively by
agreeing to adopt the Yaounde Declaration establishing
a coherent interregional approach for combatting
maritime insecurity in the Gulf of Guinea. This
milestone achievement reflects the existing cooperation
among coastal States and landlocked States, as well
as three subregional organizations, across the two
subregions to address a pressing common security
concern. The subsequent activities to operationalize
the strategy reveal sustained political will to meet
commitments and an affirmation of the collaborative,
interregional process for doing so.

In our role as secretariat of the United Nations
Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions
in Central Africa (UNSAC), UNOCA has continued
to shape and guide the deliberations of Member States
on key security challenges in the subregion. During
the thirty-sixth session of the Committee in Kigali,
UNSAC member States agreed that poaching, or the
illegal killing of elephants for the sale of ivory, was a
direct threat to the security oftheir States. They decided
to retain the subject as a standing agenda item during
all future meetings of the Committee.
On the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA), I can report
that our joint diplomatic efforts with Ambassador
Madeira, the African Union Sepcial Envoy for the
Lord's Resistance Army issue, have ensured continuing
regional cooperation among the governments of LRA-
affected countries. In particular, the operations of the
African Union Regional Task Force resumed in August
in the Central African subregion, while the Democratic
Republic of Congo lifted border restrictions for
Regional Task Force operations conducted by foreign
contingents.

With the critical support of United States military
advisers, Regional Task Force contingents are now
fully operational. Military operations have degraded
the LRA and limited it to pursuing survival tactics.
However, recent attacks in South Sudan attributed to
the LRA are a reminder that the group remains a serious
and unpredictable threat to communities throughout
the subregion. We must therefore remain vigilant and
continue making progress on the implementation plan
for the UN regional strategy to address the threat
and impact of the LRA, which remains the guiding
framework for our collective efforts.

For the coming period, UNOCA will continue its
institutional strengthening work with ECCAS in the
area of mediation. We will continue leading on the
issue of maritime insecurity in the Gulf of Guinea,
working closely with our colleagues in UNOWA, the
three subregional organizations and international
partners, to operationalize the decisions of the Yaounde
Summit. Together with the United Nations Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force, we will advance
the development of a counter-terrorism strategy for
Central Africa.

Given the linkages between youth unemployment,
peace and security, UNOCA will - together with the
African Development Bank, the World Bank, the United
Nations Development Programme and the International
Labour Organization - finalize a proposal and
mobilize the resources required to convene a regional
youth employment forum. We will identify areas
for cooperation with concerned Governments on the
issue of poaching. At the same time, we will continue
undertaking country assessment missions so that we
will remain well placed to identify emerging threats
and their regional implications.

On the LRA, UNOCA will continue its close
and fruitful partnership with the African Union in
achieving progress in a number of areas. We will update
the regional strategy implementation plan, with a View
to identifying the most critical needs and funding
gaps. We will enhance the existing coordination
mechanisms in order to ensure that our collective
efforts have the greatest impact. We will work with our
partners to identify long-term stabilization activities,
and our efforts will be facilitated by a recent World
Bank preliminary assessment in LRA-affected areas.
Finally, we will focus on further strengthening regional
cooperation by organizing a high-level summit on the
LRA issue.

On issues such as the situation in the Central
African Republic, maritime insecurity and the LRA,
Central African countries have demonstrated a
determination to act collectively. A visa-free travel
regime, set to go into effect in January 2014 in five
of the six countries of the Central African Economic
and Monetary Community, reflects the gravitational
pull towards greater subregional integration. Those are
encouraging trends that should be sustained.

Lastly, UNOCA will capitalize on those positive
developments by redoubling its efforts to advance
subregional security in close collaboration with
Member States and subregional organizations.

I thank the members of the Security Council for
their steadfast support to UNOCA.

