Mr. Chen Xu (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the
outset, I would like to welcome you, Mr. President, as
you chair this public meeting today.

Recently, the Security Council mission
successfully visited Ethiopia and Eritrea and presented
a report, thereby demonstrating the Council's firm
support of and commitment to the peace process in
Ethiopia and Eritrea. We would like to express our
appreciation for the outstanding leadership of
Ambassador Kolby and for the efforts of the Permanent
Mission of Norway. I would also like to thank the
Governments of Ethiopia and Eritrea for their warm
hospitality, as well as the United Nations Mission in
Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE) for the meticulous
arrangements they made.

The peace process in Ethiopia and Eritrea is at a
crucial stage. On the one hand, the border area -
particularly the Temporary Security Zone - is
basically calm. Both sides have reiterated that the
decision of the Boundary Commission will be binding
and final. Both sides have also agreed to have the
United Nations play a central role in the
implementation of the Boundary Commission's
decision. On the whole, the situation is an encouraging
one. That is a result of the efforts made by both sides in
the peace process.

On the other hand, the Peace Agreement itself
does not mean that peace will naturally appear. The
specific modalities for implementing the decision still
need to be determined. Issues such as demining,
refugees and the release of prisoners of war still need
to be resolved. In order genuinely to put aside past
differences, increase confidence and dispel mistrust, it
will be necessary for both sides to make further efforts.
We hope that both countries can, in the interests of
their peoples, scrupulously fulfil their commitments to
accept the decision of the Boundary Commission in
order to create favourable conditions for peace and the
development of the two countries.

It also needs to be pointed out that while it might
be easy to draw a boundary line on a piece of paper, it
is much harder to physically demarcate that boundary
on the ground. Like others, we hope that the two
countries will, in a timely manner, reach agreement on
specific modalities for implementing the decision. At
the same time, they must demonstrate calm and
restraint and maintain the security of the Temporary
Security Zone, avoiding any unilateral actions that
would negatively affect the peace process.

UNMEE has done a lot of work in maintaining
tranquillity in the Temporary Security Zone and in
easing tensions between the two countries. We wish to
commend and support the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Joseph
Legwaila, to move the peace process forward. In the
current situation, it is even more necessary for the
parties to the conflict to strengthen their cooperation
with UNMEE through concrete actions. We also hope
that UNMEE will continue its current efforts to play a
positive role in the smooth implementation of the
Boundary Commission's decision.

The Chinese delegation endorses the analysis and
proposals made in the report of the visiting mission,
including the proposal to extend UNMEE's mandate.

Consolidating the development of the peace
process requires not only the joint efforts of the
Governments of the two countries, but also cooperation
between United Nations agencies and full cooperation
between the United Nations, Ethiopia, Eritrea, the
Organization of African Unity, humanitarian agencies
and non-governmental organizations. We sincerely
hope that the conflict will be resolved at an early date
in order to inject new vitality into the momentum for
resolving other conflicts on the African continent.

