Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): I would like to
align myself with the statement to be made later on
behalf of the European Union and its member States.

Let me begin by thanking Special Representative
Yamamoto, Executive Director Fedotov and
Ambassador Umarov for their comprehensive briefings.
Let me also extend a special welcome to Ms. Frogh and
thank her for bringing the voices of Afghan women into
the Chamber today.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/1056)
underlines the continuing instability and volatility that
affect the lives of the Afghan people on a daily basis.
At the same time, as Special Representative Yamamoto
pointed out today, opportunities exist to break the
cycle of violence that has afflicted the country for four
decades. I would like to make three points today.

First, only the Afghan people, working together,
will determine the future for Afghanistan. An Afghan-
owned and Afghan-led peace process remains essential.
We therefore welcome the Afghan Government's
strong commitment to engage in the political process.
The upcoming meeting in the Kabul process will be
an important step towards creating an environment
conducive to that. We strongly encourage the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
to actively support the efforts of the Afghan Government
to ensure that the Kabul meetings result in a sustainable
peace process.

During her visit to Afghanistan in October, the
Swedish Foreign Minister met with representatives
from all parts of society and underlined the importance
of an inclusive peace process. Ensuring that the whole
population - meaning both men and women - can
participate effectively is vital for the achievement
of sustainable peace, as is the active participation of
civil society.

The regional context is important, as many of
the challenges facing Afghanistan cannot be dealt
with in isolation. We urge all stakeholders, especially
Afghanistan's neighbours, to assume responsibility and
to work together towards a political settlement. There is
tremendous potential in increased regional cooperation,
and we welcome the engagement of the Central Asian
States in that regard.

It is imperative for Afghanistan's future stability
that parliamentary elections take place in 2018 and
presidential elections in 2019, as announced, and that
the elections be conducted in an inclusive, credible and
transparent manner. Every effort must now be made to
ensure that difficulties are overcome and that elections
take place. We welcome to the Secretary-General's
emphasis in his report on women's participation in
elections. We urge the electoral management bodies and
the Afghan Government to take all the necessary steps
to ensure women's full participation in the elections, as
both voters and candidates.

Secondly, respect for human rights and international
humanitarian law is vital to the achievement of
sustainable peace. We congratulate Afghanistan on its
election to the Human Rights Council. As an elected
member of the Council, we expect Afghanistan to
uphold the highest standards in the promotion and
protection of human rights.

We deplore the recent execution of five prisoners,
and urge the Government to reinstate the de facto
moratorium on the death penalty with a view to
abolishing this cruel and inhumane punishment.

We appreciate the efforts of UNAMA in the area
of human rights, not least pertaining to its work on
children and armed conflict and civilian casualties. We
encourage them to continue that important work.

Attacks against humanitarian and development
workers, health-care professionals, medical transport,
hospitals and other medical facilities, as well as
schools, continue and are deeply concerning. Such
attacks not only impede efforts to aid the people of
Afghanistan, but infringe upon their enjoyment of the
right to education, health and life, which are crucial
in building sustainable peace. In addition, civilians
continue to bear the burden of the conflict, with women
and children increasingly under threat. We are equally
deeply concerned about the increased recruitment of
children by armed groups, in particular by the Taliban,
and call for an immediate end to that practice.

Finally, I would like to reiterate our strong support
for the outcome of the strategic review of UNAMA and
the Secretary-General's recommendations. It is now
important that the recommendations be implemented
without delay. With its unique field presence, UNAMA
can contribute to making a tangible difference on the
ground and provide important support for efforts to
attain lasting peace. An integrated United Nations
approach, linking together peace, development and
human rights work in Afghanistan, is crucial to
delivering results. Our expectations for UNAMA in
that regard are high.

Sweden's assistance to the people of Afghanistan
has remained steadfast for over four decades.
Afghanistan is Sweden's single-largest development-
cooperation partner, and our support will continue,
including for reform efforts aimed at building strong
and independent institutions. The Afghan people can
count on our continued backing as they advance their
efforts to build a peaceful, stable and inclusive future.

