Mr. Lacroix: I will be very brief. I certainly do not
want to turn the discussion into one primarily between
the Security Council and myself. Most of the questions
were addressed to my colleagues the Force Commanders,
and they will be answering those questions.

First, a question was posed directly to me regarding
the financing of peacekeeping operations in Africa. I
think there are two different levels for doing that. On
one hand, the issue of making sure that United Nations
operations in Africa have enough resources to deliver
on their mandates is very important. I think, just to be
very concise on this issue, there are three points there.

The first is that we are committed to continuing
our efforts to find efficiency and to make the best use
ofthe resources that are given to us. There are a number
of efforts that were made to that effect, and we feel it is
our duty to continue.
Secondly, we need adequate resources to continue
implementing our mandates in environments that I
think everybody around this table recognizes are very
challenging and very difficult.

Thirdly, it may be the case in some instances that
our peace operations can be faced with unexpected
situations that may have financial implications. Ijust
want to mention one, which is the challenge posed
by the support of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) to the Ebola response, which
draws heavily on MONUSCO's resources in terms of
logistical support, the use of our security and police
and military forces to support our colleagues who are
dealing with Ebola, and a number of other resources
dedicated by MONUSCO to that support, including
some of our colleagues, especially after the decision
that was made to strengthen the Ebola response
in Butembo. That is just one example of a case where
an unexpected situation has an impact on the financial
resources required by peacekeeping operations.

The second part ofthe question was about financing
operations in Africa, and the Council is no doubt aware
of the position that the Secretary-General expresses
regularly in support of providing those operations with
predictable and sustainable financial resources, which
we think is an important condition for their success. I
want to reiterate that position here.

With regard to the questions that had to do with the
relations with the host Government, I want to say that
this key principle ofpeacekeeping remains entirely valid
and that it is incumbent on us to seek the best possible
interaction and cooperation with the host Government.
Sometimes that is challenging. Our Force Commanders
and Heads of missions make great efforts to address
issues that have to do with clearances or freedom of
movement, but in some cases we have to escalate those
issues. My colleagues and I have done so on occasion
when some of those issues needed to be addressed with
representatives of the host Governments, and in some
cases we do need the support of the Council in making
sure that whatever difficulties we encounter can be
resolved. I want to emphasize that it is a top priority
of our missions to ensure the smoothest possible
cooperation and interaction with host Governments.

The issue of performance was also mentioned.
In that regard, I want to comment on the efforts we
are currently making to enhance performance. It is a
multifaceted effort that includes putting in place various
performance assessment mechanisms, including the
military-unit and police-unit performance systems,
along with the systematic investigation of cases where
we believe we have not performed to expectations. We
now systematically investigate those cases and I think
that has resulted in a number of lessons learned and
useful improvements.

The issue of the prioritization of mandates was also
raised. I believe that we still need the Council to focus
on our mandates" key priorities, but those priorities are
evolving, and situations where at least in some cases we
might once have considered the extension of a mandate
to be a routine procedure no longer apply. All missions
are more or less in a situation of transition. I have two
comments to add in that connection, the first being that
prioritizing mandates is also our responsibility as the
United Nations, because we make recommendations
to the Council that should be adequately prioritized.
Secondly, our missions want the Council to decide their
mandates so that their financial and human resources are
allocated to the implementation ofthose priorities. That
is easier said than done, because it requires constantly
changing operations and seeing their structure evolve
on a permanent basis.

Last but not least, we are committed to continuing
our efforts to generally increase the role and positions
for women in peacekeeping, including in the senior
leadership of both our military units and civilian
components. The trend is encouraging, but we are
certainly committed to doing more.

Finally, regarding peacekeepers' safety and
security, we are also committed to continuing the
implementation of our dedicated plan for improving that.
We had encouraging results last year, with a decrease
in the number of fatalities due to hostile attacks, and
this year so far only one mission has had fatalities as a
result of hostile attacks. We are aware that more must
be done, and that has to do with training, equipment,
performance and medical support. We are working very
hard on all of those issues.

