Mr. Ilichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
We thank the Acting Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Finn Reske-Nielsen, for his
briefing on the final stage of the work of the United
Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT)
and the situation in the country. We welcome the
successful conclusion of the Mission's work, which
was made possible by the sustained stabilization of the
situation in Timor-Leste in almost all of its parameters.
Moreover, we underscore that it would not have been
possible if the Timorese people themselves had not
sought to overcome conflicts with their neighbours
and within their own society and to build their own
State, capable of solving its problems independently.
The political maturity of Timor-Leste was confirmed
by this year's parliamentary and presidential elections,
which were conducted without hindrance.

The security situation is also stable. The transfer of
the Mission's law enforcement mandate to the Policia
Nacional de Timor-Leste in March was justified.
During the electoral period, local security services duly
fulfilled their tasks. The overall situation in Timor-
Leste, the strengthening ofpeace in the country and the
successful establishment of State authorities, including
the national police, are good examples of effective
United Nations peacekeeping and peacebuilding as a
whole.

We welcome the decision of the Timorese to
share their own experiences and to make a significant
contribution to United Nations peacekeeping by
providing military and police officers. We believe that
the political and security situation in the country will
enable us to draw down the Mission by the end of this
year and to remove Timor-Leste from the Security
Council's agenda.

Timor-Leste is prepared to shoulder its full
responsibilty for the processes in the country. That was
confirmed in a letter to the Secretary-General from the
Prime Minister of Timor-Leste, Mr. Xanana Gusmao
(S/2012/736, annex). The Security Council's recent
mission to the country came to the same conclusion.

With regard to the modalities of a future United
Nations presence in Timor-Leste, the final decision
must be taken by the country's leadership.

