Mr. Serry: Before beginning the briefing, let me
mark that today is the Jewish holiday Rosh Hashanah. I
wish to congratulate our Israeli colleagues and to wish
them a happy new year.

Turning now to the briefing, it is nearly one year
since the Secretary-General forwarded the Palestinian
application for membership of the United Nations to the
Council. At the same time, the Quartet set a framework
for resumed dialogue, reaffirming that the only
sustainable solution to the conflict was a negotiated
one. Despite some positive and quiet engagement, the
parties have not yet engaged in meaningful dialogue on
the core issues. More recently, following his meeting
with the Foreign Ministers of States members of
the League of Arab States in Cairo on 5 September,
President Abbas expressed his intention to commence
preparations to pursue an upgrade in the status at the
United Nations through the General Assembly.

Today, amid a fiscal crisis and related social unrest
in the West Bank, the stakes are growing. The main
obstacles remain political: unresolved issues between
the parties, the continued occupation and the ongoing
Palestinian division. However, we can no longer
simply count on the pursuit of short-term and mutual
confidence-building measures aimed at starting talks.
Such measures are not alternatives to a negotiated
peace.

The lack of progress on the political track and
the ongoing conflict and occupation put at risk the
very viability of the two-State solution. There is no
more sobering a manifestation of such a risk than the
financial and economic crisis currently afflicting the
Palestinian Authority.
Starting on 4 September, thousands of Palestinian
demonstrators in the West Bank took to the streets to
protest the increase in value added tax (VAT), recent
rises in the price of fuel and most basic commodities,
and the deferred payment of August Government
salaries. Unions and taxi and truck drivers repeatedly
blocked city centres and joined the protesters. One
protester, who set himself on fire in Ramallah,
remains in serious condition. Attempts by another two
protesters, including one with his child, were thwarted.

Although the Palestinian security forces handled
the protests with professionalism and restraint, the
demonstrations turned violent on 10 September and
dozens were injured in clashes. The situation in Gaza
also became tense when a teenager died on 2 September
after he torched himself to death to protest his family's
poor living conditions.

The Government of Prime Minister Fayyad
announced an emergency economic package on
11 September, including a reduction ofthe VAT to 15 per
cent and a return to pre-September prices for diesel
and gas. Such measures will provide temporary relief
to the average Palestinian, who bears the brunt of this
crisis. Absent a predictable and immediate injection of
funds, the Palestinian Authority will be unable to meet
its recurrent financial requirements, which amount to
less than $1 billion. Such a mounting fiscal crisis would
paralyse the institutions of the Palestinian Authority.

In a few days the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
for the Coordination of International Assistance to
Palestinians (AHLC), meeting in New York, will
offer a sober account of the Palestinian Authority's
very grave fiscal situation. Despite Prime Minister
Fayyad's commendable efforts, he is confronted with
the effects of a decrease in foreign aid, the failure of
donor countries to fulfil their financial pledges, and
slowing economic activity. As our report to the AHLC
will highlight, such a slowdown is dampening hopes
of reducing the high unemployment, poverty and
vulnerability that still affect thousands of Palestinians.
Against that background and as an immediate step to
ensure the Palestinian Authority's fiscal viability in the
short term, we urgently call on donors, in particular
from the region, to increase their contributions and
provide the much-needed funds to bridge, in a timely
manner, the current gap.

The Israeli Government is also called upon to do
more to alleviate the Palestinian Authority's burden
and provide a much-needed economic impetus in
the medium term. On 11 September, Prime Minister
Netanyahu announced the transfer, in advance, of
225 million new Shekels in tax money it collects for
the Palestinians. This is welcome, and we encourage
Israel to take further steps in that direction. Greater
facilitation by the Israeli Government, in particular
by easing restrictions to allow for the private sector
to develop, would contribute to stimulating economic
activity and addressing the Palestinian Authority's
fiscal sustainability in the medium term.

Developments on the ground also do not support
efforts to overcome the political stalemate. Settlement
activity continued during the reporting period. On
9 September, the Israeli Government endorsed an
Israeli higher-education committee decision to upgrade
the status of a college in the settlement of Ariel to that
of a university. While it is pending final approval, that
decision would lead to a further encroachment into
the West Bank. On 11 September, Israeli authorities
reportedly issued orders to confiscate some 1,500
dunams ofland near Nablus. On 2 September, the outpost
of Migron was evacuated following a High Court ruling
and its approximately 50 families moved to another
settlement nearby. The United Nations position remains
that settlement construction in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, whether on private
land or elsewhere, is contrary to international law and
should be brought to a halt.

Several vehicles were vandalized, and a monastery
in Latrun and a mosque near Hebron were desecrated
on 4 and 11 September, respectively, as part of so-called
price-tag activities following the evacuation of Migron.
Thirty-five incidents involving settler violence resulted
in injuries to 15 Palestinians as well as extensive
property damage.

Palestinians were attacked in Jerusalem on 5 and
7 September, and Israeli police have actively pursued
the attackers. We note the Israeli Government's
consistent condemnation of such attacks. Israeli police
also arrested settler youth in connection with the
16 August Molotov cocktail attack near Hebron. Yet we
continue to urge the Israeli authorities to act decisively
against acts of violence perpetrated by Israeli citizens.

Palestinian violence against Israelis in the West
Bank, mostly stone-throwing at vehicles, resulted in
injuries to seven Israeli citizens as well as material
damage. On 9 September, a Palestinian driver killed an
Israeli security guard in a suspected deliberate hit-and-
run accident near the barrier and the Oranit settlement.

Citing security concerns, the Israel Defense
Forces conducted 247 operations in the occupied West
Bank, in which 110 Palestinians were injured and 186
arrested. The majority of injuries and detentions took
place during Palestinian demonstrations, including
against the barrier, which deviates from the Green
line in contravention of the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice (A/ES-10/273).

Much of the reported violence continues to occur
in Area C, an area fundamental to the contiguity of
the West Bank and the viability of a future Palestinian
State. Palestinian access to and development of Area
C is vital to accommodate the natural growth of the
Palestinian population. Developing natural resources is
also essential for the private sector to drive the economic
growth needed for a rapidly growing population.
Alongside the United States Agency for International
Development (USAID) and other international partners,
the United Nations has engaged the Israeli Government
on a series of planning and social infrastructure projects
in Area C. An additional package of 18 education and
health projects for USAID has just been approved.

The United Nations remains concerned about the
scale of ongoing demolitions, which in the reporting
period included 11 residential structures. We note that
there is an ongoing dialogue between the concerned
vulnerable communities and the Government of Israel.
While there are initial indications that plans for six to
eight Palestinian communities may soon be approved,
greater progress in addressing the needs of Palestinian
communities in Area C is urgently required so as to
adequately address the long-standing developmental
needs of those communities.

Palestinian security forces have continued working
to maintain law and order in the West Bank. On
5 September, a senior Palestinian Authority security
commander was shot dead in Jenin, where extensive
security operations have taken place since the death
of its Governor in May. For the Palestinian Authority
security forces to continue operating effectively, it is
necessary that they receive a delivery of equipment that
is currently awaiting approval for import.

On 13 September, the nineteenth anniversary of the
Oslo agreement, all pre-Oslo Palestinian prisoners in
Israelijails observed a one-day hunger strike protesting
their continued imprisonment and in solidarity with
other long-term hunger strikers. The Secretary-
General remains concerned about the life-threatening
condition of three of those hunger strikers, and calls
for a swift resolution of their cases. On a positive note,
visits of family members from Gaza to Palestinian
detainees have continued on a weekly basis since they
were resumed on 16 July with the facilitation of the
International Committee of the Red Cross.
The Palestinian Central Elections Commission
continued preparations for local elections, which are
scheduled to take place in the West Bank on 20 October.
In accordance with the electoral law, the nomination
period, which began on 1 September, concluded
on 11 September. That constitutes an important
benchmark, and we encourage the Palestinian Authority
to conduct that poll as scheduled, with all necessary
support extended to the Central Elections Commission.
The last such elections were only partially held in 2005,
and some municipal councils have not been voted into
office since the 1970s.

In Gaza, the United Nations released a report entitled
"Gaza 2020" on 27 August. The report highlighted the
ever- greater stress that population growth in Gaza will
place on the provision of clean water, electricity, health-
care services and education, which are inadequate now
and will not keep pace with the needs of a population
that is projected to grow to 2.1 million people by 2020.
The implications, if there is no change to the current
untenable situation, should be a reason for alarm for all
concerned. Alongside efforts to make progress on the
peace process, we must all work to ensure that calm is
realized, the Palestinian divide ends, and the closure
regime is lifted.

In that sobering context, several weeks of calm
were yet again interrupted on 26 and 31 August, when
home-made rockets fired from Gaza hit the Israeli town
of Sderot, causing damage to infrastructure. A Grad
rocket fired at the Israeli town of Netivot on 9 August
caused extensive material damage to a house without
injuring residents. In total, 50 projectiles were fired
from Gaza into Israel, including six Grad rockets and
17 mortar shells. Israeli forces conducted five incursions
and 10 airstrikes into Gaza, resulting in six Palestinian
militants killed, while four Palestinian militants and
six civilians were also injured. Israeli strikes at tunnels
also resulted in one Palestinian killed and one injured.
We continue to condemn all indiscriminate rocket

attacks from Gaza into Israel, which must stop. We also
urge Israel to show maximum restraint.

Efforts to promote Palestinian reconciliation
continue to face obstacles. At the meeting of the
League of Arab States held on 5 September, President
Abbas reiterated that general elections were the key to
true reconciliation. For its part, Hamas reiterated that
no polling should take place prior to reconciliation. On
2 September the de facto authorities in Gaza reshuffled
the ruling Cabinet, but claimed that efforts towards
Palestinian reconciliation would not be impacted.
A unified Palestinian polity is central to realizing
a two-State solution. The Quartet has also been clear
in stating that the situation in and around Gaza would
remain unsustainable as long as the West Bank and
Gaza are not reunited under a legitimate Palestinian
Authority that adheres to the Palestine Liberation
Organization's commitments. In this context, we
welcome recent statements of support, also by the
League of Arab States, for Egyptian facilitation efforts
to bring the Palestinian factions back to the table.

Lifting the closure regime, in accordance with
resolution 1860 (2009), and Gaza's recovery and long-
term economic growth remain fundamental United
Nations objectives. The long-term growth of Gaza's
economy will depend on reactivating the productive
private sector by allowing it to have easier access
to necessary raw materials, capital inputs and its
traditional markets, namely, the West Bank and Israel.
Lifting restrictions on the entry of aggregate, iron bar
and cement would not only enable the growth of the
private sector, but also provide an additional source of
revenue for the Palestinian Authority through taxation
at the point of entry. In the meantime, a steady flow of
approvals for works involving dual-use material should
be maintained. We appreciate the ongoing cooperation
with the Israeli authorities and we expect approval this
week of an additional substantial package of United
Nations projects, including housing, schools, shelters
and solid waste treatment infrastructure.

Turning to the region, the situation in Syria
remains of utmost concern to the Secretary-General.
Mr. Brahimi is returning from Damascus and will
report on his mission, so I will be extremely brief. As
we are facing a grim spiral of violence, our objectives
remain the same: to stop the bloodshed and human
rights violations, to alleviate human suffering, and to
seek a political solution through a Syrian-led process of
transition and dialogue. Tragically for millions of Syrian
civilians, the violence and killing continue to mount as
a result of a dangerous militarization of the conflict.
Military operations have broadened, encompassing all
major cities. Indiscriminate shelling of civilian areas
by Government forces with heavy weapons, tanks and
air assets has increased. Operations from the armed
opposition have also intensified.

The month of August registered the highest number
of casualties thus far, and that toll is growing. More than
2.5 million people, including refugees from Palestine
and Iraq, now need assistance and protection inside
Syria. As conditions deteriorate, we see dangerous
implications for Syria's neighbours. United Nations
agencies and their humanitarian partners are working
tirelessly to deliver food and basic assistance to those
in need in Syria, as well as to refugees across borders.
They have been able to reach an increasing number
of people, but more support from donors is needed to
further increase capacities.

As regards the situation in the area of separation,
the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
(UNDOF) has continued to liaise with Israeli and
Syrian military authorities to prevent an escalation
of tensions. UNDOF has, since 18 July, protested
operations by Syrian security forces in the area of
separation, which are in violation of the agreement
on disengagement between Israeli and Syrian Forces.
Among other measures, the Israel Defense Forces
started three weeks ago to reinforce the technical fence,
including through an advanced alert system along the
Israeli-Syrian disengagement line. New roads have
also been paved in several spots. Overall, while the
situation in the occupied Syrian Golan has remained
relatively stable in spite of continued settlement
activity, no progress towards peace between the two
countries can be expected while the conflict in Syria
remains unresolved. Ajust and comprehensive peace in
accordance with relevant resolutions remains, however,
a critical objective for regional stability and an essential
part of realizing the vision of the Arab Peace Initiative.

The situation on Lebanon's northern border remains
tense, underscoring the need for continued vigilance
internationally about the risk of further impact from the
crisis in Syria. Of particular concern is the continued
cross-border shelling from Syria into Lebanon, with
seven confirmed incidents since 22 August, resulting
in the injury of at least eight people. It is noteworthy
in this context that the Lebanese Armed Forces (LAF)
have performed robustly during this period, while the
Government and political leaders have helped to calm
the situation through responsible appeals for national
unity. On 11 September, the LAF freed the last hostage
kidnapped on 15 August, while on 8 September four
Syrians and a Turkish national were freed in an
operation in southern Beirut in which Government
forces made several arrests in connection with the
kidnapping. Following the release on 25 August of one
of the Lebanese pilgrims kidnapped in Syria in May,
10 still remain in captivity

Although fragile, calm has also prevailed in Tripoli
after the cessation of violence in the city and after the
LAF arrested some 18 people on 26 August for their
involvement in last month's clashes. The LAF also
confiscated guns, ammunition and heavy weapons.
Those successful operations serve to underscore the
continued need for international support to the Lebanese
Government and the LAF as they face increasing
challenges as a result of the situation in Syria.

The next national dialogue session is planned for
20 September. International support for the continuation
of that process is important, as it represents a key test
of the commitment of all Lebanese parties to their
country's stability and sovereignty against attempts to
cause sectarian strife and draw Lebanon into regional
events. Welcomed by leaders of all communities in
Lebanon, Pope Benedict XVI further encouraged an
atmosphere of calm and tolerance during his visit to
Lebanon from 14 to 16 September.

The situation in the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon (UNIFIL) area of operations remained
cautiously calm and stable. UNIFIL maintained an
enhanced presence across its area of operations as the
LAF operated at lower strength due to the temporary
redeployment of some units to cater to security
requirements north of the Litani river. While Israeli
violations of Lebanese airspace continued on an almost
daily basis, there were also minor Lebanese ground
violations of the Blue Line.

Those developments are taking place in a broader
regional context, which, as we have seen, is rife with
tensions - tensions that have recently led to disturbing
episodes of violence in the region. In this challenging
context, the Secretary-General has been clear that
now is the time for all to work for calm and restraint,
and strive to advance dialogue, mutual respect and
understanding.

In conclusion, in a volatile and rapidly changing
region, the vision of the two-State solution and
the achievements of the Palestinian Authority are
elements of stability and progress that should not be
lost, but rather maintained and realized in full without
further delay. For one, that means nothing short of the
unequivocal support of the international community
for the Palestinian Authority and collective intensified
efforts to address the fiscal difficulties presently faced
and preserve the institutional gains made to date. Israel
also has a special responsibility and interest in ensuring
the Palestinian Authority's viability. It is now even more
important for the parties to further engage in positive
steps, show restraint and refrain from provocative acts
that risk inflaming an already delicate environment.

By the end of this year, yet another timeline set by
the Quartet for reaching a comprehensive, negotiated
settlement will have lapsed. In circumstances of
prolonged political stalemate and an increasingly
fragile situation on the ground, the time has come
for the international community to seriously reassess
its role in resolving the conflict. In that regard,
the Secretary General sincerely hopes that Quartet
partners, in consultation with the parties, will look
beyond prescriptive timelines to chart a new credible
political way ahead in the coming months. Both
parties will suffer the consequences of failure to act
responsibly and of sliding further away from the two-
State solution and regional peace, as envisaged in the
relevant Security Council resolutions and the Arab
Peace Initiative.

