Mr. Goledzinowski (Australia): I would like to
thank you very much, Mr. President, for convening this
debate. Given the lateness of the hour, I promise the
interpreters and others that I will be as brief as
possible. I would also like to thank those who have
spoken before me. Every intervention I have heard
contained good and valuable ideas with which we
strongly agree and of which we have taken careful
note. I would also like to acknowledge the important
role that Japan has played, and to thank Costa Rica,
Jordan, Lichtenstein, Singapore and Switzerland for
the burden they have taken on in advancing this issue.
While Security Council reform in general has been
stuck, some modest improvements in the Council's
working methods have been achieved. We encourage
more work in that regard.

Australia has not been on the Council for over
20 years, but we have been a contributor to many
peacekeeping operations mandated by this body. Of
course, as a Member we are bound by its decisions. We
therefore believe that the basic mindset of the Council
should be one of active accountability and deliberate
transparency. Let me offer a few brief thoughts on what
that might mean in practice. More details can be found
in the printed copy of Australia's intervention.

First, the Council has an image problem. Outside
of this building, and perhaps even outside the
Chamber, and certainly in many capitals and among the
wider public, it is regarded as a bit of a closed club
doing good where it can but regularly and jealously
guarding its privileges and specific interests. That
image is not going to change overnight. Real change
will require substantive reform but, as I think all
statements up to now have emphasized, the reform of
working methods can help. A good start would be for
the Council to formally state that it has an objective
and that that objective is to be like any modern
effective organization: to be accountable and
transparent.

Secondly, we believe that reliable progress can
only be made if one measures what one does. How
much of the Council's work is done behind closed
doors? As others have asked, how much of it should be
done behind closed doors? How soon are newly elected
Council members brought into deliberations? How
often are resolutions drafted ahead of open debates and
what, if any, changes are made as a consequence of
those debates? What percentage of the drafting
recommendations of the 10 elected members or
non-members of the Council are ever accepted? As we
have been reminded, some Council Presidents have
done very well in maximizing transparency and access
by non-members - and we are grateful for that - but
have all?

The Council should keep those sorts of statistics
and issue them periodically - say, every two years -
so that we can know if we are making progress or not. I
note that the representative of Croatia cited some
performance statistics in his intervention. We should do
more of that, and information should be more readily
available. Self-assessment can be useful and necessary
but, equally, an external assessor is not a bad idea. The
work of one external organization mentioned a few
moments ago by a previous speakers - Security
Council Report - illustrates the value of external
auditing. That is a body very well and ably led by
someone very well known to many of us. He is a
gentleman who participated in the last debate on this
issue, back in 1994. Nineteen ninety-four: as we in
Australia say, that is a long time between drinks.

One of the most compelling ideas I have heard

today was raised by the Permanent Representative of
Costa Rica. He said that his delegation advocates

"for periodic open debates on these issues every
two years, so that each elected member can have
at least one opportunity, during its tenure of
membership of the Council, to debate the
working methods of this organ" (supra).

That is a good idea. We should just do it.

I would also like to echo Indonesia's call for
greater use of web-based information technology, not
just to disseminate information but also to gather
inputs on less controversial matters from a wider pool
of expertise.

Finally, we non-members should also reflect on
our own performance. Too often we turn up at open
debates and merely read out what our capitals have
sent us, rather than responding to the interventions that
have gone before and that have been the product of
very careful consideration.

On those occasions when we are invited to open
debates, as noted by the United States delegation, we
often fail to turn up. We ignore time limits, and we do
not avail ourselves of the opportunity, as we are
frequently reminded by the President, to shorten our
statements and distribute longer written texts. In short,
we can all do better, and we need to.

