Mr. Berger (Germany): I, too, would like to
thank Mr. Muburi-Muita, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his comprehensive briefing.

Strengthening the partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union (AU) for the
maintenance of peace and security in Africa is in our
mutual interest. Much has been achieved, including
through consultations, on issues of mutual concern to
the Security Council and the African Union Peace and
Security Council. The establishment of the United
Nations Office to the African Union (UNOAU) is
another concrete step in strengthening the capacity of
the AU and in enhancing the institutional cooperation
between both organizations. We welcome the update
provided by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and look forward to the Office
becoming fully operational soon, and also look forward
to the Special Representative's first report.

The strong partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union for peace and security
on the African continent manifests itself, as has been
mentioned by many colleagues, in various forms - in
the field of peacekeeping, most visibly in the form of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur. United Nations support is also provided to the
United Nations-mandated African Union Mission in
Somalia. The Joint African Union-United Nations
Chief Mediator for Darfur and the close cooperation
between the United Nations Mission in the Sudan and
the African Union High-level Implementation Panel,
under the chairmanship of President Mbeki, also show
the relevance of close cooperation in conflict
mediation, such as is currently the case in the Abyei
region of the Sudan.

Other issues relevant to peace and security in
Africa have become increasingly pertinent for
inter-organizational cooperation, such as transnational
organized crime, the HIV/AIDS pandemic and climate
change. All of these examples underline the importance
of capacity-building for the African Union and regional
organizations, with a view to enhancing their ability to
manage conflict and to counter security threats,
including through the maintenance of constitutional
order and the promotion of human rights, democracy
and the rule of law.

Effective United Nations-African Union
cooperation on peace and security also greatly benefits
from the efforts of other actors, such as the European
Union (EU) and individual Member States, in further
strengthening the African Peace and Security
Architecture. The European Union, with the joint
Africa-EU Partnership on Peace and Security and
through its African Peace Facility, provides substantial
financial and logistical support, as well as capacity-
building, to the AU at the continental, regional and
mission levels. Those efforts are complemented by
bilateral support. Germany, for instance, is currently
constructing the peace and security building for the
African Union Commission in Addis Ababa. We also
finance the German-African Border Project as part of
our joint combined efforts. We also support the training
and equipping of African police officers for the African
Standby Force and for deployment to United Nations
peacekeeping operations.

As also mentioned by the Special Representative,
enhancing coordination and expanding synergies
among the various efforts of the United Nations, EU
and bilateral donors is important in order to maximize
their impact and avoid duplication.

Let me conclude by stressing that Germany
remains committed to strengthening the African Peace
and Security Architecture.

