Ms. Wolcott Sanders (United States of America): On behalf of the United States, I would like
to join others in welcoming the President of the Special
Court for Sierra Leone, Justice George Gelaga King,
Chief Prosecutor Stephen Rapp, and Acting Registrar
Herman von Hebel to New York and to the Security
Council. Their briefings today come at a critical time
in the Court's work, with proceedings in three cases
still under way in Freetown and the trial of former
Liberian President Charles Taylor having begun on
4 June in The Hague.

The United States also welcomes the participation
in today's discussions of Deputy Secretary-General
Migiro. Her presence underscores the importance that
the United Nations and members of the international
community continue to attach to the successful
completion of the Special Court's work in order to
bring a sense of justice to the innocent victims of the
terrible crimes and atrocities that were perpetrated in
Sierra Leone.

The United States has been a strong supporter of
the Special Court from its inception. We played an
instrumental role in drafting and negotiating resolution
1315 (2000), which called on the Secretary-General to
conclude an agreement with the Government of Sierra
Leone to create an independent special court to
prosecute persons "who bear the greatest
responsibility" (para. 3) for the serious violations of
international humanitarian law and Sierra Leonean law
that were committed in the territory of Sierra Leone
since 30 November 1996. The successful completion of
the Court's work remains a top United States priority.

The United States commends the commitment
and hard work of the many men and women, a large
number of whom are Sierra Leonean, who have been
working to ensure that the Special Court fulfils its
mandate. The efforts of these dedicated men and
women have contributed to a number of important
precedents, the most notable of which was the
indictment of Charles Taylor - who was then a sitting
head of State - on charges of crimes against humanity,
war crimes and other serious violations of international
humanitarian law. Additionally, the Special Court for
Sierra Leone represents the first test of a new model of
international justice - namely, an independent,
international court of mixed jurisdiction and
composition seated in the country where the crimes
were committed. One important aspect of the Special
Court's legacy will be the future of this new model of
international justice. The efficient and timely
completion of the Special Court's work would serve as
testimony to the efficacy of the model to meet future
needs. Accordingly, we urge the leadership of the
Special Court to do everything in its power to address
inefficiencies at the Court and to avoid unnecessary
delays in the proceedings, in order to set a solid
precedent for the future of this new model.

The United States has contributed $35 million to
support the work of the Special Court since its creation
in 2002 and intends to make additional contributions to
the Court to ensure that it completes its important
work. More than 40 other States have also provided
funds to support the Court. The United States
welcomes that broad base of past support, but notes
that the Court will exhaust the funds currently
available to it in a few months. The United States
therefore appeals to all Governments to help guarantee,
through additional contributions, that justice will be
served, that impunity will not be tolerated and that
peace and stability can be sustained in Sierra Leone
and in the region.

