The President: I think this will have been a very
productive session, but only if there is follow-up. I invite
the non-governmental organizations to be as active as
possible in keeping the pressure on all of us in this
Chamber.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council recalls its previous
statements concerning protection for humanitarian
assistance to refugees and others in conflict situation,
the situation in Africa, the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, and the role of the Security Council in
the prevention of armed conflicts. The Council further
recalls its previous relevant resolutions, as well as
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly.

"Bearing in mind its primary responsibility under
the Charter of the United Nations for the maintenance
of international peace and security, the Security
Council underlines the importance of taking measures
aimed at conflict prevention and resolution in Africa.
The Council stresses the need to address the root
causes of armed conflict in a comprehensive manner
in order to prevent those circumstances which lead to
internal displacement and the outflow of refugees. The
Council notes with concern that the majority of
refugees, returnees and internally displaced persons
and others affected by conflict are women and
children and stresses the need to intensify efforts to
meet their special protection needs, including their
vulnerability to violence, exploitation and disease,
including HIV/AIDS. The Council underlines the
obligation of all Member States to seek to settle their
international disputes by peaceful means. The Council
condemns the deliberate targeting of civilians and
practices of forced displacement. The Council
reaffirms its commitment to the principles of political
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
all States. The Council emphasizes that national
authorities have the primary duty and responsibility
to provide protection and humanitarian assistance to
internally displaced persons within their jurisdiction.
The Council reaffirms the obligation of States to
prevent arbitrary displacement in situations of armed
conflict, and reaffirms as well their responsibility to
meet the protection and assistance needs of
internally displaced persons within their jurisdiction.

"The Security Council expresses its grave
concern that alarmingly high numbers of refugees
and internally displaced persons in Africa do not
receive sufficient protection and assistance. In this
context, the Council notes that refugees are protected
under the 1951 United Nations Convention and the
1967 Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees, the
1969 OAU Convention Governing the Specific
Aspects of Refugee Problems in Africa, and other
relevant initiatives in the region. The Council also
notes that there is no comprehensive protection
regime for IDPs and that existing norms are not
being fully implemented. The Council recognizes
that large-scale human suffering as well as violations
of human rights and humanitarian law are
consequences and contributing factors to instability
and further conflict. In this regard, the Council
affirms the need to ensure adequate protection and
assistance for both refugees and internally displaced
persons, taking into account the special difficulties
in the provision of humanitarian assistance to IDPs
in Africa.

"The Security Council urges all parties
concerned to comply strictly with their obligations
under international humanitarian, human rights and
refugee law, and emphasizes the need for better
implementation of relevant norms with regard to
internally displaced persons. The Council invites
States which have not already done so to consider
ratifying the relevant instruments of international
humanitarian, human rights and refugee law. The
Council takes note of the efforts made within the
United Nations system aimed at promoting an
effective collective response of the international
community to situations of internal displacement.
The Council calls upon States, in particular States
with situations of internal displacement in Africa, to
cooperate fully with such efforts. The Council
further notes that the United Nations agencies,
regional and non-governmental organizations, in
cooperation with host Governments, are making use

 

of the Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement,
inter alia, in Africa.

"The Security Council reaffirms the responsibility
of States hosting refugees to ensure the security and
civilian and humanitarian character of refugee camps
and settlements in accordance with existing
international standards and international refugee,
human rights and humanitarian law. In this regard, the
Council underlines the unacceptability of using
refugees and other persons in refugee camps and
settlements to achieve military purposes in the country
of asylum or in the country of origin.

"The Security Council underlines the importance
of safe and unhindered access, in accordance with
international law, of humanitarian personnel to
civilians in armed conflict, including refugees and
internally displaced persons, and the protection of
humanitarian assistance to them, and recalls the
responsibility of all parties to conflict to ensure the
safety and security of such personnel. The Council
condemns recent acts of deliberate violence in Africa
against humanitarian personnel.

"The Security Council recognizes the extensive
experience and burden of African States in hosting
refugees and in dealing with the effects of refugee
camps and settlements. The Council welcomes the
efforts made to support the needs of refugees in
Africa, in particular those of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and host countries.
Noting with concern the shortfall in funding for
refugee and internally displaced persons programmes
in Africa, the Council calls upon the international
community to provide such programmes with the
necessary financial resources, taking into account the
substantial needs in Africa."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2000/ 1.

There are no further speakers on my list. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage of

its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.30 pm.
