Mr. Lal (India): I thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this open debate.

It has been acknowledged for a long time now
that the flagship activity of the United Nations - its
peacekeeping operations - is facing severe challenges
and is not able to achieve the desired result of bringing
sustainable peace to the areas of its deployment.

A series of studies, including the report of the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
(S/2015/446), have pointed out the primacy of politics;
the need for regular consultations between the Council,
the troop-contributing nations and the Secretariat;
improved mandate design and implementation; meeting
capability requirements for hostile, asymmetric
environments; as well as addressing important elements
for sustaining peace for better results in peacekeeping
operations. This is because the nature of peacekeeping
has changed substantially, with modern armed conflicts
taking place within a State and involving non-State
actors and international terrorist networks. The sheer
number of briefings and open debates that continue to
be held on this issue in the Security Council indicate
that we are grappling with the complexity of issues
involved. Operational and logistic issues aside, there is
an obvious lack of appropriate investment in political
dialogue and a huge mismatch between resource
allocation for peacekeeping and peacebuilding.

The numerous long-standing chronic armed
conflict situations have led to serious deliberations
here at the United Nations, especially over the past
couple of years, on clarifying the concept of sustaining
peace, culminating in the adoption of the landmark
identical General Assembly resolution 70/262 and
Security Council resolution 2282 (2016). However, it
is still not clear how this is to be aligned. The United
Nations agencies that have a major role in implementing
the sustaining peace agenda are outside the Security
Council and have little funding support. We all are
aware that fewer than 1 per cent of the funds allocated
to peacekeeping are available for peacebuilding
efforts. While the normative acknowledgement of the
challenges and possible solutions exist, that appears
to be mere lip service when it comes to providing the
required resources.

The long, extended peacekeeping missions that go
on for decades and elusive political solutions remind
us of the need to focus on long-term investment in
sustainable development, institution-building and
inclusive political processes. The ongoing transitions
in Haiti and Liberia are useful cases for the ongoing
discussions on sustaining peace at the United Nations.
The ability of the United Nations to invest long term
in institution-building and sustainable development in
these countries would turn them into examples of how
to successfully sustain peace.

The current peacekeeping mandates include some
elements to restore and rebuild the legitimacy of the
State authority in order to prevent the relapse into
the conflict and lay the foundations for achieving
sustainable peace. However, the challenges in this
process include a lack of genuine effort to understand
the priorities of the host State and properly incorporate
the same into the mandate; and a huge difference
between ambitions, capacities and resources.

We may consider whether allocation of an
appropriate percentage of funds from the peacekeeping
budget to activities related to peacebuilding and
sustaining peace in those situations, could be an option
that would allow us to move forward efforts to achieve
sustainable peace in the various intra-State conflicts
we are facing. This is in the context of the pressure on
the already meagre resources available for the United
Nations development system.

There is a broad and clear agreement on the need
for reform. We appreciate the focus of the Secretary-
General on greater collaboration across the three
pillars of United Nations work so that resources can
be reoriented to build capacity to prevent relapses
into conflict. We have noted the intention to co-locate
the departments of political affairs and peacekeeping
operations for closer coordination. We also look
forward to receiving the Secretary-General's reform
proposals in the area of peace and security.

We hope that our discussions can move forward
our collectively efforts to contribute to the goal of
sustaining peace.

