Mr. Saliba (Malta): I would like to congratulate you,
Sir, on the manner in which you are conducting the
business of this very important meeting.

This meeting is an opportunity which allows Member
States of the United Nations not members of the Security
Council to exercise the right given to them by the Charter
to establish conditions under which justice and respect for
the obligations arising from treaties and other sources of
international law can be maintained and to employ
international machinery for the promotion of the economic
and social advancement of all peoples. It is an opportunity
to renew our commitment to this world body of sovereign
States as a regulatory force in safeguarding peace and
security and in promoting international cooperation in the
economic, social and humanitarian fields. This is a
commitment which Malta values, a commitment which we
have scrupulously upheld and will continue to respect in the
coming years.

In this context, we would like to make a strong appeal
to all Member States to make every effort to strengthen and
enhance the potential of our Organization as an instrument
of peace and understanding.

As a small country, Malta has in the past sought
refuge in this Organization with a view to resolving by
peaceful means problems and situations that it had to face.
Indeed, we look upon our Organization as a unique body
that symbolizes a democratic and credible institution which
protects the small, the weak and the vulnerable. It is the
Organization that can and should safeguard countries from
the threat or use of force against their territorial integrity
and sovereignty and be a vehicle for their economic and
social development.

Malta welcomes this opportunity to voice its own
views on a subject that has attracted the attention of an
ever-increasing audience in the international, political and
legal environment. We join other delegations that have
highlighted the urgency of assessing and analysing with all
fairness and frankness the impact that the current and
prolonged sanctions against Libya, and to that effect,
against other countries have had and continue to have, not
only on the targeted country or countries but also on other
Member States of this community of nations. In doing so,
we must ensure that justice is done to all parties involved.

As a neighbouring country to a country hit by
sanctions, Malta must ensure that any preventive or
enforcement measures undertaken by the Security Council
in accordance with Chapter VII of the Charter do not in
any way contribute to increased tension and instability in
the Mediterranean region. On the contrary, we would like
to see the Members of the United Nations play an active
and constructive role so that the issue under consideration
could be resolved in the shortest time possible. This
would allow Libya to join other countries in the region in
their efforts to contribute towards stability, cooperation
and development in the Mediterranean region.

Together with other countries, Malta feels that a
collateral effect of the application and enforcement of the
sanctions regime on Libya is undermining the holistic
approach of the political, economic and social initiatives
launched to achieve security and stability in our region.
In our case, these sanctions have had and continue to
have a negative impact on our bilateral business and
investment opportunities, on travel arrangements between
the two countries, as well as on other economic and
social exchanges.

My Government strongly believes that a serious and
open debate should be launched to explore alternative
measures for the application of sanctions and on measures
that offer built-in incentives that encourage changes in the
behaviour of targeted countries. Such sanctions must be
a mechanism for the promotion of peace and not for the
indiscriminate mass punishment of whole populations.
Sanctions must be used to maximize political impact
where it is needed most and at the same time should
ensure minimum collateral damage elsewhere.

When sanctions on a targeted country have severe
effects on the population at large, immediate remedial
action should be taken by our Organization to alleviate
the sufferings of the vulnerable groups in that society. As
in the case of Iraq, we have been witness to the fact that
the civilian population has been bearing the brunt of the
ensuing scarcities and deprivations. The presence of a
body to monitor the effects of sanctions would have
averted such disastrous consequences, helped to avoid the
situation deteriorating to such levels, and raised greater
awareness of the humanitarian aspect of sanctions.

Malta believes that the Security Council should
impose sanctions only as a last resort. My Government
has consistently pronounced itself with regard to the
application of sanctions in accordance with Chapter VII
of the Charter. Sanctions have profound consequences,
not only for the target countries, but also for the
neighbouring ones. In our view, the sanctions under the
present format are not achieving their desired objective.
Malta is in favour of the use of fair sanctions, imposed

 

appropriately and for the minimum period of time possible
by our Organization in its task of guaranteeing international
peace. However, and as already stated, the imposition of
sanctions should not lead to uncontrolled far-reaching
effects on the whole population of a targeted country.
Besides being enforced only in extreme cases and as a final
measure after all diplomatic measures have failed, a
monitoring mechanism should be set in place to report back
on the effectiveness or otherwise of such measures.

While my Government will unequivocally continue to
respect the sanctions imposed by the Security Council and
abide by them to the letter, it feels duty-bound not to
remain silent in the face of undue sufferings these sanctions
could cause to the civilian populations, especially if they hit
women, innocent children and less-privileged groups.

My delegation would like to reiterate its position that
the time has come to address the broader humanitarian and
economic effects of sanctions as well as objective criteria
in their application and the conditions to be complied with
for their termination.

It is a source of satisfaction to note the increasing
worldwide chorus of opinions that have joined the United
Nations Secretary-General in calling for a reassessment of
the criteria for the imposition of sanctions. The work started
by Ms. Graga Machel and continued by Mr. Olara Otunnu
on the impact of armed conflict on children is a case in
point. Similarly, the United Nations Committee on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights has recognized that
sanctions almost always have a dramatic impact on the
rights recognized in the Covenant, as they often cause
significant disruption of food, pharmaceuticals and
sanitation supplies, jeopardize the quality of food and the
availability of drinking water, severely interfere with the
functioning of basic health and education systems, and
undermine the right to work.

Joining the call for a more humanitarian consideration
of sanctions is the Bonn-based Development and Peace
Foundation and the high-level and broad-based international
task force assembled by the United Nations Association of
the United States under the able leadership of Lord
Carrington.

In addition, the report of the fact-finding mission to
Libya by Mr. Vladimir Petrovsky in December 1997 is a
vivid description of a people under sanctions and the
deprivations that have been inflicted on it for so long and
without an end in sight. In this regard, we recommend the
suggestions made in his report to start paving the way for
a possible unblocking of the situation.

The decisions recently delivered by the International
Court of Justice represent for many a breakthrough. These
decisions provide an opportunity to view the Lockerbie
incident and related issues in a new light. Perhaps the
most significant implication is that the Court, through its
decisions, has recognized the fact that the case
surrounding this issue is not without a legal basis. This
judgment is in itself a positive development in an issue
that has been dragging on for too long. Malta awaits with
earnest further developments in this issue, hoping that the
legal and political instruments and measures provided by
the Charter of the United Nations will lead to a just and
fair solution to this sad episode in the not-too-distant
future.

At this stage, we have to remind this world body
that my country has, from the very beginning, showed its
great sorrow towards and sympathy with the victims of
the Lockerbie tragedy, and is also very sensitive to the
continued psychological suffering of their relatives. We
sincerely hope that eventual developments in this case
will be just and equitable and to the satisfaction of all
parties concerned in this tragic episode.

Member States of this Organization that have taken
part or will take part in this debate consider it a revealing
and new-found opportunity to give the political agenda of
the United Nations a forward-looking, realistic and human
dimension, particularly in the enforcement machinery of
the Organization. Many have called for a more
democratic and transparent United Nations. Today's
opportunity is part of this evolving new identity. The new
millennium beckons all of us to work together in the
search for alternatives that will enhance the capacity of
the United Nations to maintain world peace and order and
guarantee basic human rights and fundamental freedoms,
while avoiding the unnecessary humanitarian
consequences of political and economic sanctions.

Malta once again would like to appeal to all Member
States, particularly the members of the Security Council,
to exhaust all diplomatic initiatives and all the tools of
preventive diplomacy for the peaceful and equitable
solution to problems, be they at the global, regional or
national level, before deciding on implementing such
measures as are contemplated in Articles 41 and 42 of the
Charter.

 

Malta pledges its unbiased support and cooperation in
the search for all possible avenues through which it could
contribute actively and constructively to reaching a just,
equitable and honourable solution to the issue under
consideration.

