The President: As this is the first formal meeting
of the Security Council this year, I should like to extend
my warm wishes on the occasion of the New Year to all
members of the Security Council, the United Nations
and the Secretariat.

In presiding over this first formal meeting of the
Council in 2017, lam happy to welcome the Plurinational
State ofBolivia, Ethiopia, Italy and Kazakhstan, which,
together with Sweden, are joining as new members
this year. We look forward to their participation in the
work of the Council. Their experience and wisdom
will be of invaluable assistance in the discharge of the
Council's responsibilities.

I also take this opportunity to express the Council's
gratitude to the outgoing members - Angola, Malaysia,
New Zealand, Spain and the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela - for their important contributions to the
work ofthe Council during their terms in 2015 and 2016.

Expression of thanks to the outgoing President

The President: I should also like to take this
opportunity to pay special tribute, on behalf of the
Council, to His Excellency Ambassador Roman
Oyarzun Marchesi, Permanent Representative of Spain,
for his service as President of the Council for the month
ofDecember 2016. I am sure I speak for all the members
of the Council in expressing deep appreciation to
Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi and his delegation for
the great diplomatic skill with which they conducted
the Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic

of the Congo


The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.

After consultations among Council members, I
have been authorized to make the following statement
on their behalf:

(Spoke in French)
"The Security Council welcomes the signing
of the comprehensive and inclusive political
agreement in Kinshasa on 31 December 2016,
which follows the political agreement reached on
18 October 2016 under the auspices of the African
Union facilitation, and commends the tireless
efforts of the Conference episcopale nationale du
Congo mediators to facilitate the agreement.

"The Security Council is encouraged by the
spirit of flexibility and compromise demonstrated
by Congolese political leaders in reaching this
agreement for the stability, peace, development
and consolidation of constitutional democracy in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and calls
on all Congolese actors to preserve this spirit in the
discussions to come in order to swiftly resolve all
pending issues, especially the practical modalities
of the inclusive management of the executive
during the pre-electoral and electoral period. The
Security Council encourages the political parties
that did not sign the agreement to do so.

"The Security Council hopes for a swift
implementation of the agreement, in good faith
and in all its components, in accordance with the
Congolese Constitution and in line with resolution
2277 (2016), in order to organise peaceful, credible,
inclusive and timely presidential, national and
provincial legislative elections no later than
December 2017, leading to a peaceful transfer
of power. The Security Council stresses the
importance for the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and its national partners to
take all necessary steps to accelerate preparations
for the elections without further delays, within the
agreed time frame. The Security Council stresses
the importance of the inclusion of women in the
follow up and implementation of the agreement.

"The Security Council reiterates its strong
commitment to the sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

"The Security Council further calls for the
assistance of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo's friends and development partners to
support the efforts of the country to ensure the
establishment of sustainable peace and security in
the country.

"TheSecurityCouncilrcitcralcsitscommitmcnl successfully conclude the electoral process, and to
to supporting the implementation ofthe agrccmcm, acl accordingly,"
in close cooperation with the African Union, and
its determination to continue to closely follow
the situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, in particular respect for human rights, the
security conditions on the ground and the efforts to

(spoke i n English)

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2017/l.

The meeting rose at 3.10pm,

