Mr. Danesh-Yazdi (Islamic Republic of Iran):
Allow me, Sir, to begin by congratulating you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I should also like to thank you for
convening this meeting on an issue that is very
important for the international community in general
and for the Middle East in particular. We also wish to
pay tribute to last month's French presidency of the
Council.

A year ago this month, the International Court of
Justice (ICJ), in its advisory opinion, found the
construction of the separation wall cutting through the
occupied West Bank to be illegal. The ICJ asserted that
the wall had to be dismantled and that the Palestinians
had to be compensated for losses sustained due to its
construction. Shortly after that, the General Assembly
cemented the ICJ opinion by adopting resolution ES-
10/15, which acknowledged the advisory opinion,
demanded that Israel comply with it and called upon all
Member States to respect the legal obligations
stipulated therein.

Blatant defiance was the Israeli response to the
will of the international community so clearly
expressed. Over the past year, the building of the
unlawful expansionist wall, including in and around
East Jerusalem, went on at a faster pace, as did the
ongoing destruction of properties and the confiscation
and annexation of Palestinian land required for
construction. In parallel, the expansion of Jewish
settlements on the occupied Palestinian land, also
deemed illegal by the same advisory opinion of the
Court, has continued unabated.

The recent approval by the Israeli cabinet of a
route for the section of the concrete wall being built
around Jerusalem is the latest act of flagrant defiance
of the will of the international community. That section
of the wall cuts through two densely populated
Palestinian neighbourhoods, cutting off an additional
55,000 - maybe more - Palestinian residents of
occupied East Jerusalem from the rest of the city and
from their work, schools, hospitals and families. It also
prevents other Palestinians from reaching occupied
East Jerusalem and denies them complete access to the
Holy City. In so doing, the Israeli regime is seeking to
achieve the goal of tilting the demographic balance and
pursuing the aim of the Judaization of the city by
imposing a fait accompli on the Palestinians.

International law holds that no occupying Power
has a right to change the features of the territories it
occupies. The International Court of Justice, in its
advisory opinion, reiterates this basic principle by
stressing that

"all States are under an obligation not to
recognize the illegal situation arising from the
construction of the wall, not to render aid or
assistance in maintaining that situation"; (A/ES- 10/273, p. 52, para. 163)

and

"to ensure compliance by Israel with international
humanitarian law as embodied in [the Fourth
Geneva] Convention". (ibid.)
There is no doubt that the legal stipulations in
this paragraph entrust the international community
with an immense responsibility. Besides, this wall flies
in the face of justice and basic humane values, and
those who claim to be in possession of such lofty
values should not remain indifferent to it, let alone
condone it.

The Palestinian people continue to suffer and
endure hardship in the face of illegal Israeli practices
and policies, including crimes such as collective
punishment, house demolitions, land confiscation and
targeted and indiscriminate extrajudicial killings. In
recent months, over 60 Palestinians have been killed,
including through the resumption of Israel's terrorist
acts and extrajudicial executions, bringing the number
of Palestinian deaths since September 2000 to more
than 3,670. At the same time, the number of injured
persons continues to increase. These crimes, coupled
with other illegal Israeli practices, such as restrictions
on the freedom of movement of Palestinian persons
and goods, as well as the existence of hundreds of
checkpoints throughout the occupied Palestinian
territory and the continuation and even acceleration of
the construction of the illegal Jewish settlements, have
in turn caused the already dire socio-economic
conditions of the Palestinian people to deteriorate,
making daily life unbearable.

We note that all efforts made in past years to de-
escalate the Palestinian conflict have been torpedoed
by the callous and belligerent Israeli positions and
actions, which further proves that the Israeli regime is
adamant in its desire to defy international law and the
will of the international community. Undoubtedly, until
the legitimate rights of the Palestinians are restored -
including their right to independent statehood and the
return of all Palestinian refugees to their homeland - a
fair, just and lasting solution to the Palestinian issue
will be out of reach.

We believe that the Security Council should not
stand idly by and avoid addressing seriously the
Palestinian question, which threatens peace and
security in the region and beyond. It is unfortunate that
the exercise of the veto has prevented the Council from
fulfilling its responsibilities with regard to the
Palestinian question thus far. Indeed, the selective
show of resolve and the discriminatory approach taken
towards enforcing the Council's resolutions undermine
its credibility and adversely affect the overall
international security system.

