The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of France.

I thank Mr. Guehenno and Mr. Gambari for their
statements.

France is extremely concerned by the escalation
of violence between Israel and Lebanon. Hizbollah
bears responsibility for the outbreak of hostilities.
Once again, we condemn Thursday's attacks on Israeli
territory which killed or wounded several Israeli
soldiers. We condemn the abduction of two of them
and we demand once again their immediate and
unconditional release. We condemn ongoing rocket fire
on Israeli territory which is striking and killing
indiscriminately.

The Lebanese Government has dissociated itself
from this irresponsible and deliberate provocation, but
it must shoulder its responsibilities and abide by the
commitments it has taken before this Council by
working effectively to restore its authority throughout
its territory and by mobilizing more actively all
Lebanese political actors in support of disarming
Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias in accordance
with the Taif Agreement and Security Council
resolutions.

Israel has the right to defend its territory and its
citizens when they are attacked - and they have been
attacked. But we condemn the disproportionate nature
of the response, which has already claimed many
civilian victims and has caused significant material
damage. In its breadth and its nature, the Israeli
response threatens to erase efforts undertaken by the
Lebanese Government to restore the country's
economy and to restore State authority throughout the
territory. It jeopardizes efforts undertaken over the past
year to consolidate Lebanese democracy and to ensure
the reconciliation of its people.

Moreover, France condemns the destruction of
civilian and military infrastructure as a result of
operations carried out by Israel as well as the air and
sea blockade imposed on Lebanon. The Lebanese
people must not be taken hostage. Freedom of
movement for the population as well as for foreigners
in Lebanon must be restored without delay. France
cannot accept that its citizens should be prevented from
returning to their country. With its European partners,
it will work to ensure that a very rapid solution to this
situation is found.

We call upon all parties in Lebanon and in Israel
to refrain from any new action which would further
feed the cycle of violence and endanger the civilian
population. There can be no military solution to this
crisis, just as there can be no military solution to any of
the conflicts that have affected the Middle East for
decades.

France has constantly said that these conflicts
fuel one another and are interwoven. The history of
this region for nearly 60 years has tragically shown
that violence and the struggle for power have resolved
nothing. On the contrary, they feed other conflicts and
cause further violence and tragedy, with the civilian
population being the primary victims.

Given this very risky and intense crisis,
international diplomacy is now working in an attempt
to define the terms for a peaceful solution, in particular
18

within the United Nations framework, through the
mission sent to the region by the Secretary-General,
and within the framework of the European Union. Of
course, France wholeheartedly supports these efforts,
which can consider how to avoid direct confrontation.
France, as solemnly stated by President Chirac today,
calls upon the parties to immediately cease hostilities,
which is the only way to give a chance to mediation
efforts. It calls upon everyone to scrupulously respect
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all parties
and to cooperate fully with efforts under way taken by
the international community.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

There are no further speakers on my list. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda. I invite
the Members of the Council to consultations following
the adjournment of this meeting.

The meeting rose at noon.
06-42993
