Mr. Idrissov (Kazakhstan): Let me first of all
commend Malaysia on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for the current month. I would like
to join in thanking Ambassador Ramlan Bin Ibrahim
for convening this timely and important open debate
to address the grave violations against children in
armed conflicts. I would like to formally thank the
Secretary-General, whom I saw a few moments ago,
for his insightful remarks earlier and for his tireless
and sincere efforts to address this painful issue. My
delegation commends Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Mr. Anthony Lake, Executive
Director of UNICEF, whom I was able to congratulate
personally, and the Security Council Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict for their tireless efforts
to tackle this problem.

Despite all international action and increased global
concern, children continue to be disproportionately
affected during and in the aftermath of conflicts. This
situation calls for strong and urgent action by Member
States. My country fully endorses UNICEF's Children,
Not Soldiers campaign and urges the speedy and full
implementation of its action plans designed to end
violations against children.

We call for increased political will and the
commitment of Member States to shifting to a broader
perspective by sustaining long-term rehabilitation and
reintegration of children, child soldiers and, especially,
girls into normal life. Education programmes,
vocational training and adequate psychological support
need to be integrated so that former child soldiers are
treated as victims rather than security threats.

We believe that the machinery of the
non-governmental organization community, such
as Watchlist on Children and Armed Conflict, Save
the Children Alliance and the Geneva Call, should
be mobilized to get more non-State actors to join the
latter's "Deed of Commitment". We are convinced that
every effort should be made to protect schools, hospitals
and humanitarian facilities from attacks in order to
ensure safe access to education and health care. In
that regard, my country co-sponsored resolution 2286
(2016), recently adopted on this matter. Kazakhstan
has also endorsed the Safe Schools Declaration and
calls on parties to conflicts to uphold its Guidelines for
Protecting Schools and Universities from Military Use
during Armed Conflict.

Realizing the important role that education can play
in promoting peace and stability, we have allocated a
total of more than $53 million for various humanitarian
projects in Afghanistan. Our record of assistance
includes the construction of schools and hospitals in
that country and the funding of annual scholarships for
Afghan students.

As a State fully committed to its international
obligations, Kazakhstan ratified, in July 2011, the
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child and accordingly adapted its own national
Children's Rights Act. We also introduced legal
measures to prohibit the enlistment of persons
under the age of 18 or their use as mercenaries, and
strengthened the relevant provisions of our national
criminal code. As part of our school curriculum, we
focus on interfaith and inter-ethnic education in order
to form a national identity based on the shared human
values of tolerance in a global civilization, and thereby
prevent violent extremism.

We would like to suggest the following
recommendations for strengthening the capacity of the
United Nations to protect children in armed conflict.

Thia grave situation demands that a child-protection
mandate be incorporated into the work of the Security
Council and of peacekeeping and political missions,
with dedicated child-protection capacity at every level.
Intensive special training of troops, police and civilian
personnel before deployment would ensure effective
detection, tracing, rescue and rehabilitation operations,
as well as monitoring and reporting procedures on
behalf of child victims. Child protection should also be
an integral element of all peace processes.

Of late we have learned of despicable plans of
the self-proclaimed group called the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Shams, or Da'esh, to massively use
children to train future terrorists. These are absolutely
reprehensible and unacceptable plans, and we should
respond in a united and global manner to foil them.

Another aspect of this issue is mass migration
and refugee flows. In the case of mass refugee flows,
States of origin, transit and destination must be held
accountable to fulfil their obligations to uphold the
rights of children.

All aspects of this integrated approach call for
greater coordination between all States Members of the
United Nations, specifically the members ofthe Security
Council, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
the United Nations country teams on the ground and, of
course, the Human Rights Council.
It is an honour for Kazakhstan to have been elected
to serve on the Council for the years 2017 and 2018. We
pledge to undertake that responsibility with the utmost
seriousness, and we see upholding the rights, dignity
and protection of children in time of conflict as a most
sacred mission.

