Mr. Mukerji (India): On behalf of my delegation,
Madam President, I would like to congratulate you
and Australia for your successful hosting of the Group
of 20 summit and of our Prime Minister's bilateral
visit to your country. I would also like to thank you
for organizing today's open debate on international
cooperation on combating terrorism and violent
extremism. I compliment you on your circulation of a
useful and well-structured concept note (S/2014/787, annex), which will help us in the debate.

At the outset, we would like to assert that there can
be no justification for terrorism and that the United
Nations must demonstrate zero tolerance if we are
to successfully counter its threat. The international
community is facing unprecedented challenges from
terrorism, which threatens to endanger the very
foundation of democratic societies. Resolution 2178
(2014) represents a good beginning to the Security
Council's response to one dimension of that threat.
The resolution's impact will depend on how it is
implemented by Member States, keeping in mind
their obligations under Article 25 of the Charter of
the United Nations. Much will also depend on how the
Council addresses Member States' compliance with the
resolution's provisions. Its credibility as an effective
and empowered body will be tested by the way it
oversees their implementation.

The concept note brings out the immediate context
around resolution 2178 (2014). Regarding the first and
second groups of issues in the note, whereby Member
States are asked to speak on national experience and data
collection, we would like to point out that a wealth of
such information is already available to the Council. In
India, we have used grassroots-level local communities
and committees for outreach and feedback on counter-
terrorism and have formulated appropriate counter-
terror narratives. Based on our collection of data on the
travel and transit of foreign terrorist fighters, we feel
there is a need to enhance international cooperation in
disrupting the travel of such elements.

The phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters is
not a recent one. The issue, therefore, is not so much
the need to collect more information, but what the
Council proposes to do with such information. We
believe that the Council needs to act robustly using
the instruments of law and the information available
to it to counter terrorism and maintain international
peace and security. In that context, we urge that the
Council add its collective voice to the early conclusion
of the comprehensive convention on international
terrorism, so that Member States are legally obliged,
under Article 25 of the Charter, to either prosecute or
extradite terrorists.

With respect to the third basket identified in the
concept note, which is the role of United Nations entities
in countering terrorism, we would recall that during the
recent review of the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy, it was stated by the Secretariat that
there were as many as 31 separate entities in the United
Nations family dealing with this issue. However,
it is a matter of concern that there is no single point
or coordinator accountable to the States Members of
the United Nations for the activities of these various
entities. This, we believe, must be rectified urgently.

There are at least three important observations in
the concept note that we welcome. One of them relates
to the infrastructure of terrorism, which involves both
physical structures as well as financial and ideological
wellsprings. Since this infrastructure does not exist in
a vacuum, it is an inescapable conclusion that Member
States have an obligation to act swiftly to prevent their
sovereign territory from being used by terrorists. No
Member State can hope to be immune to the threat
of such terrorism, and the infrastructure of terrorism
therefore needs to be erased urgently if we are to avoid
a doomsday scenario.

Secondly, we fully agree with the observation
relating to the increasingly sophisticated use of
technology and communications to commit ever more
barbaric acts of terror, based on our own horrendous
experience of 26 November 2008 in Mumbai, involving
an attack carried out by foreign terrorist fighters in the
full glare of the international media. One of the fighters
was apprehended by our authorities and prosecuted and
penalized through the due process of law. That was
the first time that we confronted the use of Voice over
Internet Protocol to direct terrorist acts. We believe
that if we are serious about countering this challenge
in an effective manner, we must agree on the necessary
adjustments to be made in the way that the global
Internet infrastructure is currently managed in order
to counter the exploitation of the Internet by terrorists.

Thirdly, I would stress the challenge posed by
terrorists to United Nations peacekeepers, specifically
in the Golan Heights and in Mali. Unless effectively
deterred, such threats will only increase in number and
scope. In the case of the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force, it has been alleged that the foreign
terrorist fighters who attacked United Nations
peacekeepers belong to the Al-Nusra Front, which is
proscribed by the Security Council as a terrorist group.
We call on the Council to take urgent and visible
steps to use its authority to investigate, prosecute
and penalize the perpetrators of such terrorist acts. A
clear obligation for all Member States to act against
foreign terrorist fighters who attack United Nations
peacekeepers should become an integral part of the
peacekeeping mandates approved by the Council.

Ms. King took the Chair.

Finally, it is not clear to us as to what are the
working procedures applied within the Council when
it deliberates on how to counter terrorism, which is
becoming the single biggest threat to the maintenance
of international peace and security. We feel that it would
benefit the Council to have regular interactive sessions
with Member States to address these issues. Such an
innovation would go a long way towards offsetting the
widely held perception that the Council uses different
standards to deal with terrorism.
In conclusion, we would reiterate that the fight
against terrorism has to be unrelenting and fought
across all fronts. The immediate lesson all of us must
draw is that foreign terrorist fighters and the spectre
of terrorism cannot be dealt with through selective
approaches and that there can be no justification for
terrorism.

