Mr. Rovensky (Czech Republic): My delegation has
been following closely the activities of the Multinational
Force in Haiti, and is delighted both with the substantial
progress that has been attained and with the way in which
it has been attained - that is, largely non-violently.
Indeed, it is hard to recall many other changes of a
political order as radical as the one that has occurred in
Haiti where the level of violence in resolving the crisis
would have been as low, especially in View of the high
level of violence that prevailed while the crisis itself

 

lasted. We congratulate the Multinational Force (MNF) and
the people of Haiti on this remarkable accomplishment.

We note with great satisfaction that the situation with
respect to the observance of human rights and the security
situation in the country has improved immensely over the
past few months. However, a lot remains to be done. The
previous regime appears to have been so corrupt that
purging the security and judicial apparatus, to name just
two examples, of unwelcome elements has led to their
almost total collapse. The task of the new Government is
thus to build them up from scratch, a task even more
arduous than just revamping them.

At the same time, all dangers to the country's
fledgling democracy have not disappeared. We feel that a
truly terrifying quantity of arms is circulating or is cached
in the country, and we are uncertain about the paramilitary
elements that seem to be hibernating for the moment,
perhaps awaiting a more propitious time to show signs of
life again. Efforts to disarm them may not have been
assiduous enough so far.

These are some of the reasons why we understand the
need for a massive infusion of United Nations personnel to
take over from the MNF. This step meets with our full
approval. Resolution 940 (1994) anticipates that the task of
the United Nations Mission in Haiti (UNMIH) will be
accomplished no later than February 1996; we hope that
this will be long enough for it to complete its job.

President Aristide has attained some important political
successes, especially in having consolidated his Cabinet.
We are encouraged by the definite steps that have been
taken towards holding parliamentary elections, and we
encourage Haiti's authorities to hold them at the earliest
convenient time. We have every expectation that once they
take place the United Nations will certify them as having
been free and fair.

By successfully completing the task it was authorized
to undertake by paragraph 4 of resolution 940 (1994), the
multinational force has demonstrated the usefulness, in
some circumstances, of the Security Council's entrusting
groups of States with enforcement action. We see this as an
exceptional measure, to be used when all else fails. But,
following the non-implementation of the Governors Island
Agreement, we saw that in Haiti all else had indeed failed.
In following the progress of the MNF, the Security Council
benefited from frequent, detailed and on-the-record reports
provided on behalf of the MNF by the United States
delegation. We are grateful for this reporting effort. We
salute and thank all members of the MNF and wish equal
success to the new UNMIH force.

