Ms. Treppel: It is an honour to be here this morning
at this open debate of the Security Council on behalf of
the Secretary General of the Organization of American
States (OAS).

I would like to begin by thanking you, Mr. President,
for promoting discussion on the importance of
preventive mechanisms for countering the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction (WMDs) by non-State
actors, particularly in the context of the just-concluded
review of resolution 1540 (2004). The OAS would
also like to take this opportunity to recognize the
Kingdom of Spain for its very capable leadership
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004).
Since the adoption of resolution 1540 (2004),
more than a decade ago, the Organization of American
States, through its Inter-American Committee against
Terrorism (CICTE), has focused on promoting a regional
framework for cooperation among its member States to
ensure the effective implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) throughout the Americas. As we have also been
tasked with implementing resolution 1373 (2001), as well
as the Inter-American Convention against Terrorism,
the OAS is uniquely positioned to promote both global
and regional instruments at the hemispheric level. We
know, however, that the successful implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) is a responsibility shared among
States, international organizations, the private sector,
the scientific sector and society as a whole. It is for that
reason that I would like to acknowledge our strategic
partnerships and strong collaborative relations with
other organizations, especially the 1540 Committee,
its Group of Experts and the United Nations Office for
Disarmament Affairs (UNODA).

The OAS is pleased to see the focus that the recently
approved resolution 2325 (2016) places on the role of
regional organizations and regional collaboration, and
in that spirit the OAS celebrates the agreement reached
with the Office for Disarmament Affairs to designate,
with financial support, an OAS 1540 Regional
Coordinator for the Americas. I am also pleased to
report that the OAS is working with the UNODA
Regional Office in Lima to organize a regional 1540
conference early next year.

The OAS is committed to increasing dialogue and
strengthening political outreach and awareness among
the countries of the hemisphere. Since 2014, we have
been promoting the development and implementation
of national action plans in the Americas to complement
existing national legislative frameworks for combating
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.

Currently, CICTE is supporting the efforts of 10
countries in the region in this critical area, including
Chile, the Committee's current Chair, and Panama,
which, as Vice-Chair and host of the upcoming CICTE
annual meeting, has designated the prevention of
proliferation of WMDs and terrorist financing as the
key topic for debate. Furthermore, the Government of
Panama, together with Spain and the OAS, sponsored
a non-proliferation side event in the framework of
the seventy-first session of the General Assembly
in September.

The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
will continue to pose a growing threat to international
peace and security. The more complex and asymmetrical
the violence, the greater the risk of terrorists acquiring
weapons of mass destruction. We know that in most
Latin American and Caribbean countries the human,
financial and material resources allocated for emergency
preparedness and response are limited. While the
humanitarian impact of WMDs is undeniable, few if
any countries currently have the capacity to address the
humanitarian consequences of an attack caused by a
weapon of mass destruction.

In the interests of time, I will not go into detail
here, but my written remarks set forth a series of
measures that we believe Member States should take
into account to enhance their 1540 frameworks and
prevent the spread of weapons of mass destruction and
related materials to all non-State actors.

We believe that regionalbodies playavery important
role in addressing proliferation and terrorism, so allow
me to conclude my remarks today by reaffirming OAS
support for existing non-proliferation and arms control
systems, as well as our commitment to improving their
effectiveness throughout the Western Hemisphere.

Because the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) must reconcile international security and
strategic trade needs, the OAS will also continue to
encourage the enactment of legislation that supports
both non-proliferation objectives and commercial
interests and that criminalizes offenses related
to the proliferation and financing of weapons of
mass destruction.

Thank you again, Mr. President, for this
opportunity. The OAS reiterates its firm commitment
to the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and
has every confidence that this open debate will make
important contributions to its ongoing review.

