Mr. Takasu: Before proceeding, I would like to
add my words of deep appreciation and warm regards
to Norma Chan for her dedication.

I would like to thank Special Representative Kai
Eide for his very frank and helpful remarks. Also, we
are grateful to Minister Spanta for his presence this
morning. We are very grateful to the Secretary-General
and the Special Representative's team in Kabul for
preparing the most recent report of the Secretary-
General (S/2009/475), containing benchmarks. As he
has admitted, it is difficult to formulate benchmarks for
a mission in such a complex situation, but they will
serve as useful guidelines to track the progress in the
country, which is now the focus of attention of all of us.

First of all, let me congratulate the people of
Afghanistan, who cast their ballots in the recent
historic elections under very intimidating
circumstances. There is hardly any country in the
world where it is more difficult to conduct elections
now than Afghanistan. It must be stressed that the
recent elections were the very first Afghan-led
elections and included very strong public engagement.

Now that the votes have been cast, we expect the
process to be completed with due process. We expect
the Electoral Complaints Commission to handle
properly the many complaints of fraud. The ongoing
joint work of the Independent Election Commission
and the Electoral Complaints Commission is
reassuring, and we should have full confidence in their
efforts to announce the certified results soon.

I would like to urge all concerned parties in
Afghanistan to accept the certified results once they are
announced. We encourage them to try to mend the
political fissure that has been created by the electoral
process and to promote a policy of inclusion under the
new Government.

The next six months will be critical to defining
the future course of Afghanistan. We must now look
ahead to the post-election strategy. Sustained
international attention and assistance are needed now
more than ever. In this light, I would like to reaffirm
that the new Japanese Government will continue its
intensive efforts to extend assistance to Afghanistan.
Japan's strong commitment to the stability and
reconstruction of Afghanistan is unchanged.

We also wish to see the newly elected Afghan
Government demonstrate its determination to address
forcefully the various challenges it faces - in
particular the issue of good governance - and thereby
gain trust both at home and abroad.

The proposed international conference will
provide a valuable opportunity to confirm
commitments on the parts of both the international
community and the Government of Afghanistan. I
would like to point out that the venue and modality of
the conference will be decided in full consultation with
the new Afghan Government. It is important to ensure
that the Government take the lead in the preparation of
the conference and demonstrate ownership in the
outcome.

In the post-election strategy, the reintegration and
reconciliation of insurgents are of critical importance.
We should encourage political outreach towards those
former insurgents who have forsaken violence and
made a firm commitment to living peacefully within
the framework of the Constitution.

We must remind ourselves that the reintegration
effort must be led by the Afghan Government. The
Government, at the national and local levels, must be
regarded by the people as credible, strong and
competent if such efforts are to be effective. Building
on its experiences in disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration and in the disbandment of illegal and
armed groups, Japan intends to contribute to these
efforts, including by providing vocational training for
those who have been reintegrated.

In meeting the diverse challenges in the country,
a more focused and better-coordinated approach among
donors is essential. Japan fully supports the efforts of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
prioritizing and coordinating areas of assistance, and
concurs with the areas he has identified to address.
Agriculture, rural development, infrastructure and
basic human needs are the areas on which Japan has
been focusing its assistance, and we will continue to
exert our efforts in those areas.
10
Major pledges have been made, but many of them
still await implementation. I would like to emphasize
that it is time to accelerate the implementation of
pledges, as soon as the commitment is reaffirmed by
the new Afghan Government.

Obviously, security is the biggest challenge and a
prerequisite for all these efforts. Efforts at reintegration
and reconciliation, for instance, must be carried out
from a position of strength. We pay high tribute to
those countries that are providing troops, many of
which have experienced the loss of the precious lives
of their personnel.

We also commend the performance of the Afghan
security forces, particularly in the past few months. But
clearly, much more needs to be done to further
strengthen their national capacity. Japan has been
supporting efforts to improve the national security
capacity, including through assistance for the police
payroll. Japan will continue to explore what it can do
to best assist in this area.

The indispensable role of the United Nations in
Afghanistan has been reaffirmed on a number of
occasions by the Council itself, but also at various
international forums. It was again borne out in the
conduct of the recent elections. We fully recognize how
difficult and treacherous the situation is for United
Nations personnel to accomplish their given mandates.
The leadership of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Kai Eide, and the courageous
efforts of his staff are highly commendable.

Japan reiterates its support for the strengthening
of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan in the months to come and looks forward
to examining a detailed proposal.

