Mr. Fowler (Canada) (interpretation from French): I
am pleased to take the floor today as the Security Council
considers a draft resolution establishing a United Nations
Civilian Police Mission in Haiti (MIPONUH), an entirely
new Mission which is clearly adapted to Haiti's special
circumstances. The members of the Council are hereby
sending a very positive and encouraging message to the
Haitian people and their Government, a message that we
strongly endorse.

Canada believes that the United Nations and the
Security Council in particular can contemplate the
completion of the United Nations Transition Mission in
Haiti (UNTMIH) with some measure of satisfaction.
Canadian military personnel have spoken warmly of their
experiences with this Mission and of their excellent
relations with the Haitian people. As this Mission - one of
Canada's most important military operations in recent
years - draws to a close, Canada is particularly proud of
all that UNTMIH has accomplished.

Here I wish to pay tribute to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Enrique ter Horst,
for the part he played in the success of UNTMIH. His
outstanding diplomatic skills were crucial assets and were
highly appreciated by the Canadian staff of UNTMIH as
well as by our embassy in Port-au-Prince.

We believe that this Mission enabled a smooth and
successful transition period. UNTMIH paved the way for a
more comprehensive and coordinated approach to Haiti's
long-term development, meshing security concerns with
technical assistance and a whole range of environmental,
agricultural, educational and administrative reform
programmes. Canada's largest bilateral assistance
programme in the hemisphere, and one of our largest aid
programmes in the world, is found in Haiti. This
programme covers a broad range of poverty-reduction and
peace-building programmes. We strongly support this
measured and careful approach by the United Nations.

We believe that the new Mission to be established
today and the draft resolution which authorizes it are
evidence of the continuing commitment of the
international community to assisting Haiti as it continues
taking these early, important steps along the road to
stability and development as a democratic nation.
Although the military component of the peacekeeping
operation in Haiti will now come to an end, our interest
in and support for Haiti's progress are in no way
diminished.

(spoke in English)

For our part, and on the assumption that there will
be wide participation in the new Mission, Canada plans
to contribute some 24 of our police officers to
MIPONUH, along with six armoured personnel carriers
for the special police unit. This will be in addition to the
22 Canadian police experts in Haiti under our bilateral
technical assistance programme.

Haiti's immediate security needs cannot be divorced
from longer-term development objectives. In this regard,
we welcome the flexibility demonstrated by the Council
in responding to Haiti's particular circumstances and
needs, and especially in providing for MIPONUH's
important coordination function with respect to all United
Nations activities in Haiti.

We are particularly pleased that the new Mission
will be of one year's duration. The continuity of such a
mandate will be of great benefit to Haiti. The Haitian
National Police has taken substantial strides forward in
providing for Haiti's security needs. However, we agree
with both President Preval and the Secretary-General's
assessment that there is still much that remains to be
done. In the absence of any tradition of civilian policing
in Haiti, the guidance, training and mentoring provided by
the United Nations Civilian Police, United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) technical advisers and
by the International Civilian Mission to Haiti (MICIVIH)
continue to be critical to fostering good policing practices,
which by definition include respect for fundamental
human rights. This requires the development of both
investigatory and enforcement expertise. It also requires
continuing vigilance against the abuse of authority by
Haitian National Police officers and, in this regard, we are

 

pleased that these officers are increasingly held accountable
for unethical or abusive conduct. We must also encourage
the Haitian National Police to develop appropriate
supervisory skills, particularly at the middle- and senior-
management levels.

Promoting the concept of community policing, so that
citizens and police alike do not fall back into old patterns
of behaviour that are unsuitable to a civilian force
respectful of people's rights and at the service of the
community, should be the informing principle of this new
Mission. Community policing plays an integral role in other
aspects of development, in particular initiatives targeting
youth, education and fighting the traffic and consumption
of illegal drugs. We look forward to continuing progress in
all of these areas.

As we have said before the Council in the past,
Canada remains very concerned at the growing gap between
the Haitian National Police's achievements and the
agonizingly slow pace of judicial reform. We cannot
overemphasize the importance of progress in both of these
areas. Without judicial reform, the National Police's
development will be at best a pyrrhic victory. In partnership
with the donor community, the United Nations Secretariat
and the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP),
we are continuing to offer the Haitian Government support
in this field. Ultimately, however, it is the Government's
responsibility to achieve the goal of an effective and fairly
administered judicial system.

Finally, the political paralysis which has gripped Haiti
for many months is also a source of concern. We urge all
political parties in Haiti to work together to find a solution
to the impasse and to permit the vital business of
government, at this delicate phase in Haiti's development,
to proceed. International assistance will be stymied if the
host Government is not in a position to plan for and to
implement such development.

Yet another milestone in Haiti's history will be passed
with the adoption of this draft resolution. We are confident
that the new Mission will afford the Government of Haiti
a further opportunity to work towards ensuring political
stability, respect for fundamental freedoms and economic
development for the Haitian people.

For its part, Canada will continue to support strongly
the Haitian people in their efforts to meet the challenges of
the coming months.

