Mr. Tenya (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We appreciate
the convening of this meeting. We are grateful to
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for his detailed briefing this
afternoon, which draws attention to the tragic situation
in Gaza.

We would like to emphasize three points that we
believe need urgent attention.

First is putting an end to the settlement, demolition
and eviction practices in the occupied Palestinian
territories. Peru regrets and notes with concern the
continuation of such practices, which are contrary to
international law, seriously jeopardize the territorial
integrity of the Palestinian State and undermine the
possibility of reaching a political solution. We are
particularly concerned about the humanitarian impact
that would arise from the demolition of a group of
structures in the village of Khan Al-Ahmar, which,
as Mr. Mladenov mentioned, houses a community of
181 Palestinians, more than half of whom are minors.
Such practices must cease, in strict compliance with
the resolutions adopted by the Security Council, in
particular resolution 2334 (2016).

My second point is that we believe that it is
important to reverse the deteriorating humanitarian
situation. We note with dismay the profound and
ongoing deterioration of the humanitarian situation
in the Gaza Strip, exacerbated by the recent incidents
of violence and the cuts in the funding of assistance
programmes. In order to overcome that reality, we
believe that it is essential to address the lack of basic
goods and services, as well as the blockade to which
millions of Palestinians are subjected and which
provides an ideal setting for those who promote violence
and extremism. In that regard, we welcome the fact that
the Special Envoy and his team have identified specific
infrastructure and development projects in Gaza.

We also believe that it is essential to advance the
process of intra-Palestinian reconciliation and that the
agreement reached last October under the auspices
of Egypt be reflected in concrete actions and results.
We believe that that should make it possible for the
legitimate Palestinian Authority to regain effective
control of Gaza and should facilitate the resumption of
direct negotiations with Israel.

We must also reiterate the need to provide the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East with steady and predictable
funding and to mobilize to that end the solidarity of
the international community, in particular the countries
with the greatest resources and those committed to
peace and stability in the region.

Lastly, my third point is that we believe that
it is important to end the violence and to commit to
achieving a political agreement. We regret the fact
that the parties continue their hostile positions. Peru
condemns the indiscriminate violence of Hamas, the
disproportionate Israeli responses and the rhetoric of
confrontation on the part of both sides. We emphasize
the importance and the urgency of having a minimum
level of understanding to assist in the reversal of the
negative trends on the ground and in the resumption
of direct negotiations between the parties, all with a
view to achieving the only viable solution: two States
coexisting with secure and mutually recognized borders.

I would like to conclude by commending the
presentation last June, in written form, of the quarterly
report (S/2018/614) on the implementation of resolution
2334 (2016), which was requested of the Secretary-
General by 10 members of the Security Council (see S/2018/454). We hope to have a new written report in
December in order to lend greater transparency to the
treatment of this delicate issue.

