Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I would first like to welcome, through you,
Mr. President, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan and thank him
for presiding over this meeting. I would also like to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council this month. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing today.

In their statements today, some delegations have
deliberately referred to the situation in my country,
Syria, in a provocative and misleading manner. They
have cited a number of false allegations and accusations
that only serve to support terrorism and extremism in
Syria and in the region, and to divert attention from
the core matter under discussion, which is how to put
an end to the Israeli occupation of Arab territories, and
not the domestic affairs of the countries of the region.
On that basis, I will not respond, under this item, to the
statements of countries that support, arm, harbour, train
and incite terrorists and facilitate their infiltration of
Syrian territory across our borders with neighbouring
States. Those statements encourage extremism and
devastation in Syria and feverishly aim to thwart any
possible solution to the Syrian crisis, including efforts
undertaken to convene the second Geneva Conference,
which the Syrian Government has agreed to participate
in without preconditions.

It is well known that the United Nations
bears a historical and legal responsibility for the
establishment of the independent and sovereign State
of Palestine. That responsibility dates to the adoption
of General Assembly resolutions 181 (II) of 1947, which
partitioned Palestine, and 273 (III), which endorsed
Israel's membership in the United Nations, based on
its commitment to United Nations resolutions relevant
to the establishment of the State of Palestine and the
return of Palestinian refugees to their land. However,
what happened after that was just the opposite. Fully
supported militarily, politically and economically
by its protectors and sponsors, Israel launched one
aggression after the other against the people and States
of the region, implementing an expansionist policy that
resulted in occupying territories in a number of Arab
countries in 1967.

Furthermore, successive Israeli Governments have
perpetrated systematic and documented violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights law
that amount to war crimes and crimes against humanity.
Settlement activities have always been a top priority for
the policymakers of successive Israeli Governments, in
spite ofthe fact that those activities - as recognized by
everyone, including Israel's supporters - undermine
the possibility of creating a contiguous and viable State
ofPalestine, as well as the right to self-determination of
the Palestinian people.

Israel has not stopped there. It has organized State
terror reaching beyond the region, imposed racist laws,
desecrated Islamic and Christian holy sites, expelled
Palestinians from their homes and arbitrarily detained
and inhumanely tortured Palestinians, including women
and children, and the democratically elected leaders of
the Palestinian people.

In the same context as the Israeli policies I have
just mentioned, the suffering of the Syrian people
under occupation in the Syrian Golan has been going
on for almost half a century. Israeli settlement activities
continue in the occupied Syrian Golan, where the
Syrian population is subject to heinous policies of
suppression, racial discrimination, detention, torture
and depravation of their natural resources, including
oil, gas and water. They are also deprived of the right
to learn the Syrian national curriculum. Their right to
carry their national identity cards is also denied. Syrian
citizens in the occupied Golan receive no medical care
and students are not allowed to study in Arabic or to
use the Syrian national curriculum. Health workers
wearing the symbol of the Syrian Red Crescent are
not permitted to work in the Syrian Golan. Moreover,
a separation apartheid wall is being built to the east
of the Syrian city of Majdal Shams. Israel also refuses
to remove mines that have been planted on Syrian
territory there.

The Israeli occupying Power bears full
responsibility for the consequences of its support
and assistance to the terrorist group in the area of
separation in the occupied Syrian Golan, in blatant
violation of the disengagement agreement of 1974,
the mandate of the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force (UNDOF) and international law.
Israel's support for terrorists endangers the lives of
United Nations forces and undermines their work. This
has been demonstrated in reality when such terrorist
groups have kidnapped UNDOF peacekeepers, fired
upon them or targeted their sites. We have informed
the Department for Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO)
of the details of those incidents and formally requested
an investigation into the collusion of Qatari intelligence
in the kidnapping of Filipino peacekeepers. What is
surprising is that DPKO has to date failed to report on
the results of that investigation, if such an investigation
has even been conducted.

In the light of the documented and authenticated
facts to which I have just referred, it is only natural
to discuss the issue of the Israeli occupation of Arab
territories on the United Nations agenda. What
is strange and unacceptable, however, is that the
resolutions adopted by the United Nations go unheeded
by the Israeli authorities in their intransigence and total
lack of will to follow up on their implementation, in
addition to the irresponsible support provided by some
powerful States for Israel's ongoing occupation of Arab
territories, in disregard for all relevant resolutions.

The failure of the United Nations to shoulder
its historical and legal responsibilities should not
continue, nor should the failure to implement the
relevant resolutions on ending the Israeli occupation,
including resolution 497 (1981), aimed at ending the
Israeli occupation of the occupied Syrian Golan. In
order to maintain what is left of the credibility of the
United Nations, it is imperative that certain States end
their policies of double standards and turn their words
into action by forcing Israel to comply with United
Nations resolutions so as to end the occupation and the
unprecedented calamity to which Arab citizens have
been subject for decades.

We must not delude ourselves or deny the truth.
Israel is a settler entity that was established on the
basis of occupation and expansion, and has never
been interested in peace. It has responded to all
peace initiatives and negotiations by raising such
invalid pretexts as security concerns, only to enforce
occupation and impose a fait accompli that cannot be
changed. It has done so by building and expanding
settlements, threatening Arab territories and changing
historical and demographic characteristics. Any
criticism of such actions makes Israel throw up its arms
in protest, while any discussion of the untold suffering
of the Palestinians is always controversial.

No just, lasting and comprehensive peace process
in the region can be successful without honouring the
well-established terms of reference, especially United
Nations resolutions. Those terms of reference are the
only basis for any settlement ofthe Arab-Israeli conflict,
regardless of any other explanation or judgement that
contradicts them and free from any Israeli attempt at
extortion, bargaining or to link the peace process to
other issues.

The nations of the region aspire to peace and
prosperity and to ending the state of instability and
tension. But Member States that have worked against
the fulfilment of this goal and contributed to the
creation of volatile hotspots throughout the region are
nurturing the violence and fuelling regional clashes
based on ethnic, sectarian and religious reason with a
view to lifting international political and diplomatic
pressure from Israel and to ending any hope of ending
the Israeli occupation of Arab territories.

I mentioned earlier that, in their approach to the
situation in Syria, certain States have focused on certain
issues that they consider important enough to raise in
this meeting while deeming it appropriate not to discuss
to the fullest the issue at hand - putting an end to the
Israeli occupation of Palestinian and Arab territories
and attaching comprehensive and lasting peace. That is
to say, we have been ignoring the elephant in the room.

Although all of this has been discussed, no one has
spoken of the importance of fighting the international
terrorism that has ravaged Syria. In scores of letters to
the Security Council, we have described and detailed
the many dangers posed by this terrorism. Terrorism
entered our country through its north-eastern borders.
However, I would like to remind everyone that it is the
same terrorist group - the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant - that has struck both Iraq and Syria. This
fact is well known to all. Some have condemned its
activities in Iraq, but they have not been able to utter
a word condemning the existence of the same terrorist
organization in Syria.

It is truly shameful that hypocrisy should reach such
levels, at a time when we have presented the Council
with the names of hundreds of dead in Syria - Saudis,
Turks, British, American, Canadians, Australians,
Libyans, Tunisians and others. All those have died on
Syrian territory. At a time when the Foreign Ministers
of the United Kingdom, France and other countries,
including the chief of the American Federal Bureau of
Investigation, have admitted their fear of the return of
the terrorist elements who are shedding Syrian blood
in Syria to their home countries. If they continue to
shed Syrian blood in Syria that is fine; but for them to
return to their homelands in the West, that is a problem
for them. Preferably, they should continue to shed the
blood of Syrians in Syria and not return to their Western
States of origin. "Kill the Syrians and let the Syrians
kill you". That is the solution. "But do not come back
to your capitals because you are unwanted." It is as if
those terrorists left their countries wearing invisible
attire and as if their Governments had no knowledge of
their departure.

Turkish freight trucks sent by the Turkish
Government, supposedly carrying humanitarian
assistance to Syria, were stopped by coincidence on
Syrian territory by the police. It turned out that they
were filled with weapons, and not with medication,
milk for infants or warm clothes for the refugees.
No, they were filled with weapons. However, those
weapons, according to the Turkish Government, are
humanitarian assistance. Those freight trucks were
stopped. When they were searched and the weapons
discovered, the Head of the Turkish Government laid
off hundreds of police officers, judges and other people
involved because they uncovered this deceptive action
at the Yarmouk refugee camp, the home of Palestinian
refugees - our brothers, our sisters - until a decision
is made by the United Nations for a return to their
occupied territories.

The same delegations have ignored the declaration
from Damascus by Palestinian Minister of Labour
Ahmed Majdalani that terrorists, Islamists and
religious people, financed by Saudi Arabia and Qatari
intelligence, are the ones who fired against the convoy
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) that was
attempting to enter the refugee camp. The Director of
UNRWA was there, as was the Palestinian Ambassador
to Damascus and the Palestinian Minister of Security,
and they were all witnesses to the firing on the assistance
convoy attempting to enter the Yarmouk refugee camp.

There is much to be said. However, I will not delve
into further details, as the subject under discussion is
that of the question of Palestine and of putting an end

to the Israeli occupation. If some Arabs are going to
please Israel by their actions, I will not do the same.
