Mr. Fayala (Tunisia) (interpretation from French):
It is a great pleasure for me to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
the current month. We wish you every success in the
performance of your noble duties. I also congratulate your
predecessor, the Ambassador of the Argentine Republic,
on his excellent work last month.

I wish to tell you first, Mr. President, of the great
interest that President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali, current
Chairman of the Organization of African Unity (OAU),
takes in a final settlement of the conflict in Angola, and
of the OAU's determination to spare no effort, in
collaboration with the Security Council, to maintain and
consolidate peace in Angola and in Africa as a whole.

I should also like to take the opportunity provided
by my participation in this debate to congratulate the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Angola, Maitre Alioune Blondin Beye, the countries
making up the troika of observers - the United States of
America, the Russian Federation and Portugal - and the
countries of southern Africa, particularly Zambia, for the
commendable efforts they have all made to promote a
settlement of the Angolan conflict.

The signing of the Lusaka Protocol and the
declaration of a cease-fire between the two parties were
crucial stages on the way to achieving a lasting peace in
Angola. The United Nations can rightly be regarded as
the architect of the peace process now going on in that
country. It sponsored the process from start to finish and
did everything necessary to ensure its success. What has
been achieved so far by the efforts of the United Nations,
the OAU, the members of the troika and all the countries
of the region guarantees that the Lusaka Protocol will
continue to be implemented on a solid foundation.

 

Furthermore, the setting up of a Joint Commission to
supervise the implementation of the peace accords will
ensure that any difficulties will be overcome that may stand
in the way of a final settlement of the Angolan conflict. In
this context, the prompt deployment of the new United
Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III) would
certainly speed up the implementation of the Protocol, in
response to the expectations of the Security Council and the
international community as a whole. Likewise, the
supervision and verification of the disengagement of forces,
the monitoring and observance of the cease-fire, and the
verification of the withdrawal, quartering and
demobilization of troops are tasks that only the United
Nations can perform and which are vital if the peace
process is to be propelled forwards.

The Angolan people expect the Security Council to
continue to provide assistance until peace is restored in
their country, which, for 19 years now, has been ravaged by
a fratricidal war that has caused enormous losses and great
suffering. The Government of Angola and the leaders of
UNITA, both during and after the signing of the Lusaka
agreement, have made their willingness to further the peace
process clear. Further cause for satisfaction is the fact that
the cease-fire has been respected and that the parties have
committed themselves to ensuring the safety of United
Nations personnel. These are sufficient conditions for the
rapid deployment of UNAVEM. III.

Moreover, the readiness of the President of the
Republic of Angola and the Head of UNITA to meet in the
near future and the offer by the Angolan Government to
provide logistic support to the UNAVEM. forces provide
additional assurances that the United Nations operation will
be launched under very favourable circumstances.

The consolidation of peace in Angola is a priority
matter that requires cooperation from us all. The
reconstruction of the country, the repatriation of refugees,
the return of displaced persons, the de-mining operations
and the reintegration into civilian life of demobilized troops
are major challenges that call out for more assistance from
the international community.

We welcome the Secretary-General's arrangements for
the humanitarian relief programme that the United Nations,
in cooperation with the specialized agencies, intends to
implement at the present stage of the peace process. The
role of UNAVEM. III is crucial in this context as it will
enable relief to be delivered to the needy and will
strengthen coordination between the various humanitarian
activities.

The Council of Ministers of the Organization of
African Unity (OAU), at its sixty-first regular session in
Addis Ababa - from 23 to 27 January 1995 -
reaffirmed its total support for the peace process under
way in Angola on the basis of the "Acordos de Paz" and
the relevant resolutions of the Security Council. In order
to ensure the success of this process, the Council of the
OAU dispatched the African ministerial delegation that is
present here today, to ask the Security Council to
authorize the establishment of UNAVEM. III and the rapid
deployment of troops.

The presence of the ministerial delegation also
provides an opportunity to reaffirm the OAU's desire to
continue and to strengthen its cooperation with the United
Nations, particularly in the area of preventive diplomacy,
through the OAU's central mechanism for the prevention,
management and settlement of conflicts in Africa. This
cooperation has proved very useful in a number of
situations, and the case of Angola once again provides us
today with an opportunity to observe a successful peace-
keeping operation conducted by the United Nations with
the participation of the African countries.

We hope that the Security Council will adopt a
resolution commensurate with the expectations of the
Angolan people, that will be equal to the task of
consolidating peace throughout southern Africa - and
throughout Africa as a whole - so that Africa can
embark irreversibly on the process of development.

