Ms. Sison (United States of America): I would
like to begin by thanking Foreign Minister Le Drian of
France for being here to preside over today's discussion
on children in armed conflict. I would also like to thank
Secretary-General Guterres and Special Representative
Gamba for their briefings and their work on this issue, as
well as our guest briefer, Mr. Shaikh, for his important
and unique perspective.

We should all be disturbed by this year's report of
the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict
(S/2017/821). The report shows that in conflicts around
the world children are being killed and maimed, abducted
and attacked in schools and hospitals, recruited to
fight, sexually abused and denied humanitarian aid by
State and non-State actors alike. All parties to armed
conflict should share the goal of protecting children
from violence, and yet all too often violations and
abuses of international law affecting children in armed
conflict are rampant. Of particular concern to the
United States is the scale and gravity of such violations
and abuses against children by terrorist organizations,
including the Taliban, the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant, Boko Haram and Al-Shabaab. Those groups
are responsible for many of the most barbaric attacks,
having committed over 6,800 Violations and abuses
against children, as documented by the United Nations.

South Sudan also remains a major cause for concern.
The number of children who have been recruited by
armed groups is approximately 17,000 - coincidentally,
about the same number as the staff in the United Nations
peacekeeping mission in South Sudan. Ambassador
Haley just returned from that country, where she issued
a strong warning to President Kiir: "the hate and the
violence that we are seeing has to stop". She also told
President Kiir during their meeting that he could not
deny the actions of his military, whether it was related
to violence or rape or child soldiers. Sexual violence
against girls and boys in particular, including mass
gang rape, has intensified even in parts of the country
that were once deemed safe for them. The United
Nations and the Security Council should bring all of
our influence and tools to bear so as to ensure that all
parties to the conflict in South Sudan immediately end
committing all violations and abuses against children.

This month Ambassador Haley also visited
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, where she
witnessed at first hand the plight of children caught
in the crossfire of conflict. The Democratic Republic
of the Congo, which has never witnessed a democratic
peaceful transfer of power, has been plagued by dozens
of armed groups vying for power and control, with
rape used as a weapon of war and children recruited
as soldiers.

As reported by the Secretary-General, the recruitment
and use of children by non-State actors in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo remains rampant,
and child casualties in the country are up by 75 per
cent, as compared to 2015. And sexual Violence as a
weapon of war is endemic, with more than 60 per cent
of survivors in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
being children. Every day displaced women and girls
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo fear being
assaulted or seeing their children abducted. This must
end. As Ambassador Haley emphasized on a recent trip,
"we cannot turn a blind eye to all of this. No one should
live like this."

To better help children victimized by armed
conflict, the United States would like to emphasize
three points.

First, we need to demand that all parties to a
conflict, including State actors, fulfil their obligations
under international law that bear on the protection
of children. Those obligations include avoiding the
unlawful recruitment of children. All of us must do
more to make sure parties to conflicts understand these
responsibilities and fulfil them.

Secondly, when parties to conflict fail to comply
with the obligations thatbear on the protection of children
in conflict, we must hold them accountable. Atrocities
committed by the Al-Assad regime in Syria, enabled by
Iran, Hizbullah and Russia, show what happens when
the Security Council fails to demand accountability.
In 2016, the Al-Assad regime slaughtered thousands
of civilians in Aleppo and gassed its own people using
banned chemical weapons. Schools and hospitals have
been repeatedly attacked. The immediate and long-
term impact on children in Syria of these atrocities is
impossible to calculate. We must not stop pushing to
bring the perpetrators of these acts to justice and to get
help to the civilians who need it.

Similarly, in Yemen, the Houthis, Al-Qaida and
militias on all sides reportedly continued to recruit
children in spite of our numerous demands to stop. The
Yemeni Government must also urgently take further
steps to stop any unlawful recruitment of children in its
ranks. All parties to the conflict in Yemen need to do
more to ensure the protection of civilians.

Thirdly, the United Nations, humanitarian partners
and Member States should do more to focus on what
happens to children after they are released from
recruitment or suffer wartime atrocities. For example,
we must ensure resources are available to meet the needs
of all children subject to grave Violations and abuses,
including survivors of sexual violence. Those children
desperately need assistance, including psychological
support, food and shelter and medical assistance. We
must not let them down or allow them to return to
the battlefield.

The proliferation of child deaths, abuses, attacks
on hospitals and schools and unlawful recruitment in
armed conflict shows the importance of the capacity
of the United Nations to alleviate the suffering of
those children. As we consider our Security Council
mandates, the United States recognizes the importance
of maintaining the role of child-protection officers in
United Nations field missions, as the report recommends.

In conclusion, even in such a grim landscape, it is
important to note progress. More than 60 countries have
action plans in place with the United Nations. From
Afghanistan to Chad, a number of Governments have
continued their good-faith work to fully implement
those actions plans to end abuses suffered by children
in conflict. We still have a long way to go with regard to
stemming the tide of abuse and horror faced by children

in conflict situations. The United States will continue
to stand behind the important work being done by the
United Nations to protect those children.

