The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Meza-Cuadra for his briefing.

I shall now provide a briefing in my capacity
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004).

(spoke in English)

On behalf of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004), I am pleased to report on the
progress made since our last report, in April 2018. We
fully endorse the joint statement delivered on behalf
of the Committees established pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities, as well as of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
and the 1540 Committee.

The key concern for the 1540 Committee is
preventing the proliferation of nuclear, chemical and
biological weapons, their means of delivery and related
materials to non-State actors, in particular for terrorist
purposes. While the mandates of the three committees
differ, there are important areas of complementarity.
Cooperation among the three committees and their
supporting experts is important to promoting the
effective implementation by States of their obligations
under the respective Security Council resolutions.
However, the 1540 Committee continues to be
concerned by the potentially devastating effects and
catastrophic consequences of nuclear, chemical or
biological weapons proliferation by and to non-State
actors, and the use of such weapons for terrorist
purposes. Given the global nature of the challenges
posed by the proliferation of the capabilities and
technologies that can be used by non-State actors for
weapons of mass destruction programmes, no State
is exempt from making every effort to prevent such
proliferation from happening. The obligations under
resolution 1540 (2004) are designed precisely for
that purpose.

The full and effective implementation of
obligations under resolution 1540 (2004) involves a
wide range of activities beyond the requisite adoption
and enforcement of measures to prohibit non-State
actors from manufacturing, acquiring, possessing,
transporting, transferring or using nuclear, chemical
and biological weapons and their means of delivery. In
that sense, I am pleased to report that the overwhelming
majority of States have demonstrated their commitment
to resolution 1540 (2004), and through their reporting
to the 1540 Committee have provided valuable
information on the measures they have taken, or
plan to take, to comply with their obligations under
the resolution. It is worthy of note that to date 181
countries - more than 90 per cent of all United Nations
Member States - have submitted initial reports. To that
end, two experts will be assisting Mali in preparing its
initial report on the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) during an upcoming visit this month. Regular
additional reporting and updating are also important so
that the status of implementation can be reflected and
assessed accurately.

While reporting is important, what also matters
is the effectiveness of the practical steps taken at the
national level to implement the resolution 1540 (2004).
One helpful step in that regard is for States to develop
voluntary national implementation action plans as
encouraged by paragraph 5 of resolution 2325 (2016).
In the implementation of such action plans, and in order
for the process to work, all key national stakeholders
must be engaged with the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004). The voluntary national implementation
action plans also help to identify actions to close any
gaps and vulnerabilities in legislation, regulation and
national control frameworks, and to identify areas
where assistance may be required

Exchanges and the sharing of information by
Member States are among the Committee's core
activities. The Member States are in the best position
to identify effective national practices and to share
them with the 1540 Committee and other partners.
As one example, the Committee had an opportunity
to hear about the peer review meetings between Chile
and Colombia, held in each country in 2017, in relation
to the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). That
was the third peer review to take place globally and
the first in the western hemisphere. The discussions
highlighted the value of the peer review process for
promoting Member States' confidence in sharing
information about the challenges of the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) and generating ideas about
effective national implementation practices.

The 1540 Committee recognizes the key role of
the 1540 national points of contact in support of the
resolution's implementation. The Committee has
developed regional training courses for national points
of contact, including the most recent ones in Addis
Ababa for French-speaking African States, hosted by
the African Union, and in Rostov-on-Don, with the
support of the Russian Federation and the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe. The regional
national points of contact training courses, not only
aim to enhance the capacity and coordination role
of points of contact, but also seek to create a living
network of points of contact to strengthen cooperation
and coordination with the Committee and among points
of contact in the respective regions.

One of the priority areas the committee is
focused on is improving the system of assistance to
facilitate Member States' capacity to implement their
obligations under resolution 1540 (2004). In particular,
the Committee seeks to match assistance requests
from States with offers from States or international,
regional or subregional organizations in a position to
provide assistance. By doing so, an assisting State or
organization can respond effectively to requests for
assistance. Pending assistance requests are displayed
on the home page of the 1540 Committee website and
date back to 2010. As of today, 21 assistance requests
are still open and further assistance is needed. The 1540
Committee website also includes lists of States and
international, regional and subregional organizations
that have offered assistance in general.

As of 30 May, 47 States and 16 organizations
had informed the Committee about general
assistance programmes that could help facilitate the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). Assistance
providers are always welcome to update the Committee
about their assistance programmes. The Committee
stands ready to add to its website new programmes or
information on available assistance.

The Committee and its Group of Experts have
maintained the momentum of outreach events in the
course of fulfilling the Committee's programme of
work. A top priority is direct engagement with States
through visits and national round tables, at their
invitation. In the course of that process, increased use
has been made of the support that can be offered by
regional organizations, including the United Nations
Office for Disarmament Affairs and its regional centres.

We have also intensified our engagement with
international organizations whose mandates are
directly related to resolution 1540 (2004), such as the
International Atomic Energy Agency, the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, the Biological
Weapons Convention Implementation Support Unit,
the United Nations Office for Drugs and Crime,
INTERPOL, the World Customs Organization, as
well as those bodies that support related committees,
such as the Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate.
I would like to acknowledge the cooperation between
the 1540 Committee, its Group of Experts and these
international organizations.

Transparency and outreach are vital to the effective
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). With that in
mind, the Committee is seeking ways to make better
use of its website. For example, we have continued to
publish a quarterly message from the Chair that goes
out to the wider 1540 network, including civil society. A
special effort is being made to engage parliamentarians
through, for example, the Inter-Parliamentary Union
(IPU). In that regard, I will have the honour to deliver
a video message to an upcoming meeting of the IPU.

I should stress that the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004) is the responsibility of States. However,
effective implementation is more than simply ensuring
that legislation or regulations are in place. Among other
things, it also requires active engagement between the
State and relevant sectors of society, including industry,
academia and professional associations. An effective
partnership between States and industry is also vital
to successful non-proliferation efforts. The Wiesbaden
process conferences foster such a dialogue between
States and industry.

In conclusion, I would like to highlight that the spirit
of cooperation and dialogue with the Member States
continues to inform the 1540 Committee's activities.
(spoken in Spanish)

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.

