Mr. Al Bayati (Iraq): Mr. President, allow me at
the outset to congratulate you on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
April. I would like also to thank your predecessor,
Mr. Li Baodong, Permanent Representative of China,
for his outstanding efforts during his presidency in the
month of March. Our thanks also go to Mr. Ad Melkert,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Iraq, and his team in Baghdad and in New York for
their rigorous efforts in assisting the Iraqi Government
and the Iraqi people.

My delegation has taken note of the report of the
Secretary-General on the work of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) (S/2011/213)
and would like to make the following comments.

At the political and security levels, the national
partnership Government, led by Prime Minister Nuri
Kamel al-Maliki, won the unanimous confidence of the
Iraqi Council of Representatives, which also passed the
Government programme of work on 21 December
2010. During his presentation of the platform of
ministerial Government, the Prime Minister stated that
the Government's goal would be to

"build a federal, democratic, pluralist and unified
Iraq with justice, equality and rule of law which
gets its strength from religious and intellectual
diversity and which cooperates in international
and regional contexts, rejects aggression,
terrorism, discrimination and sectarian division,
and which respects human rights".

The programme of work for the Government of
national partnership is based on a clear set of
principles. Among those are maintaining and upholding
the Constitution and political stability, expanding the
base of participation in the political process,
consolidating State institutions and building the rule of
law. Those principles also include respect for human
rights, rejection of aggression, terrorism and
discrimination, and ensuring the right of all Iraqis to
live in peace, security and freedom.

The programme of work also includes the
completion of the building of the armed forces, the
extension of the rule of law, the completion of the
project of national reconciliation and the adoption of
the principle of balance and efficiency in the
management of the country. The programme of work
also focuses on a culture of tolerance and brotherhood,
the renunciation of violence, and, finally, working to
maintain the best possible relations between Iraq and
its Arab neighbours and at the regional and
international levels.

The Government of national partnership was
formed as a result of the political consensus achieved
in November 2010 and will work vigorously,
continuously and tirelessly to achieve all items on the
ministerial work programme for the benefit of the Iraqi
people. It is time for Iraq to reap the fruits of the
patience it has displayed and the sacrifices and
suffering it has endured so as to live in a better reality
in terms of basic rights and services.

During the past two months, Iraq has witnessed a
series of peaceful demonstrations that have put forward
a number of demands related to improving services and
the way of life of Iraqis. The position of the Prime
Minister towards protesters has been clear, recognizing
their right to express their views and raise their voices
in the face of any faults or failings. Taking into account
the need for the maintenance of public order in the
interests of the country and for security and stability
not to be jeopardized, the Government has a duty to
protect and listen to the voices of protesters in order to
address their problems.

Following the peaceful demonstration organized
on 25 February 2011, the Prime Minister said, in a
public speech to the nation, that "Nothing that is
objected to or protested will be ignored", adding that

"I will personally continue the implementation of
all matters that fall under my responsibility as
President of the Council of Ministers as well as
follow up the work of ministers and local
governments to compel them to carry out the
promises they made to citizens with gravity and
responsibility".

That was followed by an extraordinary meeting
of the Council of Ministers, which set a period of
100 days after which the work of all ministries will be
assessed to determine their success or failure in the
performance of work assigned to them. The Council
confirmed that it would make changes in the light of
the outcome of the assessment.

The Iraqi security forces have continued to
assume their responsibilities across the country and are
demonstrating the highest degree of responsibility,
discipline and ability to improve the security situation
in the country. Reports of the Ministries of Health and
of the Interior indicate that during the month of
February 2011 Iraq witnessed a marked improvement
in the security situation. The low number of people
killed or wounded in bombings carried out by terrorist
groups serves as clear proof of the efficiency and
professionalism of the Iraqi security forces. During the
meeting with top security leaders held on 3 March
2011, the Prime Minister emphasized the need to
energize intelligence efforts through the development
of effective plans for the intelligence authorities to
defeat all hostile plots.

During a meeting on 23 January 2011 with
Antonio Guterres, United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, Prime Minister Nuri al-Maliki stressed
that the Iraqi Government was keen to provide the
basic necessities for daily living for displaced Iraqis,
wherever they may be, and to meet the requirements
that will enable the displaced to return to their places
of origin. Reports suggest that about 89,000 families
returned to their places of origin during the first quarter
of 2011. Work is continuing in the Ministry of
Displacement and Migration to double the grants
provided to families to encourage them to return to
their home areas.

At the social and economic levels, the Iraqi
Council of Representatives approved the federal budget
for 2011 on 20 February 2011, with an estimated
amount of approximately $82 billion, the largest
budget in the history of the Republic of Iraq. A total of
$57 billion was allocated to fund the operating budget
for the year 2011, with $25 billion allocated to support
the investment budget for 2011. This new budget
focuses on the aspects of services, scientific
development and job creation as well as on raising the
standard of living for citizens and supporting the
momentum of reconstruction in the country.

Due to continued efforts by the Government to
create thousands of jobs for Iraqis and the widening
scope of private-sector activities aimed at establishing
a number of projects, which have started to attract local
labour, unemployment in Iraq has witnessed a
significant decline. Currently, the unemployment rate
stands at 15 per cent; in past years, it had ranged from
17 to 28 per cent.

Iraq's oil exports increased during the month of
February, reaching about 2.2 million barrels per day.
The Iraqi Government continues to implement plans to
increase the amount of oil exported, which it projects
will reach 2.75 million barrels per day this year,
3.3 million barrels per day in 2012, 4.5 million barrels
per day in 2013 and 6.5 million barrels per day in
2014. The Iraqi Government is working on a range of
projects aimed at increasing storage capacity for Iraqi
oil production, from approximately 5 million barrels to
approximately 20.7 million barrels by 2014, in order to
ensure the stability of the flow of Iraq's oil to the
international market.

The Iraqi Government is continuing with the
organization of bidding rounds, which have taken place
in the areas of oil and gas, to attract qualified
companies with international experience able to
develop the Iraqi oil industry. This reflects the
increased oil and gas production and export capacity in
Iraq, aimed at promoting economic development. The
Oil Ministry recently announced the organization of a
fourth bidding round, which will be held in the month
of November, for the exploration of 12 new gas areas
and the drilling of 10 wells to meet the shortfall in oil
production and inventory. This will result in increasing
oil and gas reserves for future generations.

Marked improvement has been seen in the Iraqi
economy following the introduction of a series of
economic, investment and financial regulations by the
Government, which have contributed to the increase in
per-capita income, improved purchasing power and a
higher level of social welfare. Through bidding rounds
held in the areas of oil and gas last year, Iraq has
brought international experience to these sectors,
which will improve our ability to increase production
and export capacity to promote economic development.

In the context of the Iraqi Government's efforts to
find comprehensive solutions for the problem of
housing, the Investment Authority of the Iraqi National
Investment Commission has submitted a proposal to
build 1 million housing units, at an estimated cost of
approximately $30 billion. This would be the first stage
of a plan to build 2 million housing units over the next
five years to provide adequate housing for various
segments of the Iraqi population.

In the context of Iraq's regional and international
openness, the recent period saw a number of important
visits, which I will detail in chronological order. In
January, the Jordanian Prime Minister, Mr. Samir Zaid
Al-Rifai, visited Baghdad to discuss issues of common
concern to our countries. On 5 January, the Iranian
Foreign Minister, Mr. Aliakbar Salehi, visited Baghdad
to express his congratulations on the occasion of our
formation of a Government of national partnership.
Mr. Amr Moussa, Secretary-General of the League of
Arab States, visited Baghdad on 9 January to discuss
Iraqi preparations to host the next Arab Summit. His
Highness Sheikh Naser Al-Mohammad Al-Ahmad
Al-Sabah, Prime Minister of the State of Kuwait, made
a historic visit to Baghdad, on 12 January, where he
met Prime Minister Nuri Kamel al-Maliki to discuss
issues of common concern and how to develop bilateral
relations between our two countries. The Vice-
President of the United States, Mr. Joseph Biden,
visited Baghdad on 13 January to discuss ways to
develop relations between Iraq and the United States in
various fields through the activation of the Strategic
Framework Agreement. The Syrian Prime Minister,
Mr. Mohammad Naji Ottri, paid a visit to Baghdad on
15 January to discuss the development of relations and
expand the horizons of cooperation between our two
countries. On 16 January, Mr. Ahmet Davutoglu,
Foreign Minister of Turkey, visited Baghdad to discuss
issues of common concern to Turkey and Iraq. On
26 January, Mr. Yuri Shafranik, Chairman of the Board
of the Union of Oil and Gas Producers of Russia,
visited Baghdad to discuss ways to strengthen
cooperation in the field of investment in the oil and gas
sectors. On 14 February, Ambassador Tan Sri Abdul
Majid Khan, Special Envoy of the Prime Minister of
Malaysia, visited Baghdad to deliver a letter from the
Malaysian Prime Minister on ways to expand the
horizons of bilateral cooperation in various fields.
Chinese Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs Zhang
Zhijun paid a Visit to Baghdad on 23 February to
discuss the development of bilateral relations and the
expansion of cooperation between our two countries.
Mr. Ekmeleddin Ihsanoglu, Secretary-General of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, visited
Baghdad on 16 March to discuss means of cooperation
between Iraq and the Organization of the Islamic
Conference. The Turkish Prime Minister, Mr. Recep
Tayyip Erdogan, visited Baghdad on 28 March to
discuss bilateral relations, ways of promoting such
relations, the situation in the region and issues of
common concern. Yesterday, United States Defense
Secretary Robert Gates visited Baghdad and held
meetings with President Jalal Talabani, Prime Minister
Nuri al-Maliki and other Iraqi leaders regarding the
status of a mutually agreed security pact between the
two countries.

At the same time, Iraqi officials have also worked
hard to promote bilateral relations on the regional and
international levels. President Jalal Talabani paid a
visit to Damascus for a meeting with Syrian President
Bashar Al-Assad on 12 February to discuss ways to
develop bilateral relations. On 25 February, President
Talabani visited Kuwait, where he met the Emir of
Kuwait, Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah
and to participate in the celebrations of the State of
Kuwait's independence and liberation. Prime Minister
al-Maliki visited the State of Kuwait on 16 February
and met with His Highness the Emir and His Highness
the Prime Minister to discuss the development of
relations and the expansion of cooperation in various
fields. During this visit, agreement was reached on
activating the work of joint committees and convening
a meeting of the Iraq-Kuwait joint ministerial
committee, headed by the respective Foreign Ministers,
to resolve all outstanding issues. The President of the
Iraqi Council of Representatives, Osama Al-Nujafr,
also visited Kuwait, on 20 March. During his visit, an
agreement was made with Mr. Jassim Al-Kharafi,
Chairman of the Kuwaiti National Assembly, to form a
committee to coordinate the work of friendship
between the two countries. The Iraqi Minister of
Foreign Affairs, Mr. Hoshyar Zebari, paid a visit to
Cairo on 2 March to preside over the work of the 134th
session of the Arab League Council to discuss current
developments in the region. On 19 March, Foreign
Minister Zebari visited Paris to participate in the
ministerial summit in support of the Libyan people,
during which he gave a speech emphasizing the
position of Iraq in support of the Arab and international
consensus for the enforcement of the no-fly zone to
stop military operations against civilians and support
the Libyan people in realizing their aspirations for a
decent life. Mr. Zebari visited Kuwait on 27 March to
co-chair the first meeting of the Iraq-Kuwait joint
ministerial committee.

Iraq, in line with its will to strengthen relations
with Arab countries and its commitment to playing a
leading role in supporting and strengthening the Arab
joint work system, has accepted the challenging task of
hosting the next Arab Summit, to be held in Baghdad
in May. This decision was based on Iraq's assertion
that it has returned to normal relations with its Arab
brothers and that we are working to strengthen
relations with the Arab community. Iraq's
determination in this is supported by all Arab countries
and confirmed by their participation in the Summit.

The convening of the Arab Summit in Baghdad
comes at a crucial and sensitive time for the Arab
world. The revolutions that have taken place in Tunisia
and Egypt, the painful events in Libya, and the
expansion of demonstrations and protests in a number
of Arab countries have given Iraq a leading role in the
Arab world. This situation emphasizes the need for the
Summit to proceed on schedule, in order for the
transformations in the region to be dealt with and
appropriate solutions found, in keeping with the
aspirations and hopes of the Arab peoples.

On 15 December 2010, the Security Council held
a historic meeting on Iraq (see S/PV.6450), at which it
adopted three important resolutions - 1956 (2010),
1957 (2010) and 1958 (2010). Those resolutions
represent the beginning of the end of the era of the
sanctions and restrictions that were imposed on Iraq
after the Saddam regime's crime of invading Kuwait.
Despite these positive achievements, Iraq still has
some way to go to resolve all outstanding issues with
our brotherly neighbour Kuwait.

During the visit to Baghdad of His Highness
Sheikh Naser Al-Mohammad Al-Ahmad Al-Sabah,
Prime Minister of the State of Kuwait, on 12 January,
Kuwait and Iraq agreed to set up a joint ministerial
8
committee under the chairmanship of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of our two countries to address
outstanding issues between us. During the visit of
Prime Minister Nuri al-Maliki to Kuwait on
2 February, it was agreed to set a date for the joint
ministerial committee to meet.

The committee held its first meeting in Kuwait on
27 and 28 March, during which four sub-committees
considered all the issues that concern the two
countries, whether of a bilateral nature or relating to
the situation between Iraq and Kuwait in the light of
the relevant Security Council resolutions. The
importance of the joint committee's meeting lies in its
being the first of its kind, its consideration of issues
sensitive to both parties, its atmosphere of openness
and transparency and the positive spirit that dominated
the proceedings.

Let me now comment on the issue of Camp
Ashraf, which was raised by Mr. Melkert. I do not have
any information on what happened yesterday, but I
know the position of the Iraqi Government, namely,
that it considers the people in Camp Ashraf as refugees
and that they have rights. It will not force them to go
back to their country of origin, Iran, but will encourage
them to go to a third country. However, when United
States forces handed over responsibility for Camp
Ashraf to the Iraqi forces and the Iraqi Government
decided to establish a police station there, the people in
Camp Ashraf used violence against Iraqi security and
police forces, which resulted in deaths and injuries. We
always try to solve this kind of problem peacefully and
we encourage third countries to accept these people as
refugees.

In conclusion, I would like to stress my
Government's gratitude for UNAMI's role in Iraq and
for Mr. Ad Melkert's support offered in response to the
Government's request and based on mutually agreed
mechanisms.

