Mr. Wapakhabulo (Uganda): On behalf of the
regional ministerial representatives on the Regional
Peace Initiative on Burundi, I congratulate you, Madam
President, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. Let me also thank
your predecessor, the Permanent Representative of
Ireland, for his leadership during his presidency of the
Council last month. I wish you, Madam President, and
all the other members of the Council, successful
deliberations on this and all the other issues on the
Council's agenda.

The conflict in Burundi has been on the Council's
agenda for some time now. I salute the Council for its
partnership with the Great Lakes Regional Initiative in
the search for a permanent solution to the conflict in
Burundi. Indeed, the forum accorded to us today is a
clear demonstration that the Security Council continues
to be an ally as it executes its Charter responsibility of
ensuring international peace and security.

Former President Nelson Mandela of South
Africa, the facilitator of the Burundi peace
negotiations, may be making a presentation to the
Council on the peace process at some later date.
However, allow me to update the Council on the recent
developments resulting from the Regional Initiative on
Burundi.

Nineteen Burundian political parties signed on 28
August 2000 the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement, which provides for a three-year
Transitional Government. The Transitional
Government was successfully inaugurated on 1
November this year. President Buyoya will be the
leader for the first 18 months, deputized by Mr.
Domitien Ndayizeye of the G7-Hutu alliance parties,
and the reverse will apply for the next 18 months of the
transition, although personalities may change. There
will also be a pro rata power sharing arrangement in
the Cabinet, Parliament, army and other State
institutions.

The swearing in of the Transitional Government
in Burundi on 1 November this year will go down in
the annals of African history as the day of the first step
towards tangible peace in Burundi. For us in the region
it is significant that our initiative and efforts have been
able to bear fruit. I congratulate the people of Burundi
on their commitment and determination to find a
peaceful solution of the conflict in their country.

The region wishes to pay special tribute to the
late Mwalimu Julius Nyerere, who set the course for
the negotiations, and to his successor, Nelson Mandela,
for his extraordinary resolve and leadership in
facilitating peace negotiations in Burundi. We
commend them for a job well done.

The contribution of the United Nations and the
international community to the peace process cannot be
overemphasized. We particularly acknowledge the
European Union for the financial support it has given
so far.

However, there should be no celebrations yet. The
daunting challenge is to consolidate what has been
achieved so far and to ensure further progress by
supporting the Transitional Government during this
delicate phase of implementing the Arusha Peace and
Reconciliation Agreement.

As the Council will appreciate, one bit of
unfinished business relates to the participation of the
Burundian armed opposition, namely, the Conseil
national pour la defense de la democratie
(CNDD)/Front for la defense de la democratic (FDD)
and the Pelipehutu Forces nationales pour la liberation
(FNL). These armed groups did not participate in the
negotiations that led to the August 2000 Agreement
and have not agreed to a ceasefire. The position of the
region is that negotiations, facilitated by President
Omar Bongo of Gabon and Deputy President Jacob
Zuma of South Africa will continue between the
Transitional Government and the armed opposition.

We call upon the Security Council as a whole and
individual members of the Council to bring their
influence to bear on these groups so that they agree to
take part in ceasefire negotiations. We assure the
Security Council that we are prepared to work with it
to bring the armed groups into the peace process, and
we are also prepared to take the necessary measures
should the CNDD/FDD and the Pelipehutu FNL remain
intransigent in the peace process for Burundi.

The other major challenges during the
implementation phase relate to the formation of a new
national army, Parliament and other institutions of the
transition. The Transitional Government and the
Implementation Monitoring Committee for the Arusha
Peace Agreement will need continuous support and
encouragement from the Council.

The link between the conflicts in Burundi and in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo has hitherto
been a complicating factor in the search for peace in
the Great Lakes region. For the first time the prospects
of a ceasefire in Burundi bring us closer to an
opportunity to turn the negative forces in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo into positive forces
in Burundi and reduce the magnitude of the task for the
third phase of the United Nations Organization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in the
imminent disarmament, demobilization, reintegration,
repatriation, or resettlement exercise in that country.

According to the Arusha Peace and
Reconciliation Agreement, it is envisaged that the
Security Council will mandate a peacekeeping force in
Burundi. However, the regional leaders agreed that,
while they were awaiting a resolution of the Council
mandating the deployment of a peacekeeping force, a
regional force should be formed and deployed for
various functions entailed in the Agreement. In this
respect, a special protection unit to protect political
leaders has already been deployed in Burundi. We take
this opportunity to thank the Republic of South Africa
for offering 700 of its troops, who are already on the
ground in Burundi. Troops from Nigeria, Ghana and
Senegal are expected to follow. All this demonstrates
the seriousness of the region about seeing to it that the
conflict is finally put to rest. Regional arrangements
will, however, need to be buttressed by the United
Nations, especially during this delicate phase.

In conclusion, we have a Transitional
Government in Bujumbura. But let us have no illusion
about the peace process in Burundi. The challenge of
sustaining the achievements of the Arusha process
remains. It is extremely important that a ceasefire be
urgently put in place in Burundi in order to allow for
the deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping force
under Chapter VII of the Charter and the involvement
of the armed groups - FDD and FNL - in the power-
sharing arrangement. We therefore call upon the
Security Council and its individual members to
positively and actively support the second track of the
Regional Initiative under President Bongo of Gabon
and Deputy President Jacob Zuma of South Africa for a
ceasefire agreement in Burundi.

Secondly, we ask the Security Council to send a
strong message that it is prepared to commit an
adequate United Nations peacekeeping force as soon as
a ceasefire is in place in Burundi.

Thirdly, we call on the United Nations and the
international community to mobilize the necessary
resources for humanitarian assistance and economic
recovery in support of the peace process in Burundi. It
is important that the Transitional Government should
receive adequate assistance to enable it to provide
social services and to handle the return and
resettlement of refugees and internally displaced
persons.

