Mrs. Mungwa: I should like to start by
conveying the apologies of the Permanent Observer of
the African Union to the United Nations, who is
currently away from New York and could not attend
this meeting in person. I have been instructed to deliver
the following statement to the Security Council.
The African Union would like to thank members
of the Council and the Secretary-General for their
statements this afternoon. The African Union welcomes
the unanimous adoption of resolution 1769 (2007) on
the hybrid African Union/United Nations operation in
Darfur (UNAMID). This, members will recall, follows
the adoption by the African Union Peace and Security
Council, on 22 June 2007, of a decision authorizing the
deployment as soon as possible of the African
Union/United Nations hybrid operation, on the basis of
the report of the Chairperson of the African Union

Commission and the Secretary-General of the United
Nations (see S/2007/307/Rev.l), as explained and
clarified during the technical consultations of 11 and
12 June 2007 with the Government of the Sudan.

Members will recall that in that decision the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union
urgently requested the Security Council of the United
Nations to urgently authorize the deployment of the
African Union/United Nations hybrid operation.
Today's resolution represents a landmark in our joint
efforts to find a lasting solution to the conflict in
Darfur as well an effort to strengthen relations between
the African Union and the United Nations.

Over the past three years, the African Union, in
spite of the serious financial and logistical constraints
facing the African Union Mission in the Sudan, has
made sustained efforts to facilitate the resolution of the
conflict in Darfur and the restoration of lasting peace
and reconciliation in that war-torn region. As we move
towards the African Union/United Nations hybrid
operation, we would like to take this opportunity to
restate the gratitude of the African Union to all our
partners and to the United Nations Security Council for
their valuable support.

There is no need to stress the crucial importance
of continued support for the African Union Mission in
the Sudan until the transition to the African
Union/United Nations joint operation is completed.

While the adoption of this resolution marks a
turning point, it goes without saying that many
challenges lie ahead that require continued consultation
and collaboration among all the stakeholders. The
African Union is committed to continue working with
the United Nations and the Government of the Sudan
for the establishment of the mechanisms required for
the effective establishment the hybrid operation in
Darfur. It is our wish that the constructive spirit which
prevailed during the entire period leading up to the
adoption of this resolution will be continued and
strengthened throughout all the coming stages in order
to ensure the greatest possible success of UNAMID in
the restoration of durable peace and security in Darfur.

We wish also to take this opportunity to reiterate
the appeal of the African Union Peace and Security
Council to States Members of the United Nations for
generous contributions to UNAMID. It is our
conviction that the joint efforts of the United Nations
and the African Union in Darfur and in other conflict
and crisis situations in Africa will greatly contribute to
building a new framework of cooperation between the
United Nations, the African Union and other regional
organizations, in the maintenance of international
peace and security, as well as in the promotion of
sustainable development.
