Mr. Ouane (Mali) (spoke in French): I should
like first of all to thank you, Mr. President, for having
organized this meeting to provide information about
the situation of refugees and displaced persons in West
Africa.

My delegation is grateful to Mr. Ruud Lubbers,
the High Commissioner for Refugees, for giving us this
opportunity to gain an overview of the situation and for
informing us about the conclusions and outcome of his
mission to Guinea, Sierra Leone, Liberia, Cote d'Ivoire
and Mali. I would also like to join with others in
welcoming him here today. I would also like to say that
we fully share his assessment of the current refugee
crisis in West Africa, and we strongly support his
suggestions and proposals, which we hope that the
Council will follow up.

In this respect, I would like to make two sets of
comments, and ask Mr. Lubbers several questions.
First, I would like to express the great concern of my
delegation with regard to the situation as described by
Mr. Lubbers and to recall, very briefly, the efforts of
the leaders of our subregion to deal with it through the
determined action of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS). As is well known, the
current humanitarian crisis is a consequence of the
conflicts that have engulfed the West African subregion
for almost a decade, and the repercussions have led to a
progressive deterioration in relations between the
Mano River Union countries - Guinea, Liberia and
Sierra Leone.

Faced with this situation, ECOWAS has worked
tirelessly to achieve a comprehensive and lasting
political settlement. The measures decided upon in this
respect by the twenty-fourth summit of heads of State
or Government, which took place in Bamako on 15
December 2000, are typical of those efforts. As we
know, such measures are aimed at making the borders
between Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone safe, and at
restoring the strong relationship of trust between those
three countries so as to put new life into the Mano
River Union.

Specifically, the plan was, on the one hand, to
deploy a multinational force along the borders of the
three countries, and, on the other, that the leaders of
Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone take on the
commitment, inter alia, to prevent armed individuals
from using their national territory to prepare for or
carry out acts of aggression in neighbouring countries.

The current Chairman of ECOWAS has also made
numerous visits to the three countries, and in the next
few days an extraordinary ECOWAS summit will take
place to consider the security situation in the
subregion, in particular the Mano River Union area.

With regard to the operational conclusions
contained in the letter of 21 February 2001 from
Mr. Lubbers to the Secretary-General, which were
reiterated in his statement this afternoon, I shall limit
my contribution to a few comments, followed by
several questions.

First, I would like to repeat that we fully support
the suggestions and proposals that Mr. Lubbers has
made, particularly those intended to guarantee safe
passage for refugees by setting up safe corridors. My
delegation shares the view that our first priority should
be to achieve a formal agreement between the
Governments of Guinea and Sierra Leone and the
Revolutionary United Front (RUF), as well as the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone, on the basic
principles of freedom of access and safe passage. In
this respect, I would like to thank Mr. Lubbers for his
confidence that the ECOWAS Monitoring Group can
participate in the work of establishing such safe
corridors; I am sure that he will provide further
clarifications to counter the sceptical comments that we
have heard from some delegations.

Secondly, I believe that further information would
be useful so as to give us a clearer idea of the action
plan relating to UNHCR strategy with regard to the
RUF.

Thirdly, I would like to stress how right
Mr. Lubbers was to remind us that the international
community should treat the current crisis in West
Africa as a matter for urgent attention. This is crucial.
Certainly, the international community should provide
assistance and necessary financial support, but the
Security Council must show the necessary political will
to re-establish peace and security in the subregion of
West Africa.

Finally, I would like to ask whether the World
Bank and the International Monetary Fund, whose
directors Mr. Lubbers met on the occasion of an
important meeting that took place in Bamako, have
plans to support specific projects for aid to refugees
and displaced persons.

In conclusion, I should like to assure Mr. Lubbers
of the full support of my delegation for his mission,
and say how strongly we support him and his staff in
the risks that they take in their work to serve the
thousands of refugees and displaced persons in that
part of West Africa.

