Mr. Spokauskas (Lithuania): I would like to thank
the Secretary-General for his briefing and for his
report on the future of United Nations peace operations
(S/2015/682), in which he proposes ways forward to
implement the recommendations submitted by the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations. We
appreciate the presidency's efforts to focus this briefing
on a few specific recommendations and hope that this
will contribute to a more streamlined conversation
among Council members.

The need to refocus the efforts of the United
Nations on prevention is a constant refrain in our
discussions. However, the gap between declarations
and actions remains wide. The Panel has hit the nail on
the head by describing the United Nations as focused
more on bringing ambulances to the bottom of the cliff
rather than trying to prevent the actual fall. Preventive
measures are manifold and include early-warning and
alerts capacity, the Council engaging early to address
emerging threats, mediation and good offices, and
better partnerships with regional organizations and
with their respective early-warning mechanisms.

We are aware that at times proactive United Nations
engagement may not be enough to stop a conflict from
erupting, as evidenced by the unending human tragedy
in Yemen. However, the risk of failure is not an excuse
for not trying. The Council should remain proactive
and flexible in quickly bringing up emerging issues for
discussion, whether through re-establishing some form
of horizon scanning, through informal briefings by the
Department of Political Affairs, or through the use of
"Other business".

The Secretary-General's Rights Up Front
Initiative should also be further developed and applied
systematically as an early-warning tool, providing
prompt, reliable and unsanitized information about
serious human rights violations.
In this context, let me stress that the need for rapid
deployment cannot serve as grounds for compromising
on the zero-tolerance policy towards all forms of
sexual exploitation and abuse by United Nations and
related personnel. A preventive approach is paramount,
including pre-deployment training, adequate
mission staffing with gender mainstreaming, women
advisers, child protection advisers, viable complaint
and disciplinary mechanisms, and adequate vetting
procedures. The recommendations of the 2005 Prince
Zeid report (A/59/710) on making the complaints
investigation mechanism more independent from
missions also remain valid.

To have a meaningful impact on the ground, as the
Panel notes, the United Nations should be able to deliver
more "right fit" rather than "template" missions. The
Council and the Secretariat must ensure that mission
mandates are sufficiently clear and robust, adequately
financed and supported by the necessary materiel.
Peacekeepers must have the will and the capacity to act
in defence of those they are mandated to protect.

As the United Nations is forced to operate with
insufficient capacities and drawn-out force generation,
prioritizing and sequencing might indeed be the most
suitable approach in situations where every day of
inaction means more deaths and displacement. Recently,
such sequencing was introduced in the mandate of
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
and was welcomed as an example to follow. While fully
appreciating this innovation, we believe that we should
continue to carefully observe the impact of sequencing
where it is applied and draw lessons for improvement.

On the ground in the Central African Republic,
concerns have been expressed about the impact of
such sequencing on the Mission's capacity to support
security-sector reform (SSR) efforts at a time when this
issue is causing especially heated reactions in political
circles as well as among the population. As security
in the country continues to suffer setbacks, the need
to invest in the SSR process, to promptly carry out
vetting procedures and to proceed with building viable
and professional security and defence forces could not
be more urgent. Furthermore, lack of progress on the
matter could have a negative impact on the protection
mandate, especially as elections are approaching.

In South Sudan, with almost 190,000 civilians
seeking protection at United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS) sites, the Mission's urgent protection
tasks are as relevant as ever, yet it is expected to deliver
more. We have heard the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General plead for flexibility and mandate
adjustments in order to be able to deliver some low-
hanging fruit in an environment where hostility to
UNMISS is still high. In October the mandate was
adjusted to support the implementation of the peace
agreement. Next month the Council will once again
revise the mandate to reflect the need for greater
political engagement. How best to balance the core
priorities with measures needed to build trust with the
host country while ensuring the necessary resources
and force enablers is for the Council to decide.

In Mali, the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali is facing a
complex set of tasks and challenges, operating in an
environment under constant terrorist threat, of which
we were once again reminded this morning. How to
adjust and update the Mission to best protect not only
civilians but also the peacekeepers themselves calls for
intensified discussion by all stakeholders.

Finally, as Jordan has rightly underlined, mandate
sequencing is a concept that should be explored not
just when a peace operation is deployed but also as it
prepares to leave.

Building on the accomplishments made by Cote
d'Ivoire in the areas ofnational reconciliation, stability,
economic recovery and the successful conclusion
of the presidential elections, the Council employed
benchmarks to measure progress that served as the
basis for gradually phasing out the mission and handing
over authority to the host Government and the United
Nations country team. We should apply this model
more regularly, since it offers all sides concerned a
clear path towards completing the involvement of the
United Nations and encourages a sense of ownership
over the reforms needed to take complete charge of the
country's future.

Sequencing and the use of benchmarks could be
employed to prevent the hasty and premature induction
or even departure of peacekeeping operations. In the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the elaboration by
the Government and the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic ofthe
Congo of a gradual exit strategy, bound to benchmarks
and indicators in the security, economic and political
fields, is clearly a better course of action that can
minimize the risk of squandering the gains achieved at a
great cost by the Congolese people and the international
community. Had we embraced such benchmarks in the
case of the United Nations Office in Burundi, we may
have had a different situation in Burundi today.

To conclude, we encourage the Council to continue
discussion on implementing the recommendations of
the High-level Panel and the Secretary-General, and we
hope that it will be followed by concrete action very
soon.

