Mr. Al-Ansari (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to thank Mr. Ibrahima Fall, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Great
Lakes Region, for his briefing. I wish him every
success following the end of his tenure this month.
I commend the special attention that the
Secretary-General has paid to the Great Lakes region;
his field visits to certain countries there upon assuming

his office; his attendance at the summit of the African
Union in Addis Ababa in late January; and the
important meetings he held at the margins of the
summit with representatives of important countries of
the Great Lakes region.

We recall Security Council resolution 1653
(2006), adopted following the First International
Conference on Peace, Security, Democracy and
Development in the Great Lakes Region, held in Dar
es-Salaam in 2004. We also recall the conclusions and
declaration adopted at the Second Conference, held in
Nairobi in 2006, which resulted in the signing of the
Pact on Security, Stability and Development in the
Great Lakes Region by the regional heads of State. The
Security Council adopted a presidential statement
supporting the summit and endorsing its results
following the open debate held on 20 December 2006,
under my delegation's presidency. We look forward to
the ratification of the Pact so that its practical
implementation can begin.

One of the tangible positive steps taken by the
second Conference is the establishment of regional
follow-up and monitoring mechanisms through the
establishment of the secretariat in Bujumbura. We pay
special attention to the need for payment of the
assessed contributions to the secretariat in order to
ensure its smooth functioning. Its work will include the
promotion of all stakeholders and actors in civil society
and dealing with some of the main questions in the
Great Lakes region, including those pertaining to
women, youth, reform of the security sector and
exploitation of natural resources in the region.

It will be extremely important, in this regard, to
set priorities in implementation. We appreciate the role
of the Group of Friends of the Great Lakes Region and
urge it to continue to play its role in the
implementation of the Pact. We also urge all
international partners to continue their positive
involvement, particularly after the decision of the
Great Lakes region to establish a trust fund for that
purpose. That means there will be an appropriate
mechanism to give the necessary support.

We must not lose sight of the fact that there is a
need to implement previous resolutions of the Security
Council, which are extremely important to the
countries of the Great Lakes region, particularly those
pertaining the prevention of conflicts, assessment of
the problem of armed groups and violations of human
rights, as well as ways and means to preserve peace
and security in the region and solving the problems of
displaced persons and refugees in the region.

In this regard, we note particularly the
implementation of resolutions 1625 (2005), 1631
(2005), 1649 (2005), 1653 (2006), which, we believe,
will be a very important factor in ensuring the success
of the mechanisms established by the Great Lakes
region. Implementation will constitute a connection
between the Security Council and the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union.

We also believe there is a need to benefit from
the role of other international regional and subregional
organizations in order to find means to deal with the
problems of the region. The Peacebuilding
Commission's discharge of its mandate in the region
will have a direct and positive influence on the
resolution of the problems of the African continent as a
whole.

Fully aware of the challenges facing us, we
believe that sustainable development will not be
achieved without good governance and assured and
adequate sources of income, which can be achieved
only through security and stability. Security and
stability cannot be achieved, in turn, without clear
cooperation among the countries and the peoples of the
region and the support of the international community
as a whole. That will facilitate the conclusion of
transparent economic accords between the countries of
the region and international financial institutions.
Those accords and agreements must be based on a clear
understanding of the socio-economic situation in those
countries and the cancellation of their foreign debt, or
at least the amelioration of their debt situation.

Projects that are founded on sound economic and
financial bases must also be established, particularly in
View of the strategic location of the region on the
continent of Africa and its immense natural resources.

We also would like to reiterate the need for
regional ownership of all programmes and projects
carried out in the Great Lakes region. I would like to
ask Mr. Fall about efforts to implement the Pact on
Security, Stability and Development in the Great Lakes
Region. When does he expect the Pact to be fully
implemented? And what are the impediments that are
blocking its implementation?
