Mrs. Gasri (France) (spoke in French): We would
like to join others in wishing cote d'Ivoire every
success during its presidency of the Security Council
for the month of December, and we congratulate China
on its presidency in November.

I also wish to reiterate the condolences offered by
President Emmanuel Macron to the American people
following the death of former President Bush.

We would like to congratulate Mr. Karim Khan,
Special Adviser and Head of the Investigative Team
established pursuant to Security Council resolution
2379 (2017), on his appointment and progress report
(see S/2018/1031). We hope to see him appear regularly
before the Security Council to report on the progress of
the work of the Investigative Team.

The international community, including France,
has stood alongside the Iraqi authorities in the fight
against terrorism. We are now also standing with
them in their reconstruction and reconciliation efforts,
without which there can be no lasting peace in Iraq.
A few days ago, President Macron made a pledge to
the fund launched by Nobel Peace Prize laureate Nadia
Murad, who embodies hope for the Iraqi people and for
all the victims of Da'esh regardless of their ethnicity,
religion or gender. France's contribution to the fund
will go towards the reconstruction of Sinjar, a region
particularly scarred by the abuses of Da'esh, as pointed
out by Mr. Khan earlier.

Furthermore, in 2019 France will host the next
follow-up conference of the Paris action plan in support
ofvictims of ethnic and religious violence in the Middle
East. The plan includes an important component
on the fight against impunity in terms of technical
assistance, training personnel and identifying victims
and providing them psychological support. A fund for
victims of ethnic and religious violence was also set
up. We believe that the operationalization of the United
Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes Committed by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant will fully contribute to that goal.

Solid foundations have been put in place over the

past three months for the Investigative Team to fulfil
the mandate set by the Security Council in resolution
2379 (2017) and its terms of reference, in keeping with
United Nations policies and best practices. In that regard,
we take note of the report of the Secretary-General
(A/73/253) that outlines the policy of non-sharing by
international accountability mechanisms of evidence
for use in the context of criminal proceedings in which
the death penalty could be imposed or carried out.
Three points seem essential to support the Special
Adviser and his Investigative Team.
The first point is that the Investigative Team must
have the resources it needs, starting with financial
resources. That has been said several times before
me. We also call on the Special Adviser to ensure
that staff members are recruited in such a way as to
ensure diversity in terms of gender, language and legal
tradition.

The second element is cooperation - first with
Iraq. We welcome the commitment of the newly elected
Iraqi Government and the establishment of a steering
committee to set the terms for that cooperation. We
also note the concern of the Investigative Team with
respect to involving all the relevant actors in Iraq,
including non-governmental organizations, religious
minorities and victims' representatives. Cooperation
with United Nations mechanisms is also important.
We particularly welcome cooperation with the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq, which has a
broad mandate to protect human rights and support the
rule of law. The cooperation of the Security Council
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989
(2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities, and its
Team of Experts is also essential, as recalled earlier by
the representative of Kazakhstan.

The third aspect is support for justice. The
Investigative Team must collect and store evidence that
could be used in fair and equitable court proceedings,
first in Iraq. We support the efforts of the Iraqi
authorities to strengthen the judicial and governance
systems. In addition, the victims of Da'esh must have
access to justice everywhere. That is something the
Investigative Team should also monitor.

Finally, France will continue to support national
reconciliation and the fight against impunity, which
are inextricably linked. The Investigative Team is an
important tool that is complementary to the measures
undertaken by the Iraqi authorities to ensure that all
the most serious crimes committed in Iraq are brought
before the courts, whoever the perpetrators and victims
may be. Iraq was able to defeat Da'esh militarily, to
hold parliamentary elections in good conditions and to
proceed with the appointment of new authorities. It is
now important to work towards the implementation of
inclusive governance that is based on the rule of law
and that serves the interests of all segments of Iraqi
society, in stability and prosperity, with the support of
the international community.
