Mr. Braun (Germany): Germany would like to
thank today's briefers and the Secretary-General for his
second report on the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015) (S/2016/1136), introduced by Under-Secretary-
General Feltman at this meeting. Let me briefly make
three points.

First, the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA), endorsed by resolution 2231 (2015), is an
outstanding success of diplomacy in an extremely
volatile region. It is a thoughtful agreement building on
and strengthening the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons. One year into the implementation
ofthe JCPOA, there is no doubt that the deal is working.
All participants have been keeping their commitments.
That contributes to security and stability in the region.
All participants to the agreement will now need to
adhere to the JCPOA for its full duration in order to
ensure its continued success.

Secondly, the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) has to date verified in four
reports that Iran is abiding by its nuclear-related
commitment - and I stress nuclear-related. Going
ahead, verification and monitoring by the IAEA will
remain essential to re-establishing trust and confidence
and to reassuring the world that Iran's nuclear
programme serves exclusively peaceful purposes. The
casing of sanctions has brought considerable economic
progress to Iran over the past 12 months. Just two
indicators are the fact that gross domestic product has
grown by 4.5 per cent and the conclusion of substantial
business contracts, among them by Boeing and Airbus.
That is a powerful and encouraging signal.
We are confident that the people of Iran are
now beginning to reap the benefit of Iran's return to
international trade and growth. At the same time, we
all know that economic consolidation and growth take
time. The full and comprehensive implementation of
the JCPOA provides the basis for that to happen. It is a
precondition for confidence to also grow in the business
community. Germany remains committed to the goal
of re-establishing full economic ties with Iran to the
benefit of all parties concerned.

Thirdly, Germany welcomes the fact that the
procurement channel has become fully operational. We
thank Spain for its important role in that regard. We
look forward to continuing the excellent cooperation
with the Security Council via the new facilitator, Italy.

The Vienna agreement and resolution 2231 (2015)
are a victory for the principles of the United Nations.
The JCPOA negotiations show the power of persistent
multilateral diplomacy to address major international
challenges. Germany is proud to be a party to the
JCPOA and remains firmly committed to its continued
and full implementation.

With your permission, Mr. President, I would also
like to take this opportunity to wish our colleague,
Ambassador Samantha Power, also on behalf of the
non-members of the Security Council, godspeed in
her future endeavours, and good luck to all of us in
the future without her at this table. Samantha will
be missed.

The meeting rose at 5.05 pm.
