Mr. Kay: Thank you, Madame President, for giving
me the opportunity to brief the Council from Mogadishu
today. I also thank the Council for its continued support
for Somalia's peacebuilding and State-building. I am
on the ground in Mogadishu and not in the Security
Council Chamber in New York due to the intensity of
the events taking place at the moment in Somalia. I
hope that the Council can understand that.

The best hope for peace and stability in Somalia, the
Horn of Africa and beyond remains a united, secure and
federal Somalia. That is achievable. Somalia can reach
its goal of an agreed constitution, a nationwide electoral
process and increased security by 2016. But times are
tough and in the short term they may get tougher.
Insecurity in Mogadishu poses challenges for Somalis,
the United Nations and the international community.
The year 2014 is a crucial one. It is marked by security
and political challenges, which will be overcome if
the Federal Government of Somalia and international

partners remain united and if both accelerate delivery
pursuant to their mutual commitments.
As I speak, an expanded African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM) and Somali National Army are
prosecuting a renewed offensive against Al-Shabaab,
made possible by resolution 2124 (2013). It will be the
most significant and geographically extensive military
advance since AMISOM. started, and there have already
been notable successes. I pay tribute to the commitment
and sacrifices made by AMISOM. and its police-
and troop-contributing States. Under Ambassador
Annadif's leadership, AMISOM. continues to be the
single most important contributor to the security of
Somalia and a Vital partner for the Federal Government
and the United Nations in peacebuilding, State-building
and stabilization.

Ethiopian troops were officially incorporated into
AMISOM. earlier this year. The United Nations has
played its part in preparing for the new operations.
Supplies of food, fuel and water were stockpiled by
the United Nations Support Office for the African
Union Mission in Somalia (UNSOA) in all sectors in
advance of the operations. UNSOA and the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) have
been supporting the training of Somali National Army
troops. That includes training in human rights and
humanitarian law, in accordance with the Secretary-
General's Human Rights Due Diligence Policy.

As members of the Council are aware, in
Mogadishu the security situation has deteriorated since
the last time I briefed the Council, in December (see S/PV.7078). A suicide attack carried out on a United
Nations convoy, a complex suicide attack against
the presidential compound in Villa Somalia and
another suicide attack near the National Intelligence
Headquarters, all in the month of February, are
sharp reminders. The risk of further attacks against
international and Somali Government targets remains
high. The Federal Government and AMISOM. have
increased their security operations in the city, and the
Government has developed a new Mogadishu security
strategy. I look forward to its early implementation and
I hope international partners will actively support it
and respond rapidly to requests from the Government.

The United Nations has taken measures to improve
its own security. Planning for the United Nations Guard
Unit, endorsed in February by the Council to protect
United Nations personnel and facilities in Mogadishu,
is under way, with the first deployments expected in
April. I take this opportunity to thank the Council
and the Government of Uganda for their support
in establishing the Guard Unit. I would also like to
thank AMISOM. for its cooperation in facilitating its
deployment.

Vital though they are, military operations alone
will not achieve sustainable peacebuilding and
State-building. The Government has established a
framework for the stabilization of areas that will become
accessible as a result of those operations, including
the establishment of interim local administrations.
UNSOM. has been working closely with partners to
support that.

As AMISOM. and the Somali National Army begin
their offensive, we are all conscious ofthe need to uphold
humanitarian principles and respect for international
humanitarian law. We also need resources. I urge
donors and partners to contribute to the trust fund for
the supply of non-lethal support to the Somali National
Army, in line with resolution 2124 (2013). Such United
Nations support for a national army is groundbreaking
and requires our collective effort and determination to
succeed.

Developing strong, professional Somali security
forces is essential. Progress is being made, but it is
made harder by the continuing insecurity and conflict.
UNSOM's work on security sector reform continues.
We are, for example, taking some practical steps, such
as supporting biometric registration and the provision
of uniforms. We plan to support the Somali Police
Force's recruitment of 2,300 additional police officers
in 2014.

Somalia's security institutions need urgently to
be properly funded. I hope that international partners
will work with UNSOM, AMISOM. and the Federal
Government to work out how to do that in a timely and
effective manner. I am pleased also to report that in
February the European Union training mission began
its training programmes inside Somalia. That is a
significant step that deserves our recognition.

Achieving greater security is a vital task for
2014, but the political dimension of State-building
and peacebuilding is equally vital this year. After
nearly three months of negotiation, Somalia now has
a new Federal Government under the leadership of
Prime Minister Abdiweli Sheikh Ahmed. The Cabinet
contains experienced and technocratic Ministers whose
workplans are built around the priorities identified in
the New Deal Compact.
On 24 February, President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud
and I co-chaired in Mogadishu the first meeting of the
High- level Partnership Forum, the body overseeing the
implementation of the Compact. The Forum concluded
that now was the time for both the Government and
international partners to convert plans into actions,
pledges into tangible projects and make real political
progress. I am pleased to report that as we meet, the
Federal Government is finalizing a detailed plan and
timetable for a process leading to the formation of Federal
states, a final Constitution and democratization by 2016.
I expect the timetable - which is broadly called Vision
2016 and has concrete and realistic deliverables - to
be published in the coming weeks, following further
consultation with stakeholders, including Puntland and
the Interim Juba Administration. The United Nations
stands ready to play a central role in supporting its
implementation.

Strengthened public financial management
is another pillar of State-building. Following the
resignation of the former Governor of the Central
Bank in November 2013, the Government has made
progress towards rebuilding national and international
confidence in its financial institutions. A key step
has been the establishment of a financial governance
committee, involving experts from the Government
and international financial institutions to advise on
financial management. Alongside other key measures,
the Federal Government has agreed to share the existing
strategic concession contracts with the committee
for technical review and expert advice. Improved
transparency and accountability are critical steps in
initiating aid flows. The World Bank, I should note, has
been intrepid in supporting on the ground the progress
we are beginning to see.

The formation of Federal states needs to be
accelerated. I said as much in my briefing to the
Council in December (see S/PV.7078), and it is even
more true today. In Baidoa, in south-west Somalia,
the gulf between two rival camps, advocating a six-
and three-region state respectively, remains wide. On
3 March, I called on all parties to respect the Constitution
and existing agreements of the Federal Government
and to resolve disputes through inclusive dialogue. I
continue to offer UNSOM's good offices to support a
Federal Government-led process. The Government has
clearly stated its commitment to a three-region state, a
position that should be respected.

In southern Somalia, the formation of the Interim
Juba Administration continued, with the announcement
ofministerial positions on 20 February. There have been
positive steps towards reconciliation and inclusiveness,
but the full implementation of the 28 August 2013 Addis
Ababa agreement requires continued engagement and
compromise. I salute the efforts of Ethiopia as Chair
of the Council of Ministers of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development and guarantor of the Addis
Ababa agreement. UNSOM. is working with the Federal
Government, the Interim Juba Administration and
partners to mobilize resources to manage an increased
caseload of disengaged combatants in Kismaayo and to
take forward reconciliation initiatives.

To the north, in Puntland, on 8 January I witnessed,
along with several members of the international
community, the election of President Abdiweli
Mohamed Ali Gaas and the peaceful handover by former
President Abdirahman Mohamed Farole. UNSOM
supported critical mediation efforts in the run-up to the
elections and advocated, among other things, for greater
women's political participation. I am encouraged by the
new Government's commitment to the resumption of
Puntland's suspended democratization process and the
restoration of relations with the Federal Government of
Somalia. President Gaas has highlighted the difficult
budget situation and the shortage of funds to pay the
salaries of Puntland Government officials, including
security forces. I hope that donor efforts to find an
interim solution will bear fruit.

I am inspired by the vigour and enthusiasm of
Somali women's political advocacy. Twenty-three
women's organizations from south-central Somalia
and Puntland have established the Somali Women
Leadership Initiative to campaign for increased political
participation by women. UNSOM. remains firmly
committed to enhancing women's participation in
national decision-making. Encouragingly, in Puntland,
President Abdiweli Gaas appointed five women to his
Cabinet, more than any of his predecessors.

Promotion and respect for human rights are at the
core of UNSOM's support to the Federal Government.
We have been working with both AMISOM. and the
Somali National Army to provide training on human
rights, international humanitarian law and refugee law.
A joint working group on human rights due diligence,
which includes AMISOM, UNSOA and UNSOM, has
been established, and I hope that in the near future
it will also include the Federal Government. The
consultative process to create a national human rights
commission is still delayed against a background of
sustained attacks against human rights defenders and
journalists and the continued application of the death
penalty. I am also deeply concerned about the ongoing
incidence of sexual violence in Somalia. I look forward
to the implementation of the recommendations of the
United Nations Team of Experts on the Rule of Law
and Sexual Violence in Conflict established under
resolution 1888 (2009). The Team of Experts visited
Somalia in December 2013.

Despite significant humanitarian crises around the
world and within the region, I believe that Somalia must
remain a priority. The country's humanitarian crisis
is among the largest and most complex in the world.
An estimated 2.9 million people will need immediate
life-saving and livelihood support in the next six months.
Recent improvements in the humanitarian situation
are fragile and risk reversal if the current trend of low
and slow funding for the 2014 humanitarian appeal
continues. There have been reports recently, also,
of displacements as a result of the recent offensives,
especially in Bay and Bakool. As of 9 March, some
3,700 newly displaced people had arrived in Baidoa,
mainly due to fear of attacks. As of today, they have all
started receiving shelter and household items. We also
had reports of some 700 previously displaced families
who have returned to Xuddur after it was recaptured by
Somali national army and AMISOM. forces.

Humanitarian access due to the volatile security
situation remains a major challenge. Humanitarian
partners are working to determine urgent needs and
how best to respond. On 10 December 2013, a tripartite
agreement was signed between the Governments of
Kenya, Somalia and the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees for the voluntary
repatriation of Somali refugees in Kenya. But conditions
in Somalia are not yet conducive to wide-scale refugee
return. Without sufficient preparation, mass returns
could, in fact, cause instability and worsen the
humanitarian situation in the country.

As a result of changes in its legislation, in
December 2013, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia began
deporting Somali nationals and other migrant workers.
It is estimated that more than 22,000 have returned to
Somalia thus far. The International Organization for
Migration expects that as many as an additional 33,000
people could be deported in the next three months. Such
an influx into Mogadishu could exacerbate the plight of
the internally displaced in the capital.

Progress in Somalia has been mixed thus far, but
it is progress. We still have a long way to go. The
targets that the Federal Government has set itself,
in partnership with the international community,
remain relevant and feasible. National reconciliation,
federalism, the conclusion of the constitutional process
and the rebuilding of security institutions are critical.
Despite setbacks and delays, none of those tasks remain
out of our collective reach. But time is of the essence.
The time for action is now.

To conclude, Somalia and Somalis desperately need
improved security. I firmly believe that can be achieved,
but it requires a collective effort. National reconciliation
must be fast-tracked. The establishment of Federal
states is critical to the creation of a cohesive and
effective federal structure in Somalia. Reconciliation
efforts must continue and will be an additional tool in
the fight against the enemies of peace. Legislation to
set the constitutional and electoral processes in motion
must be enacted.

Finally, I urge the international community to
continue to provide the support necessary to build
the Federal Government's capacity to undertake the
significant work that remains. Somalis need to see
and feel the benefit of increasing peace and security.
We need to convert good plans into more concrete
assistance, or, as a Somali proverb says "A sweet hand is
better than a sweet mouth". The Federal Government is
frustrated with the slow delivery of tangible assistance.
A country broken from decades of conflict has huge
needs. Not all can or will be met quickly, especially
while the conflict continues, but I wonder if together
we could not achieve some faster success in rebuilding
the shattered State of Somalia.

As friends and partners of Somalia, we need to
stay the course. Now is not the time to prevaricate.
We have to be prepared for setbacks but must remain
resolute. After nearly a quarter of a century of wars,
State collapse and immense human suffering, Somalis
are determined to build a lasting peace. They need and
deserve our continued support.

