Mr. Bessho (Japan): I thank you, Sir, for convening
today's important meeting. I also thank today's briefers
for their insightful and powerful statements, as well
as the leaders of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) for their initiative and commitment. I especially
appreciate the presence here today of His Excellency
Mr. Abdoulaye Diop, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of Mali, and his participation
in today's discussion.

Japan thanks the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2017/869), issued in accordance with resolution
2359 (2017). We look forward to participating actively
in discussions on possible United Nations support
to the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel,
recommendations for which were presented in the
report. Today I would like to point out that such
discussions should take into account all aspects of the
situation, including broader societal transformations,
which the G-5 Sahel Joint Force is meant to support.

Lasting security in the Sahel is ultimately a
function of political, social and economic development.
That was clear during the Council's recent mission to
the Sahel, which focused on the implementation of
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali,
the political foundation for our current and future
work on Mali and the other G-5 Sahel States. That is
in line with the emphasis of resolution 2359 (2017) on
pursuing counter-terrorism efforts in the region with
a View to supporting the Peace Agreement. Indeed,
throughout the year, we have reaffirmed that the
nexus between peace and security and humanitarian
concerns and development requires an integrated and
preventive response.

The Sahel is facing a growing threat. Japan
commends the efforts by the G-5 Sahel States and
France to counter terrorism. We also believe that
preventive efforts will be needed to mitigate the
threat in the future. As the Council observed during
its mission, security-focused and short-term measures
alone will not bring about lasting stability. We need
a sharper focus on addressing the root causes of the
conflicts that bedevil Sahel countries in both cross-
border and local contexts. By that I mean chronic
underdevelopment, inadequate local governance and
State institutions and a lack of education and job
opportunities, particularly for young people, all of
which open the door to exploitation by terrorist groups
and organized crime. The Secretary-General's report,
the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel,
the African Union Strategy for the Sahel Region, and
the Peacebuilding Commission all identify the same
problems. In essence, human security is at stake.

Addressing these root causes in a comprehensive
manner is at the core of conflict prevention and
sustaining peace. That is not easy and it takes time,
but there are no shortcuts to this approach. As the
Secretary-General has noted, the Joint Force must
be paired with deeper reflection on development and
institutions. With those principles in mind, Japan has
provided approximately $1.3 billion in development and
humanitarian assistance to the Sahel since 2013, both
bilaterally and multilaterally, within the framework
of the Tokyo International Conference on African
Development. Those efforts promote development and
security institutions, thereby weakening the influence
ofterrorist and criminal groups. They include activities
as diverse as supporting laws on migrant smuggling
in the Niger and terrorist financing in Burkina Faso,
developing human rights-compliant criminal justice
responses to terrorism in Chad and enhancing border
controls in Mauritania and Mali.

We would particularly like to highlight the
International Ministerial Conference on Border
Management and Border Communities in the Sahel,
convened in March 2016 under the auspices of the
G-5 Sahel States with the support of United Nations
Development Programme and Japan. The Conference
resulted in the Bamako declaration, in which the G-5
Sahel States called for development-focused efforts in
border communities, with particular emphasis on young
people and conflict prevention. The G-5 Sahel States
will continue to need international and United Nations
support in order to implement those development
priorities and enhance social cohesion and community
security, particularly in border communities. In the
short term, the Joint Force will focus on combating
terrorism and organized crime, and we appreciate
its important work. At the same time, its operations
must ultimately contribute to long-term solutions in
the Sahel.

