The President (spoke in Russian): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Afghanistan, Australia, Canada,
Iceland, India, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Japan,
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, the Netherlands, New
Zealand, Pakistan, the Republic of Korea, Slovenia,
Spain, Turkey and the United Arab Emirates in which
they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the consideration of the item without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Tanin
(Afghanistan) took a seat at the Council table;
the representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side ofthe Council Chamber.

The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Jean-Marie
Guehenno, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Guehenno to take a seat at the
Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Afghanistan and its implications for international peace
and security (5/2008/ 159).

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations.

Before giving him the floor, I wish, on behalf of
the members, to welcome the appointment of Mr. Kai
Eide as the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan. I also welcome his presence at
this meeting before assuming his important duties in
Afghanistan. We look forward to working closely with
him and wish him good luck and success in his new
and challenging assignment.

I now give the floor to Mr. Guehenno.


