Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I wish to thank you, Madam President, and all
members of the Security Council for having given me
the floor and for your important remarks, where I heard
broad support for my country. Ukraine counts greatly
on the Security Council to exert all possible efforts
at the international level in order to guarantee the
protection of the Ukrainian people, the sovereignty of
my country and its territorial integrity.

(spoke in English)

At the beginning of this meeting, we listened to the
briefing of the representative of the Russian Federation
with great attention. Unfortunately, we have still not
received any compelling answer to the simple question
as to why the military forces of the Russian Federation
are illegally occupying the Crimea and brutally violating
international law and bilateral agreements. I would like
to recall that, according to the Budapest Memorandum
on security assurances signed in 1994 between Ukraine
and guarantor States, including Russia itself, my
country has given up its nuclear arsenal to Russia,
while Russia, inter alia, was obliged to refrain from the
threat of or use of threat of force against the territorial
integrity or political independence of Ukraine. In that
regard, I want to underline that with this aggression,
the Russian Federation is specifically undermining
the regime of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons in general.

I wish to brief the Council on the most recent
developments on the territory of the Autonomous
Republic of Crimea, Ukraine. As of today, beginning
from 24 February, approximately 16,000 Russian
troops have been deployed in Crimea by military ships,
helicopters and cargo aeroplanes from the neighbouring
territory of the Russian Federation. The Russian troops
keep making attempts to seize, block and control
Ukraine's crucial governmental and military entities
in Crimea - the Parliament of Crimea, all civil and
military airports, means of communication, radio
stations, customs services, military and coastguard
bases and the headquarters of Ukraine's navy in
Crimea. All main roads are blocked.

The build-up of Russian Federation troops and
military equipment along the eastern border of Ukraine
clearly indicates Russia's preparation for a possible
military intervention in Ukraine - the other parts of
our country. So far, the Ukrainian armed forces have
exercised restraint and refrained from active resistance
to the aggression, although they are in full operational
readiness.

The Russian Federation is performing active
information and psychological operations in the
Autonomous Republic of Crimea, as well as in the
south-eastern regions of Ukraine. Those are aimed
at discrediting the legitimate authorities of Ukraine
and misleading public opinion by calling the Russian
intervention a peacekeeping operation.

The Minister of Internal Affairs of Ukraine
announced today information about possible
provocative acts by the Russian side on the territory of
Crimea. Tonight, unknown armed persons are planning
to attack and possibly kill Russian soldiers, presenting
it as if the attack were committed by Ukraine from
within. That is going to be used as a pretext for the
ongoing armed intervention by Russia against Ukraine.

The Russian Federation is concerned about the
human rights and freedoms of the ethnic Russians on
the territory of Ukraine. I would like to inform the
Council that it is the obligation of our Government
and people to care about that. We do not need external
help. Our Minister for Foreign Affairs agreed with
the High Commissioner on National Minorities of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
to provide an observer mission in Crimea.

Once again, we call upon Security Council
members to authorize an international mediation and
monitoring mission to Crimea to also monitor the
situation with regard to the human rights of ethnic
Russian and other ethnic groups and the so-called
Russian-speaking population. I, too, am a Russian-
speaking person but I do not need any support. My
appeal to the Russian Federation is that it demonstrate
that it is still a respectful permanent member of the
Security Council. It should not undermine the authority
of, and confidence in, this universal body.

I know that in the media there are some Russian
companies and one Ukrainian television station.
Therefore, with the Council's permission, I will
continue in Russian.

(spoke in Russian)

Iwould like to congratulate all Orthodox Christians
on the beginning of Lent and to call on all of Russia's
Christians and their leaders to seek peace. Do not
provoke God's wrath. Come to your senses. Pray for us
and hear us.

Unfortunately, the representative of the Russian
Federation has attempted to explain the presence of
Russian troops in Crimea by saying they are serving
as peacekeepers. As we have heard from many who
spoke today, those acts are seen as aggression and a
provocation ofa large-scale armed conflict in Ukraine.
That is unacceptable for a State that is one of the
guarantors of our sovereignty and territorial integrity
under the Budapest Memorandum - and, moreover,
for a permanent member ofthe Security Council, which
shares with other Member States the very important
function of supporting peace and stability throughout the
world. None of that representative's reasoning about the
legitimacy of the invasion of Ukraine can be condoned
from the standpoint of the Charter of the United Nations.
All Russia's arguments with regard to the protection of
the Russian population, for example, which supposedly
condone military intervention, are part of an issue that
is totally within the national purview of the Ukrainian
Government and its citizens and should be carried out
under our Constitution. All citizens, regardless of their
ethnicity or nationality, have equal rights. Under our
Constitution, only the Ukrainian Parliament can take
those decisions. Do we need military assistance to deal
with those humanitarian questions? I have already said
that we do not need that type of assistance.

The representative of the Russian Federation
continues to refer to the agreement of 21 February as
the basis for a settlement of the crisis in Ukraine. We
are very surprised by such reasoning. The Russian side,
which participated in the mediation talks in reaching
that agreement, together with our European partners,
refrained from signing the agreement and did not even
recognize it as such. Moreover, in the opinion of the
Russian representative, how could it be implemented in
the context that he is talking about, if one of the major
players - former President Yanukovych - left the
capital and in fact refused to implement his constitutional
functions?

The Russian representative continues to call what
happened in Ukraine a coup d'etat. In the democratic
world, there is a more precise definition. What took
place was a revolution of dignity.

We have different understandings about human
rights. In November 2013, people of all nationalities
protested in the streets without any party officials
instructing them and without any pressure from the
West - contrary to what the Russian representative
asserted. People went out to defend their right to a
life of dignity against a wretched, corrupt system that
had brought about extreme poverty to mining regions
in the east and rural areas of the centre and south of
the country, as well as unemployment in the west.
Meanwhile, as the entire world saw on television, the
relatives of former President Yanukovych, who the
Russian representative is defending, lived in luxury.

The Russian representative reiterated today what
was already said in a statement by Minister Lavrov,
namely, that the former authorities used absolutely
legitimate means in curbing unrest. That means that
the peaceful student protesters who were brutally
beaten by the police on the night of 30 November
and on 1 December, whose rights were violated, now
stand accused of violating rights. So, while in fact
the police beat them, now it seems that the protesters
were the ones at fault. And thus it was the protesters
who brought repressive laws to Parliament limiting
their constitutional rights of freedom of speech and
association and laws curbing the rights of the mass
media and the freedom of expression - laws that
Yanukovych was forced to nullify in the face of pressure
from public opinion.

I think the Russian representative is saying that
something is wrong in his country. I am sorry that he
told an untruth about the Church. All denominations
have supported the people, including the Ukrainian
Orthodox Church, which is canonically related to
the Moscow Patriarchate. The highest official of the
Ukranian Church has called on Russian Orthodox
Christians to pause and pray for Ukraine, but not to get
ready to kill Ukranians.

The Russian side justified its decision to carry out
a military intervention in Ukraine by saying that the
Prime Minister ofCrimea, Mr. Aksyonov, had requested
it. His appointment runs counter to the Constitution. He
is not a legitimate leader of the administrative territory
of Ukraine.

Allow me to recall that Ukraine is a unified State,
and Crimea, in line with its powers, is not a member
of the Federation. Without the central Government's
authorization for troops to come in from Russia, we see
it as an unauthorized act of aggression. Even in Crimea
it is not supported by many of the people.

Therefore, in accordance with the call by the
Secretary-General, the people of the east were brought
into the Government's work. Four ministers in
Ukraine's current Cabinet were born in Russia, while
several governors and territorial leaders in the eastern
regions are also Russian-speaking.

In spite of the economic difficulties in the country,
the Government of Ukraine is continuing to provide
assistance to Crimea. The National Bank of Ukraine
provided support to the Crimean bank in the amount of
400 million hryvnias.

Unfortunately, I must note an unfair game played
by Russia in the area of misinformation, which is also
contributing to the destabilization of our country. Many
examples have been given in the past few days. I do not
wish to repeat them. However, we would like to take
the opportunity afforded by this meeting to once again
call on our Russian partners to stop spreading false
information.

(spoke in English)

I would like to express my sincere gratitude to you,
Madam President, and to all members of the Security
Council, in particular those who expressed support for
Ukraine, who support the imperative to resolve all the
problems via diplomatic and political means and to stop
the aggression.

