Mr. Thomson (United Kingdom): My delegation
is most grateful to Mr. Guterres for his presence today
and also for his thoughtful and powerful statement. I
should like to acknowledge in particular his comments
at the end about the importance of values as we tackle
the challenge of refugee flows and migration.

I want to use the opportunity of this discussion
with Mr. Guterres to signal the value we in the United
Kingdom attach to the important work of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) in providing refugee protection and in
promoting durable solutions. I would also use the
occasion to record once more the United Kingdom's
recognition of the importance of the 1951 Convention
relating to the Status of Refugees and its 1967
Protocol, as well as the need for States to comply fully
with the provisions contained therein.

I want to thank Mr. Guterres for the active
leadership that he has shown on behalf of UNHCR in
taking a key role in protection and support for
internally displaced persons, which is now being
addressed through the collaborative approach and the
cluster system. It would be interesting to hear his
thoughts on how well that is working so far.

The linkages between flows of refugees and
internally displaced persons, on the one hand, and
peace and security, on the other, are clear and of direct
concern to the work of this Council. Mr. Guterres made
that point very well this morning, I think. It underlines
our own View about the Council's interests. That
extends not just to the country-specific situations that
the Council finds itself addressing, but also to our work
both on conflict management and on conflict
prevention. 1 should like to make just one or two
remarks and ask one or two questions in those two
categories.

First, on post-conflict management, I want to
underline our welcome of Mr. Guterres' undertaking
that UNHCR will play an active role in the Support
Office of the Peacebuilding Commission and in the
Commission itself.

Secondly, we very much welcome the work that
UNHCR is doing to ensure that refugees and displaced
persons are incorporated into recovery strategies.
Mr. Guterres is absolutely right, in our View, that
returns of internally displaced persons and refugees are
integral to the solution, as well as being part of the
problem. That perception and Mr. Guterres' support
will help us, I think, as we look at peacekeeping
missions and the increasing role that they are playing
in facilitating refugee returns. My point, really, is in
the same area as my French colleague's question just
now.

I, too, want to ask whether there are any lessons
that we can learn from UNHCR's experiences in
ensuring the safety and the sustainability of refugee
returns. I would sharpen that question by focusing
particularly on Mr. Guterres' remarks about the
challenges in Darfur and Chad - an issue which we
are, of course, addressing and will have to continue to
address, and on which his points only add to our sense
of urgency about the situation.

One issue in the context of post-conflict
management that I want to raise - and that I am not
sure Mr. Guterres touched on greatly but would
welcome his thoughts on - is the fundamental
importance we attach to maintaining the civilian
character of refugee camps and settlements. As we see
it, the presence of armed elements in such camps,
especially where they themselves are seeking sanctuary
in a neighbouring country, poses a number of grave
consequences for the security and welfare of refugees,
including, of course, the potential for sexual abuse and
for forced recruitment. Those factors create an unstable
and insecure operating environment for humanitarian
workers and give rise to security concerns for host
communities and receiving States. There is thus an
impact on regional peace and security.

Turning to conflict prevention, I want very much
to welcome Mr. Guterres's reference to resolution 1625
(2005). We believe that UNHCR has an important role
to play in the area of early warning and in helping both
to signal and to address root causes of conflict,
especially where these trigger displacement. I think
that we, as a Council, are going to have to take note
carefully of his remarks both about eastern Sudan and
about the Central African Republic. I should like here
to signal my delegation's appreciation for his having
raised those issues.

Mr. Guterres also spoke about the regional
dynamics, something to which I think the Council is
paying increasing attention, but which poses challenges
both for us as a Council and for UNHCR in this sort of
warning role.

I wanted to conclude by asking whether UNHCR
believes that it has sufficient capacity to do the sort of
monitoring that Mr. Guterres's comments must have
been based on, and what systems are in place to ensure
that its efforts in this area are coordinated with those of
other relevant actors in the United Nations and outside
it, and not just dependent on the occasional appearance
before the Security Council.

