Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): Let me start by
thanking the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Farid Zarif, for presenting the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2013/444) on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).
We also welcome the participation in today's meeting
of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Serbia, Mr. Ivan Mrkic', and thank him and Mr. Enver
Hoxhaj for their statements.
Azerbaijan's position with regard to the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the Republic of Serbia and
non-recognition of Kosovo's unilateral declaration of
independence remains unchanged. Resolution 1244
(1999) continues to be the binding international basis
for a comprehensive settlement through a political
negotiations process. Azerbaijan takes positive note of
the developments that took place during the reporting
period following the 19 April agreement on principles
governing the normalization of relations. In that
connection, we also note the further agreement reached
on 22 May on an implementation plan for the 19 April
agreement, and the subsequent meetings in Brussels
to advance the work of implementation. We commend
both sides for their efforts to safeguard their important
achievements and encourage them to continue to remain
committed to reaching agreement on the contentious
issues through mutually acceptable solutions. That is
indispensable to greater stability and well-being in the
region.

We emphasize the extraordinary importance of
UNMIK's presence and activities in Kosovo. It is
noteworthy that the Mission continues to work closely
with communities on the ground and to collaborate with
all other mandated international presences in order to
enhance the political dialogue's prospects for success.
UNMIK should maintain and further develop its key role
in ensuring the coordination of all international efforts
within its status-neutral framework, as envisaged in
resolution 1244 (1999).

It is encouraging that the overall security situation
in Kosovo remained generally calm during the
reporting period, though stability is yet to be achieved
and incidents and tensions require serious attention
and prompt reaction. The voluntary return of internally
displaced persons to Kosovo again showed few signs of
improvement during the reporting period. We commend
the efforts of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees to monitor the process
and implement the necessary policies for facilitating
returns. In that regard, the question of security should
be given careful consideration.

The support of the international community for
both sides remains essential, particularly in terms
of building reconciliation and confidence. As the
Secretary-General noted in his report, the unresolved
legacies of the conflict, including unsolved cases of
missing persons and the bringing to account of all those
responsible for war crimes and other criminal acts,
should remain key priorities.

In conclusion, I would like to commend UNMIK,
under the leadership of Special Representative Zarif,
for its contribution to consolidating peace and stability
in Kosovo and the entire region.

