Mr. Mayoral (spoke in Spanish): I am delivering
my l20-day briefing to the Council as Chairman of the
Committee pursuant to paragraph 16 of resolution 1617
(2005). Since my previous briefing to the Council, four
individuals have been added to the list, and the
Committee has also approved a number of other
changes to the list. The Committee is resolved to
improve the quality of the list - that has been one of
my chief concerns since I took over the
chairmanship - and to that end a number of measures
have been introduced.

With regard to dialogue with States and visits to
selected States, between 28 April and 8 May we visited
selected countries pursuant to paragraph 15 of
resolution 1617 (2005). We visited Qatar, Yemen and
Saudi Arabia - the latter two of which have suffered
from attacks by Al-Qaida. All three countries
expressed, through their authorities, their commitment
to support the work of the Committee and the
implementation of relevant sanctions measures.
Furthermore, I believe that all three countries have
made significant contributions to the fight against Al-
Qaida, which further illustrates their concerted efforts
to combat international terrorism.

Qatar is actively engaged in the work of the
Committee and offers us a clear insight into areas
which are of specific concern to Islamic States. The
visit to Qatar provided an opportunity for us to learn
more about its efforts to counter international terrorism
and its desire to work in the Committee to further
improve the sanctions regime. Yemen, too, is an
important country in the fight against Al-Qaida, given
that several individuals on the list are nationals of that
country. As the Council knows, a number of listed
individuals and entities also come from Saudi Arabia.

Sll'V.5446

 

Many governmental officials from all three
countries expressed concerns about certain aspects of
the Committee's work. One area discussed was the
need for greater consultation with relevant States prior
to placing any individual on the list. They expressed
the View that such consultations would not only
improve compliance by Member States but also serve
as a way of obtaining sufficient identifiers. Another
area addressed concerned Al-Qaida's use of the
Internet. Many officials commended the Committee's
Monitoring Team for having organized meetings of
heads and deputy heads of security and intelligence
agencies to discuss that issue and took note of the
suggestions that resulted from those meetings.
Recently, the Monitoring Team of the Committee
submitted a paper on Al-Qaida's use of the Internet,
which is currently under consideration in the
Committee.

In addition, the officials considered Al-Qaida's
ideology to be the greatest long-term threat within
those countries. In that regard, we also learned about
efforts to counter that ideology and to draw a majority
of the people away from it. In Saudi Arabia in
particular, these efforts were seen as directly linked to
attempts to dispel the preconceived notions existing in
some Western media that identify Islam with terrorism.
Needless to say, we fully agree that there is a need to
fight such prejudice, and I invited the Saudi authorities
to brief the Committee directly about that project.

Since my most recent briefing to the Council, the
members of the Monitoring Team have visited Africa,
Asia and Europe to discuss issues related to the
effective implementation of the sanctions regime. An
expert member of the Team also accompanied me on
my recent trip to Yemen, Saudi Arabia and Qatar, and
the Team has participated in further meetings of chiefs
and assistant chiefs of security and intelligence
services from a group of Islamic countries. Recently,
the Monitoring Team held a meeting with chiefs of
security and intelligence services from the region to
address the specific threat posed by Al-Qaida-related
groups in Somalia and the problem of effective
implementation of the sanctions regime.

On 30 March, the Committee issued a press
release in which it recalled paragraph 14 of resolution
1617 (2005) and invited States to send representatives
to discuss relevant issues with the Committee in
greater depth. Upon approval by the Committee,
representatives of Germany, Sweden and Switzerland
attended the Committee meeting held on 15 May to

present the joint efforts of the three Governments to
increase the effectiveness of the sanctions. Their
efforts are based on a paper written by the Watson
Institute for International Studies. The three
Governments' representatives referred to that document
and emphasized the legal and political difficulties -
including listing and delisting procedures - posed by
sanctions targeting individuals. That presentation and
the subsequent discussion were useful for the
Committee, particularly as it is preparing to consider
revising its listing and delisting guidelines and
procedures. The presentation also enabled the
Committee to become informed about certain problems
that States may experience when dealing with
sanctions-related issues, particularly in the absence of
transparent procedures.

The Committee continues to place great emphasis
on improving the transparency of its work, which
includes stepping up the dialogue between the
Committee and Member States. That effort is reflected
in, inter alia, the notes verbales sent to States on 25
April. The first note (SCA/2/O6(9)), recalling
resolution 1452 (2002), specifically reminded States of
the exceptions provided for in the sanctions regime,
particularly with regard to the freezing of assets. It
emphasized that States can release funds - even for
basic needs - only if they previously inform the
Committee of their intention to do so. Another note
(SCA/2/06(8)) clarified the Committee's procedures
concerning deceased individuals whose names appear
on the Consolidated List. With regard to requests for
the delisting of such persons, the Committee decided
that it would consider such requests by States on a
case-by-case basis; the requesting State should send to
the Committee the name of the deceased person on the
List, together with a statement of case justifying the
delisting request. That will usually require a death
certificate or a similar official document confirming
the death. Furthermore, the Committee considered it
important to stress that the requesting State should also
determine whether any legal beneficiary of the
deceased person's estate, or any joint owner of his or
her assets, also appears on the Consolidated List and to
inform the Committee accordingly. The clarifications
provided in both notes are an example of the
Committee's determination to address issues that
Member States have identified as important for
improving their implementation efforts.

S/l'V.5446

 

For several weeks, the Committee has considered
the recommendations contained in the fourth report of
the Monitoring Team (S/2006/154), and it will soon
submit a report to the Security Council on its position
regarding them. Consideration of the Team's
recommendations always gives the Committee an
opportunity to think about how to further improve the
sanctions regime.

The Monitoring Team continues to provide
professional assistance to the Committee in the form of
effective support for the monitoring of sanctions
implementation. The Team has presented various
proposals to the Committee on issues related to the
Committee's current work on its guidelines and has
suggested further improvements to the Consolidated
List and to the Committee's website, which are now
under consideration. Following the submission of its
fourth report to the Committee, in accordance with the
provisions of annex l (c) of resolution 1617 (2005), the
Monitoring Team has contributed to and participated in
all the Committee's discussions on the 38
recommendations contained in the report. Here, I wish
to clarify that the Monitoring Team has cooperated
very closely with me throughout this period. Its work is
very important, and I believe that all members of the
Committee value that work.

At the same time, at the Committee's request, the
Monitoring Team has been compiling the checklists
submitted by States in accordance with paragraph 10 of
resolution 1617 (2005) and will be presenting its
preliminary analysis to the Committee. I wish to clarify
that six checklists have been submitted to date. Finally,
in conformity with annex l (c) of resolution 1617
(2005), the Monitoring Team must submit its fifth
report to the Committee by 31 July 2006 at the latest. It
must also help the Committee to prepare an updated
written assessment of the steps taken by States to
implement the sanctions measures described in
paragraph 1 of resolution 1617 (2005), also by 31 July
2006.

The Team has continued to strengthen its links
with international and regional bodies by enhancing its
productive relationship with Interpol and by
establishing new areas of cooperation with the
International Civil Aviation Organization, the
International Air Transport Association, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and other relevant United Nations bodies, in
coordination with the efforts of the Counter-Terrorism

Executive Directorate. The Team has also continued to
coordinate its travel plans with the Directorate, and in
April this year a member of the Team participated in a
Counter-Terrorism Working Group conference with the
Directorate and the group of experts of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004).

The Monitoring Team has also continued to work
closely with the Executive Directorate and the experts
supporting the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004), to examine ways to assist the
31 States that tend to be late in reporting, or that do not
report at all, to the three Committees. At the same time,
the Team has made some proposals, which are
currently under consideration by the Committee, on
how to assist the 44 States that have not yet submitted
to the Committee their reports under resolution 1455
(2003). At the Committee's request, the Team has also
provided significant assistance to the Government of
Afghanistan to ensure that its national reconciliation
programme takes full account of the sanctions regime
against former senior members of the Taliban. The
Team has continued to work with the Government of
Afghanistan with regard to requests for the exclusion
of members of the Taliban from the consolidated list.

With regard to the future work of the Committee
and the Monitoring Team and emerging challenges, the
Committee will focus its work in the immediate future
on the following activities.

First, in the context of revising its guidelines, the
Committee will take up the matter of its procedures for
the listing and delisting of names. That will be a very
difficult and arduous task for the Committee, but it is
nevertheless a very important one. The Committee is
aware of the great expectations that have emerged on
the part of States with regard to the revision of
procedures. Some of the Member States on the
Committee have already received some ideas, and
those will be discussed in June. At the same time, the
Committee would like to believe that the revised listing
and delisting procedures will certainly benefit
implementation measures taken by States.

Secondly, with regard to further improving the
quality of the list, the consolidated list plays a very
important deterrent role, despite its current
imperfections. Nevertheless, its completeness and
accuracy are essential for the success of established
sanctions measures. We therefore encourage all

Sll'V.5446

 

Member States to submit the names of individuals and
entities that should be included on the list as a result of
their association with Al-Qaida and the Taliban. For its
part, the Committee should consider without delay the
best way to assist States in their implementation efforts
in cases when the identity of an individual is not
certain due to the lack of sufficient identifying
information on the list.

Thirdly, the Committee will focus on completing
its consideration of the recommendations contained in
the fourth report of the Monitoring Team and will
submit to the Security Council a report reflecting the
Committee's position in that regard.
Fourthly, the Committee will review the report
expected from the Monitoring Team regarding the
checklist referred to in annex II of resolution
1617 (2005). The checklist is a newly introduced tool
to monitor adherence to sanctions on the part of States.
Its effectiveness has not yet been ascertained.

The Committee will also continue to discuss, in
cooperation with the Counter-Terrorism Committee and
the 1540 Committee, how to enhance cooperation,
including as regards Committee reports.

The Committee has before it various issues of
great complexity and urgency. The Committee's agenda
also continues to grow, which has required it to revisit
certain matters several times in order to ensure that
there is no omission. As Chairman of the Committee, I
would like to assure everyone here that I will spare no
effort to intensify the work of the Committee in order
to make as much progress as possible in our work.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the
Committee's determination to make further progress in
our work. I would therefore like to encourage the
members of the Committee to continue to take a
proactive and creative approach to our responsibilities.
I would also like to repeat my invitation to Member
States to benefit from the opportunity provided by
resolution 1617 (2005) and to send representatives to
the Committee to discuss in greater depth matters
relating to sanctions. As stated by the Secretary-
General in his recent report on a global counter-
terrorism strategy, we can only combat the threat of
terrorism successfully when we are unified and
persistent in our efforts.

Before I conclude, I would like publicly to thank
the authorities of Qatar, Yemen and Saudi Arabia for
their kindness to me and the members of the
Committee and the Monitoring Team who visited those
countries.

