Mr. Holbrooke (United States of America): I am
particularly honoured to be here today, under your
presidency, Sir, at this important meeting, and I am
delighted that you intend to spend so much of the month of
Canada's presidency of the Security Council with us here
in New York. We greatly look forward to working under
your leadership. I also want to express my very high regard
for Ambassador Fowler and the entire Canadian delegation
for presiding over this "month of human security" and, in
particular, for their immense efforts with regard to the
Angola sanctions issue, which I know we will be discussing
later in the month, and to which we in our Government are
also devoting so much attention in support of their efforts.

I would also like to thank John Renninger of the
Department for Political Affairs and the Special Adviser on
Gender Issues, Angela King, for drawing our attention to
the plight of women and girls in Afghanistan, particularly
in the 1997 report of the United Nations Inter-Agency
Gender Mission to Afghanistan. I would also like to thank
my friend Ambassador Arnoldo Listre for his superb work
as Chairman of the Security Council's Taliban sanctions
Committee and for his report today, and to thank
Ambassador Chowdhury again for his presidency of the
Security Council last month.

I would like also to join other members in expressing
our special sympathy to the people of Tunisia in connection
with the passing of President Bourguiba. He was an
immense figure in the world. I remember very clearly, as
early as the early 1960s, his enormous impact on public
thinking in the United States. He was one of the very first
leaders of both Africa and the Arab world to bring to the
attention of the American people, and of the world, the
emerging desires of the peoples of Africa and of the
Maghreb - an area for which I have special affection -
for justice, democracy and human rights. We will always
remember him for his courageous stands in support of
tolerance and understanding within the Arab world and
between the Arabs and the rest of the world, and on behalf
of North Africa, and all of Africa. I shall be at the Tunisian
embassy at the earliest possible moment to join my
colleagues in signing the condolence book.

Afghanistan is obviously one of the great horror
stories of the world today. It is a vexing and tragic mosaic
of suffering, and its seemingly endless civil war exacerbates
an already dire humanitarian situation, as we heard in the
briefing this morning. It is draining resources that could
be used to alleviate privation, and it is preventing the
people of Afghanistan from reaching their full potential.
Also, the conditions of lawlessness and disorder that now
exist allow terrorism and the trade in illegal narcotics to
flourish.

The promotion of human rights, particularly the
rights of women and girls, is among our highest priorities
today. In his recent millennium report (A/54/2000), the
Secretary-General reminded us that protecting the well-
being of women and children, particularly in areas of
conflict, will be one of the greatest challenges facing the
United Nations in this century. As Hillary Rodham
Clinton, one of my own country's greatest leaders in the
effort to protect the rights of women and girls around the
globe and to empower them, said last December at the
White House, abuses of fundamental freedoms "are not
customs. They are not religious practices. They are human
rights violations".

The United States continues to press all Afghan
factions, especially the Taliban and their supporters, to
protect and nurture the basic freedoms of all Afghans,
particularly women and girls. When we talk to the
Taliban - and we do - we stress our continued desire
to see improvement in this area.

Our human rights report, issued last month, paints a
regrettably grim picture. In addition to the treatment of
women and girls, there are unacceptable abuses of
civilians in general. The human development index of the
United Nations Development Programme ranks
Afghanistan among the world's lowest, while the gender
disparity index, based on female life expectancy,
education and income, ranks Afghanistan dead last.

But due to the efforts of the United Nations and the
community of non-governmental organizations, the
situation is not hopeless. There are signs of modest
improvement, at least in informal opportunities for girls,
even if our best information suggests that this remains
spotty and fragile. Somewhat more encouraging is a trend
towards improved access to medical treatment for women
and girls, at least in Kabul.
Regrettably, the Taliban's official policies remain
unchanged. It is therefore primarily the United Nations
and the international community of non-governmental
organizations that can claim credit for what little progress
has been made. This brings to mind the words and the

 

work of Eleanor Roosevelt, one of the first leaders of the
United Nations who, as chairwoman of the Human Rights
Commission, helped draft the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights. She reminded us that it is better to light a
candle than to curse the darkness.

In noting the work of the United Nations, I would like
to ask Ms. King, the Special Advisor on Gender Issues and
Advancement of Women, about the restrictions on the
public role of women in Afghanistan. What can we do to
encourage the Afghan regime to allow women to vote, to
seek employment, to organize themselves and to work for
better treatment, in order to gain their appropriate place in
civil society?

Last year, United States humanitarian aid to the
Afghan people totaled over $70 million, making the United
States the world's single largest aid provider to
Afghanistan. Over half the United States contribution, $44
million, was in the form of wheat or flour distributed
through the United Nations and the World Food
Programme. Of the cash component, more than $3 million
was for educational and other programmes specifically
targeted to help women and girls, mainly refugees in
Pakistan. This year's effort will be of comparable
magnitude.

We have expanded United States support for the
resettlement programme for persecuted Afghans. These
cases are referred by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and administered by the United
States Department of State. We expect to welcome about
1,500 Afghan women and their families this year. Nearly
300 were resettled here under this programme last year. We
call on other nations to step forward to accept a share of
the responsibility to provide refuge to Afghans, joining
Pakistan, which hosts by far the largest number on its
territory, and Iran, another major country of refuge.

We are committed to supporting these efforts, and we
insist that all Afghan factions, particularly the Taliban,
support them as well. We want more than tacit, grudging
acceptance of reforms. Humanitarian operations in
Afghanistan must be allowed to proceed unhindered.
Afghan parties have an obligation to protect humanitarian
and other international personnel. Violations of this
obligation, such as the searches of United Nations offices
in Kandahar by Taliban militia on 26, 27 and 29 March, are
simply unacceptable. The responsibility for the subsequent
withdrawal of United Nations international staff from
Kandahar and the suspension of humanitarian assistance
activities in southern Afghanistan rests solely with the
Taliban.

Terrorism, narcotics and Afghanistan's continuing
civil war also demand attention. The efforts of the
international community to persuade the Taliban to stop
supporting international terrorism complement, rather than
conflict with, our humanitarian interest in Afghanistan.
We must remember that United Nations sanctions as set
out in resolution 1267 (1999) were carefully crafted to
target only the Taliban, not the innocent people and
certainly not the women and girls of Afghanistan. The
Taliban must comply with the demand of resolution 1267
(1999) that Usama bin Laden be turned over to authorities
in a country where he will be brought to justice. So long
as Usama bin Laden enjoys safe haven in Afghanistan,
the international community is at risk, as illustrated by the
recently disrupted terrorist plot in Jordan. I would like to
highlight the obligation of all Member States under
resolution 1267 (1999) to implement sanctions on Taliban
assets and flights effectively and promptly.

Narcotics is also a serious concern. Last year,
Afghanistan became the world's largest producer of
opium. This is almost entirely consumed outside
Afghanistan's borders, making the threat from illicit
narcotics an international issue of serious magnitude. We
have noted recent reports that the Taliban have eradicated
some poppy in Afghanistan and hope this means that such
efforts will be undertaken on a larger scale. We
encourage the efforts of the "six plus two" group of
Afghanistan's neighbours plus Russia and the United
States in working towards solutions to these problems.
We also need donor cooperation and support. And we
look forward to the upcoming Vienna meeting of the
United Nations International Drug Control Programme.

The United States continues to believe that the
Afghanistan tragedy can be settled only through
negotiations aimed at finding a solution accommodating
the rights and interests of all Afghans. In this regard, we
welcome the work of the Secretary-General and his
Personal Representative. We appreciate the recent efforts
to promote peace, including the Rome process and the
Cyprus group. But more must be done.

In conclusion, let me say that the United States
remains committed to helping forge solutions to the many
pressing problems of Afghanistan. We must work together
to alleviate the suffering of innocents, particularly those,
like women and girls, who are disproportionately harmed.
 

Let us pledge to continue and strengthen our efforts to
achieve positive results in these endeavours.

I thank you, Mr. President, for your presence at this
important meeting today.

