Mr. Martino (Italy): Mr. President, let me begin by
offering my most sincere compliments on the dynamic
and authoritative way in which you are presiding over the
work of the Security Council in the month of January.

For me it is a special honour and a source of deep
satisfaction to deliver my country's first statement in the
Security Council, a body that has taken on a pivotal role
in managing the complex and treacherous international
balances that emerged with the end of the cold war. On
this occasion I reaffirm Italy's active and ongoing
commitment to the Council's work of maintaining
international peace and security amidst the tumult and
strife of this new page of history.

In a century beset by terrible conflagrations, the
Bosnian crisis has the unenviable distinction of being one
of the worst of them. It has lasted over 30 months, and it
has had a tremendous impact on public opinion - all the
more so in Italy, where these dramatic events are
happening right on our doorstep.

However much has been done in these years to settle
this crisis, even more remains to be done. On the positive
side, the protagonists of the conflict have been brought to
the negotiating table. A massive humanitarian effort has
helped to alleviate the suffering of the civilian population.
To the greatest extent possible, a spillover of the conflict
has been avoided. Finally, the parties have been
persuaded to sign a cease-fire agreement, and an
agreement for a complete cessation of hostilities effective
as of 1 January. We fervently hope that they will fully
comply, so as to allow the negotiations to be resumed and
brought to a swift and successful conclusion.

We are quite hopeful that the recent agreements will
be fully implemented, and provide a solid and permanent
foundation on which to relaunch and revitalize the
negotiations. We must immediately build on this
achievement by strongly encouraging the parties to return
to the negotiating table as soon as possible, lest we lose
momentum or even undermine seemingly consolidated
results.

But let us not lose sight of our long-term goals: a
lasting peace, stability in the region and the region's
introduction into the fold of the free, democratic, and

 

prosperous commonwealth of European nations. These
goals remain absolute priorities for the international
community. Together with other members of the
international community, we will work patiently and with
perseverance towards these ends.

Sanctions against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
(Serbia and Montenegro) have proved effective, inducing
Belgrade to accept the logic of negotiations. But it was the
prospect of suspending and alleviating sanctions that
convinced Belgrade to cooperate with the peace process by
pressuring the Bosnian Serbs to accept the proposed peace
plan, which has already been accepted by the Government
of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We are
convinced that any feasible peace strategy must include
Belgrade. Therefore, if we want to maintain our leverage
with Belgrade at this stage we must be flexible in our
approach to sanctions through a balance of incentives and
disincentives.

Of course, should the positive trends we are presently
witnessing not be confirmed in the future, and the
Secretary-General report that the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia has backtracked on its closing of the Bosnian
border, the draft resolution sponsored by the four member
countries of the European Union and by the Czech Republic
provides for the termination of the sanctions suspension.

On the other hand, should our optimism be rewarded,
paragraph 7 of the draft resolution provides for the
possibility of the Council's considering additional measures

"in the light of further progress in the situation".

We hope that this possibility materializes as quickly as
possible, in such a way as to allow the alleviation of
sanctions with humanitarian implications. I am thinking, for
instance, of the possibility of financial transactions for the
purpose of supplying hospitals. Let us not forget that
sanctions hurt people more than they do Governments. By
creating the perception of an international conspiracy
against the country, sanctions often tend to rally the people
around the Government rather than mobilize them against
it. If sanctions are to maintain their usefulness as an
instrument of international policy, they must be applied
cautiously.
We favour the extension of resolution 943 (1994), to
eventually be followed by provisions to benefit the people
of Serbia and Montenegro rather than their Government.
While such an approach would not ensure an immediate
solution to the Bosnian crisis, it would certainly help create
favourable conditions for relaunching the peace process.

Finally, whatever progress has been made can be
attributed at least in part to our cohesiveness. If our house
is divided against itself, we will only perpetuate that
division among the very people we are seeking to help.
By the same token, our unity of purpose and intent can
only instil that spirit among the factions, and help remove
the last obstacle from the path to a fair, balanced and
global political solution to the Bosnian crisis.

