Mr. Haque (Bangladesh): We thank you,
Mr. President, for giving us the opportunity to deliver
a statement to the Council. We appreciate in particular
the efforts of nine Council members in organizing
this briefing. We also thank the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General on Myanmar for her briefing.

We appreciate the willingness of the international
community, in particular the members of the Security
Council, to resolve this protracted humanitarian and
human rights crisis. At the same time, we cannot
hesitate to express our frustration as nothing concrete
has happened so far to convince us or the Rohingyas
living in camps in Bangladesh that there will be an early
resolution of the crisis, including the safe, dignified,
voluntary and sustainable return of the Rohingyas to
their homeland. Is there anything more disappointing
than discovering that despite our wholehearted efforts,
the repatriation cannot start due to non-conducive
conditions in Rakhine state of Myanmar? Is Bangladesh
being made to pay the price for being responsive
and responsible in showing empathy to a persecuted
minority group of a neighbouring country?

Bangladesh does not have any agenda or ulterior
motive to support terrorism anywhere, in particular
in Myanmar. We are successfully implementing our
zero-tolerance policy towards terrorism and violent
extremism. In fact, the problem of the Rohingyas is
an outcome of a multidimensional and multi-layered
geopolitical construct, with its genesis in Myanmar.
It is the result of the decades-long state practice of
deprivation, disenfranchisement and atrocities. Its
solution therefore has to be found in Myanmar and by
Myanmar. It is most unfortunate that the Myanmar
authorities are now accusing us of harbouring
terrorists, which is a clear attempt to shift the blame
on Bangladesh.

The Permanent Representative of Myanmar referred
to certain incidents, concerning which we will report to
the Council after the necessary verification at our end.
In the face of such ridiculous allegations, we cannot but
reiterate that our Government, under the leadership of
Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina, is firmly committed to
not allowing any group from any other country to use
our soil or resources for terrorism. The high level of
alertness and effective prevention measures undertaken
by law enforcement agencies, in line with our zero-
tolerance policy, render it absolutely impossible for
any terrorist outfit to be present in Bangladesh. In fact,
Bangladesh has been providing enormous support to
Myanmar over the past few years and conducted many
combing operations against the Arakan Rohingya
Salvation Army. We have always reminded Myanmar of
the potential risks of farming the fire of extremism and
stoking nationalist feelings to demonize the Rohingyas
in Rakhine.

It is not only Rohingyas who are suffering; our own
people, the host community, are also suffering through
no fault of their own. The prolonged presence of the
Rohingyas in Bangladesh has been posing formidable
challenges and adversely impacting our economy,
environment, social fabric and security. We are also
faced with the threats of human and drug trafficking
and radicalization, with further ramifications for the
region and beyond. In order to inform the Council of
what the local communities are thinking, let me refer
to a January 2019 report of Ground Truth Solutions, an
international non-governmental organization supported
by Switzerland and the Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development that researches the
views of people in crises. The report says:

"Their attitudes have shifted from the start of
the crisis, where they felt much more supportive and
welcoming of Rohingya but now are much less so,
feeling that Rohingya have 'been here too long."'

The idea of the long-term hosting of Rohingyas
by Bangladesh is not at all a viable proposition. Even
if the repatriation started today, it would take another
12 years, based on the estimation that 300 Rohingyas
would return per day.

In diplomacy, there is no such thing as an
exhaustive list. Yet, I must mention that we have tried
everything bilaterally with Myanmar for the voluntary,
safe, dignified and sustainable return of Rohingyas and
are now continuing our bilateral engagements despite
Myanmar's hollow promises and various obstructionist
approaches. We have also engaged with regional
partners. Yet, not a single Rohingya has volunteered to
return to Rakhine due to the absence of a conducive
environment there.

As to our friends in the international community
who advocate a bilateral approach to the repatriation
of Rohingyas, we would like to reassure them of our
goodwill and genuine intent to resolve this crisis,
following that path. But they must also fulfil their
part of the commitment, as agreed by Bangladesh
and Myanmar, on the scope and role of "interested
international partners" in the return and reintegration
process. Investing in Rakhine without guaranteeing
the return of Rohingyas with basic human rights, is not
likely to produce any result. The policy of appeasement
is clearly not working here, just as it has not worked
anywhere in the past.

Regrettably, as far as repatriation is concerned,
the situation has gone from bad to worse. In a press
release of 18 January, the Special Rapporteur on the
situation of human rights in Myanmar, Ms. Yanghee,
Lee expressed alarm over escalating violence in
northern and central Rakhine state and in Chin state.
According to her statement, since November 2018
the Myanmar military has been engaged in heavy
fighting, resulting in deaths and injuries to civilians
and the renewed displacement of people. As a result,
we have had an influx even of Rakhine Buddhists
into Bangladesh. These developments only serve to
corroborate what we have been saying from the very
beginning of the crisis - it is about repression of all
the ethnic minorities in the Rakhine state, not just
Muslim Rohingyas, who have been the traditional focus
of atrocity crimes. The Rakhine state Government has
prohibited the humanitarian activities of international
agencies in several areas, which has made the prospects
of return by Rohingyas more uncertain.

I regret to inform the Council that Bangladesh
will no longer be in a position to accommodate more
people from Myanmar. Our priority is nothing but
the safe, voluntary, sustainable and dignified return
of the Rohingyas. This requires building confidence
among them about returning. Some specific measures
on the part of Myanmar, demonstrating its sincerity
about return, may be helpful in the short term. Let me
mention a few.

First, Myanmar should address the accountability
issue. Myanmar's own investigation processes seem
to have failed time and again. Therefore, the existing
United Nations mechanisms need to be operationalized.

Secondly, we must ensure the full implementation
of the memorandum of understanding between
the Myanmar Government, the United Nations
Development Programme and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, as well as
of the recommendations of the Kofi Annan Advisory
Commission on Rakhine State. We have been hearing
that most of the recommendations contained in the
report of the Annan Commission have already been
implemented. Had that been so, I can assure the Council
that the situation on the ground would have improved
vastly. It is therefore very natural for one to ask why the
Rohingyas are not willing to return voluntarily and why
we are still seeing fresh arrivals up to this very day.

Thirdly, the existing camps for internally displaced
persons must be dismantled. In these ghettoes inside
Rakhine, some 130,000 Muslim inmates have been
detained for over the past six years in inhuman
conditions. The several thousand Rohingyas languishing
in the so-called zero line of the Bangladesh-Myanmar
border must be taken back.

Although we expect the Security Council to
maintain its custodianship so as to ensure Myanmar's
compliance with the agreed provisions of bilateral
arrangements for return with Bangladesh, the Council's
pronouncements thus far have had no impact on
improving the situation on the ground. Circumstances
now necessitate concrete actions on the part of the
Council before the situation spins out of control. In that
context, we would like to make three specific proposals
for the Council's consideration.

First, a new draft resolution must be negotiated to set
out a regular reporting cycle as an oversight mechanism
on the implementation of the recommendations of the
Advisory Commission and progress in investigations of
human rights violations.

Secondly, a select group of Council members, if
not the full Council, should again visit the Rohingya
camps in Cox's Bazar and Rakhine state to assess the
developments since their visit to the region in April and
May 2018.

Thirdly, civilian-run safe zones must be created in
the conflict-affected areas in Myanmar in order to ensure
the safety and security of all civilians, irrespective of
their ethnic or religious identity, as proposed by our
Honourable Prime Minister in the general debate of
seventy-second session of the General Assembly (see A/72/PV.14). The safe zones may be non-military and
civilian in nature, administered by humanitarian and
human rights actors, including from the countries of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations. If the Council
agrees, we can provide further ideas in that regard.

As for the Special Envoy, we expect her to
further intensify her efforts to attain her mandated
goals, particularly the safe, voluntary, dignified and
sustainable return of Rohingyas to their areas of
origin. We should not allow Myanmar to turn the clock
backward on any grounds, and therefore we urge the
Council to act in a decisive manner.

