Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): The Netherlands
aligns itself with the statement delivered on behalf of
the European Union and the statement to be delivered
by the representative of Canada on behalf of the Group
of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict.

The Netherlands wishes to address the following
three issues in our national statement: the twentieth
anniversary of the mandate, current trends, and
credibility issues.

The year 2016 marks the twentieth anniversary
of the mandate of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict.
The Netherlands commends the current Special
Representative, her predecessors and all who have
helped in implementing the mandate over the past
two decades. The Special Representative serves as the
leading United Nations advocate for the protection and
well-being of children affected by armed conflict. We
can see, almost on a daily basis, the disproportionate
impact of war on children in Syria, Yemen and South
Sudan, to name but a few.

Too often, children are the primary victims in
conflict. Therefore, the work of Ms. Zerrougui is so
important to all of us. She helps the most vulnerable
in the most dire circumstances. We pay tribute to her
personal empathy, her efforts and her personal energy.
Important gains in the implementation of the mandate
of the Special Representative have been made, as
she had mentioned earlier. But this year's report of
the Secretary-General (S/2016/360) is another stark
reminder that there is no room for complacency.

That brings me to my second issue. We see
worrying trends: the increased number of abductions,
the effects of violent extremism and the growing
negative impact of forced displacement on children.
Those trends show the need for further action. As
rightly stated by the European Union delegation, our
approach to fighting and preventing violent extremism
needs to be comprehensive and should address its root
causes. To prevent displacement and its negative effects
on children, it is crucial that all parties to the conflict
respect international humanitarian law.

In that regard, let me draw attention to the
particularly distressing situation for citizens, including
and especially children, in Aleppo, Syria. Let me mention
the editorial opinion piece my Minister for Foreign
Affairs Albert Koenders wrote in The Independent
last weekend. The delivery of humanitarian assistance
in Aleppo should be beyond dispute, regardless of
whether people flee or decide to stay. The Government
of the Kingdom of the Netherlands therefore calls
on the members of the Council to ensure agreement
on the proposal of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs for opening regular 48-hour
humanitarian corridors.

The members of the Council should redouble their
efforts to reach a diplomatic solution in Syria. Global
efforts should be geared towards fighting terror and
leveraging a political solution. Humanitarian access,
restoration of a ceasefire and resumption of the peace
talks in Geneva are first priorities. The urgency of
the situation is underlined by today's reports about a
horrific chlorine gas attack in Idlib province in which
mostly women and children are the victims.
I come to my third subject: credibility and
independence issues. For the international community
to take action and to hold parties in a conflict
accountable for grave violations against children, we
need a strong and credible monitoring and reporting
mechanism. Previous reports of the Secretary-General,
including their annexes, have proven of instrumental
value in that regard. But the Netherlands is concerned
about a recurring trend over the past years to alter the
content of the reports and to influence the listing of
perpetrators. That could lead to double standards and
could seriously undermine the credibility of the reports
and ofthe United Nations. It is ofthe utmost importance
that the integrity of the mandate on children and armed
conflict be respected by all of us.

The Netherlands fully supports the independent
mandate of Special Representative Zerrougui and
commends her for her work. The past 20 years have
shown us that under that mandate a lot can be achieved.
This year's report (S/2016/360) underlines its continued
relevance. We urge all Member States to guarantee its
credibility and success for the coming 20 years.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands takes part in
efforts for peace, justice and development, and the
position and protection of children is key to all of
those dimensions.

