Mr. Badji (Senegal) (spoke in French): I should
like first to congratulate you warmly, Mr. President, for
having organized this public Security Council debate
on the maintenance of international peace and security:
mediation and settlement of disputes.

I should also like, on behalf of my country,
Senegal, to say how much we admire and are grateful
to the sisterly delegation of Burkina Faso, which,
having taken the happy initiative of holding a high-
level debate on mediation and dispute settlement, has
done everything to see to it that the consideration of
this important question, which is central to the current
concerns of the international community, is given all of
the necessary attention.

The interest of all Member States in this question
should be measured against the complexity of current
conflict situations, including inter- and intra-State
conflicts, which involve massive loss of human life and
the interruption of the social, political and economic
lives of a large number of countries.

Synergy and close interaction between the United
Nations - which has the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security - and
its partners, in particular the regional organizations,
which are a complementary instrument to United
Nations action, are necessary to prevent these human
tragedies. As has been shown by the positive
experiences we have seen throughout the world as a
result of the United Nations providing good offices,
mediators and special envoys of the Secretary-General
that have defused many crises, the effectiveness and
the benefits of mediation are clear for all to see.

Other achievements by regional organizations,
subregional organizations, civil society or simply by
people of good will also reinforce this conviction.

Clearly, many atrocities could have been avoided
and thousands of human lives saved had mediation
mechanisms been mobilized in many conflict situations
throughout the world.
The United Nations, which was created, inter
alia, to save present and succeeding generations from
the scourge of war and whose Charter makes pacific
settlement of disputes one of its main purposes, must
therefore make mediation central to its action, to make
it, if not the most important instrument for dispute
settlement, an important tool for that end.

Recent steps to strengthen United Nations
mediation capacities, including the creation of the
Mediation Support Unit of the Department of Political
Affairs and its technical teams, are certainly
encouraging, but efforts are still needed if mediation is
to play its proper role. To achieve that, the challenge
must be met of providing significant financial
resources and experienced, highly qualified human
resources.

Another challenge that should be met is that of
having women participate in mediation activities.
Women, who with children are the people most
affected by conflicts, have an important role to play in
conflict prevention and settlement. My delegation
therefore supports the initiative to involve them more
in mediation activities and very much supports the
recommendation contained in resolution 1325 (2000),
which urges the Secretary-General to appoint more
women representatives and special envoys to good
offices missions.

The report of the Secretary-General in document
S/2009/189, which we welcome, stresses the important
role of mediation organizations, particularly in a
framework of close cooperation with the United
Nations. In this respect, Chapter VIII of the Charter of
the United Nations clearly outlines the modalities for
cooperation between the Security Council and the
regional organizations. We welcome the recognition in
this report of the fact that the partnership between the
African Union and the United Nations, which goes
back to the creation of the Organization of African
Unity, is one of the most dynamic in the area of
peacekeeping.

As the Secretary-General recalled in paragraph 44
of his report dated 7 April 2008, published as
document S/2008/186** - which deals with the
relationship between the United Nations and regional
organizations, in particular the African Union, in the
maintenance of international peace and security -
"Most regional organizations are undertaking conflict
prevention activities". The African Union does not lag
behind here because its system for peace management
extends from preventive diplomacy to peacebuilding,
and includes peacekeeping.
However, the regional organizations, in particular
the African Union, must acquire the means to be more
attentive to the early signs of tension that could lead to
conflict and take the necessary steps, in close
cooperation with the United Nations, in particular the
Security Council.

By setting up the Group of Wise Men, the African
Union understood and recognized that conflicts, be
they latent or overt, can be resolved only by political
means, that is to say, through negotiation. That is why
the Group of Wise Men of the African Union should be
given the greatest possible support, which would
enable it to provide well-considered advice to the
Chairmen of the African Union and if the AU
Commission, which could, on that basis, engage in
intensive preventive diplomacy activities, in particular
mediation and good offices. After all, an ounce of
prevention is better than a pound of cure.

However, for proper prevention, we must
remember - as was recalled by the Secretary-General
in his report in document S/2008/ 18, dated 14 January
2008 - that prevention is a multidimensional task
involving political decisions, humanitarian activities
and development activities, which require that
organizations work in close cooperation with the
United Nations, in particular the Security Council, the
Human Rights Council and the Economic and Social
Council and its specialized agencies.

Cooperation between the Economic and Social
Council, the Security Council and the regional
organizations is particularly necessary since growing
attention should likewise be given to peacebuilding
strategies and reconciliation. The African Union has
already taken the lead when it adopted, at the seventh
regular session of the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government in July 2006, the strategic framework for
post-conflict rebuilding and development.

Finally, mediation is a valuable tool in a world
buffeted by manifold complex crises.

Combining mediation with peacebuilding, the
United Nations could not only prevent conflicts from
escalating, but also ensure that those that are being
resolved are extinguished once and for all. Those
combined actions would at last reduce the financial and
human costs of peacekeeping and peacemaking
operations.
