Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation): We are grateful
to Ms. Kane for her briefing.

The Russian Federation is deeply concerned at
the new and dangerous developments that have taken
place in the Gaza Strip. The situation in the region, in
Palestinian-Israeli relations and, indeed, throughout the
entire Middle East region is becoming increasingly
serious. Additional urgent action is required to prevent
further destabilization, and all parties must show
restraint and wisdom and understand what a dangerous
point they have reached.

Large-scale operations by the Israeli armed forces
in the Gaza Strip can lead to significant losses among
the civilian population and seriously complicate
prospects of eventually reaching an Israeli-Palestinian
settlement.

In order to avoid an escalation in the crisis, the
Russian delegation is calling on the leadership of the
Palestinian Authority to take decisive measures to curb
the extremists and to halt raids by terrorists, attacks on
Israeli citizens and Qassam missile attacks against
Israeli territory. Most importantly, the captured Israeli
soldier must be released.

All Palestinian movements must understand that
any deterioration in the situation could only harm the
realization of the national aspirations of the
Palestinians. Of course, Israel, for its part, must also
find a way to bring about stabilization. There is no
doubt that Israel has the right and the obligation to
protect the life and security of its citizens. However, it
cannot do so at the cost of serious consequences for the
Palestinian civilian population and through collective
punishment of the inhabitants of Gaza and other
regions of Palestine.
It is absolutely inadmissible, under the pretext of
bringing pressure to bear on extremists, to violate the
borders and air space of other countries of the
region- in this case, Syria's. We are particularly

concerned by Israel's arrest and detention of
Palestinian Government ministers and Legislative
Council deputies. Those persons received their
mandates following independent and democratic
elections - that is, in the context of the process of the
development of democracy in the region of the Middle
East, on whose further deepening there is broad
international agreement.

Russia sees only one way out of the existing
situation: to halt resistance by force and to achieve a
political settlement through negotiations. The only
other alternative is the further destabilization of the
situation in the region, which would be extremely
dangerous and certainly spread.

We are profoundly concerned by the serious
humanitarian situation in the Palestinian territories; it
is only worsening as a result of the latest deterioration
of the situation there. We need as soon as possible to
begin practical work on the provisional international
mechanism approved by the Quartet of leading
international mediators and implement the mechanism
for giving assistance to the Palestinian people, with the
active participation of donors.

We must first and foremost ensure the
uninterrupted supply of fuel and medicine to Gaza.
Russia, in the course of its contacts with Israelis and
Palestinians, will continue its endeavours to induce the
parties to abide by the positions agreed upon by the
Quartet. That has already been discussed at the meeting
of ministers of foreign affairs of the G-8 in Moscow on
29 June, where a corresponding position of solidarity
was agreed upon.

