Mr. J ovanovie: At the very outset, let me eliminate
every risk of perceptive mistakes: Kosovo and Metohija
is a Serbian province that has always been, and is today,
an integral part of the Republic of Serbia. That territory
has never been part of any other State. It is the cradle of
the Serbian State, one of the oldest European States, the
birthplace of Serbian culture and civilization.

Besides the Serbs and Montenegrins, and besides the
members of the Albanian national minority, members of
other national minorities and ethnic communities - such
as Muslims, numbering over 150,000; Romanies,
numbering 150,000; Turks, Croats and others - have for
centuries also lived in Kosovo and Metohija.

Under the constitution and laws, all of them are
granted the same civil and human rights: to their
language, culture, media and religion; to elect and to be
elected; and to participate in genuine political processes,
from self-rule to republican and federal parliaments. All
these rights are based on the highest European standards,
including the standards of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe and the Council of Europe
Framework Convention.

The members of the Albanian national minority are
granted the same rights that are granted to other citizens.
However, whereas all other citizens exercise their rights,
a large part of the Albanian national minority boycott
some of those rights - under pressure from and because
of blackmail by their separatist representatives - and
exercise others. For instance, they boycott municipal and
local elections, the official census and political
institutions, yet they are very active in exercising the right
to private property, pensions and social benefits and the
right to employment, passports, freedom of movement and
private enterprise. The exercise of the right to
information, for instance, is attested to by the fact that
over 50 private dailies, weeklies and periodicals are
printed in the Albanian language, the aggregate circulation
of which amounts to 2.5 million copies.

The selective boycott of some, and the exercise of
other, rights is not the result of the free will of the
members of the Albanian national minority, most of
whom are responsible, loyal and law-abiding citizens. It
is the result of pressure and blackmail by some leaders of
the political parties in Kosovo and Metohija whose public
programme is secession from Serbia. Terrorist actions, the
killing of Albanians loyal to Serbia, the assassination of
public officials, attacks on public institutions and the
ambushing of police officers such as took place on 28

 

February 1998, when four policemen were killed, are
designed to intimidate ethnic Albanians into closing ranks,
increase tension, attract the attention of the international
public and "substantiate" the requests for mediation and
internationalization. The ultimate goal is the secession of
this Serbian land from Serbia. Simply put, Serbia cannot
and will not allow that to happen under any conditions.
I trust and believe that it is apparent that the problems
in Kosovo and Metohija are rooted in a separatism which,
at this very moment, is publicly advocated by the
representatives of some political parties of the Albanian
national minority. This underpins terrorism, which has so
far claimed dozens of human lives. It is the right of every
State to defend itself from this evil, to protect its territorial
integrity, public peace and order and the safety of its
citizens. This right is not denied anywhere in the world and
it cannot be denied to Serbia and the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia.

Today's meeting of the Security Council and the
adoption of a resolution are not acceptable to the
Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, since
questions that represent an internal matter for Serbia and
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia are at stake. We
consider that this internal question cannot be the subject of
deliberation in any international forum without the consent
of the Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
Such consent has not been granted.

The pretext for this unprecedented action by the
Security Council has been found in two anti-terrorist police
actions in Kosovo and Metohija, the autonomous province
of Serbia. The first was carried out on 28 February in self
defence following the killing of four police officers in an
ambush, and the second was carried out on 5 March against
a terrorist stronghold.

There is not, nor has there been, any armed conflict in
Kosovo and Metohija. Hence, there is no danger of a
spillover, there is no threat to peace and security and there
is no basis for invoking Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations.

There have been many much larger instances all over
the world of not only police, but also military action against
terrorists in which civilians have been frequent victims. Yet
neither the Security Council nor any other international
forum has ever seen fit to raise, in any way whatever, the
responsibility of States that are defending themselves
against terrorism and protecting their territorial integrity and
sovereignty. The Council would be ill advised to do it this
time. Were the Council to recognize the right of some
States to fight terrorism and deny that right to others in
one way or another, or were it even to threaten punitive
measures, it would then formally legalize the practice of
double standards. It would have catastrophic consequences
for the struggle against terrorism in general, erode trust in
the Security Council and the entire United Nations system
and allow international relations to be governed by the
right of might instead of by law and principle.
The positions taken by the Contact Group in London
on 9 March 1998 and in Bonn on 25 March 1998 are
tantamount to the pursuit of a policy of force and so-
called gunboat diplomacy. Under the pressure of certain
Powers, the Contact Group, by its policy, places itself
above every Government and every principle. Those
Powers dictate solutions to internal questions and decide
who can and who cannot defend himself against terrorism
and separatism. They even determine who must cooperate
in the destruction of the integrity of the territory of one's
own State. Sanctions are threatened, as well as military
intervention, and the normal economic development and
lives of millions of people are hampered - and all in the
name of democracy and human rights. The Contact
Group, by its policy, places itself over and above the
Charter of the United Nations in an attempt to transform
the Security Council, before the eyes of the world, into a
body that merely executes decisions taken at some other
place, and with a motivation that is different from the
goals and objectives of the Charter.

It is with regret and deep concern that we note that,
by their activities, representatives of some permanent
members of the Security Council encourage the
separatism of the leaders of the Albanian national
minority in Kosovo and Metohija. They are currently
causing enormous damage to Serbia and the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia. However, that policy will bring
no good to their own countries either, or to Europe or the
world. On the contrary, it is counterproductive and
dangerous for the international legal system and for all
the countries and peoples of the world at the threshold of
the third millennium.

It is stated in the statements of the Contact Group
and the resolution of the Security Council that the
situation in Kosovo and Metohija threatens international
peace and security in the region. This position is not
based on facts, nor on law. It is designed to justify
support for separatism and flagrant interference in the
internal affairs of a sovereign country, a Member State of
the United Nations. The arbitrary pressure on Serbia and

 

the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia is aimed at imposing a
solution that is a direct threat to the territorial integrity of
Serbia and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. A local
anti-terrorist police action can never be qualified as a threat
to international peace and security. The situation in Kosovo
and Metohija is stable and does not threaten, nor can it
threaten, in any way the peace and security of neighbouring
countries or the region. There are no armed conflicts in
Kosovo and Metohija.
It is therefore very clear that there is no basis for
invoking Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter or for
taking any measure by invoking any other principle or
document.

The Contact Group is not authorized to create, by its
statements, obligations, legal or factual, for the Security
Council to establish the calendar of its meetings and
decisions or to determine the content of those decisions.
That would deal a serious blow to the dignity of the
Security Council.

The real threat to regional peace and security is the
overt or covert support that, under the influence of
Albanian lobbies in some countries, certain circles -
permanent members of the Security Council - render to
secessionism and to the leaders of the political parties of
the Albanian minority in Kosovo and Metohija. This is
contrary to the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and the Final Act of the Conference on Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), and contrary to the
interests of peace and security in Southeast Europe. It
causes great damage to the lasting interests of the members
of the Albanian national minority themselves in Serbia and
Yugoslavia, as well as in other countries of the region.

We recall that the Government of the Republic of
Serbia has addressed a number of public and direct calls to
the representatives of the political parties of the Albanian
national minority for an unconditional, direct and genuine
political dialogue. The representatives of all other minorities
that have lived in Kosovo and Metohija for centuries - the
Muslims, Romanies, Turks, Croats and others - requested
to take part in the dialogue themselves, since questions
relative to their rights as well have been raised. Those
requests are legitimate and have been accepted. The
members of those minorities have publicly condemned
terrorism; their lasting desire is to live in Serbia - a State
of their own - and to solve all questions relating to the
realization of their rights within Serbia and by political
means. A considerable number of influential Albanians in
Kosovo and Metohija have also distanced themselves from
separatism, condemned terrorism and displayed interest in
seeking solutions through dialogue to all outstanding
questions, as well as better living conditions in Serbia,
alongside all other citizens.

The leaders of some political parties of the Albanian
national minority are the only ones who have not heeded
the invitation of the Government of the Republic of
Serbia to unconditional dialogue. They continue to turn a
deaf ear to the appeals of the international community to
condemn terrorism publicly and to give up the idea of
independence.
Consequently, who is responsible for separatism and
terrorism in Kosovo and Metohija or for the
procrastination and delay of the dialogue? Serbia, which,
by its Constitution and laws, guarantees all rights to the
members of all national minorities under the highest
European standards - rights that are exercised by the
members of 26 out of the total of 27 national minorities
in its territory? Or is it the leaders of separatism who -
by pressure, blackmail and even by recourse to
terrorism - force the boycott of those rights?

Since the Republic of Serbia is deeply convinced
that procrastination and the delay of the beginning of a
direct political dialogue are unjustified and harmful and
that they block the genuine political process in Kosovo
and Metohija, the President of the Republic of Serbia,
Milan Milutinovie, issued on 18 March 1998 the
declaration on the political process in Kosovo and
Metohija, calling on the leaders of the political parties of
the Albanian national minority in Kosovo and Metohija to
embark upon a political dialogue without delay or
conditions. The President of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, Slobodan Milosevic, fully supported the
declaration and designated his personal envoy to conduct
dialogue with the representatives of the Albanian and
other national minorities in Kosovo and Metohija.

By its declaration of 31 March 1998, the new
Government of the Republic of Serbia further reaffirmed
the initiative and its openness to a genuine and
unconditional dialogue and renewed its invitation to the
leaders of the Albanian political parties to dialogue, for it
is clear that no other solution is available.

The agreement on the implementation of the
Education Agreement is an important positive
accomplishment. Besides, the Institute of Albanology in
Pristina was officially opened yesterday by the
representatives of the Government of the Republic of

 

Serbia and made available to its Albanian users. This is the
only institution of its kind for the Albanian minority in
South-East Europe, and it is unique in Europe in the
context of the exercise of minority rights by any national
minority.

Upholding its principled position that it is necessary to
regularize Yugoslavia's full-fledged membership in the
OSCE, the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia has expressed
its readiness to receive, on a contractual basis, an OSCE
mission of longer duration. We would like to trust, in the
objectivity of this mission, for we believe that it could
contribute to spreading the truth about the situation in
Kosovo and Metohija. The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
is also ready to receive a personal representative of the
OSCE Chairman-in-Office and of the European Community
to conduct talks with the representatives of the Government
on questions of cooperation and normalization of relations.

Considering that the limited action in the area of
Drenica has ended and that the situation is stable, the
special anti-terrorist unit, with its equipment and means, has
been withdrawn to its permanent base outside the region.
This has been affirmed also in the declaration of the new
Government of the Republic of Serbia of 31 March 1998.

The official judicial authorities have opened an inquiry
aimed at establishing facts relative to the allegations that
the police exceeded their authority during the anti-terrorist
actions.

Serbia and the Government of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia are quite open to cooperation with the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), which
we consider the key humanitarian organization. This was
borne out also by the letter of 24 March 1998 to the ICRC
President from the Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Zivadin Jovanovie. Representatives of the ICRC and other
humanitarian organizations operate freely in Kosovo and
Metohija, which was confirmed also by the ICRC
representative in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. On 15
March 1998 the Government of the Republic of Serbia also
extended an invitation to Cornelio Sommaruga, ICRC
President, to send an ad hoc group of expert pathologists,
composed of representatives of various countries, to Kosovo
and Metohija to establish facts relative, in particular, to the
allegations that civilians have been killed in the
aforementioned anti-terrorist actions. Separate invitations
have also been extended to a number of countries to send
their independent experts, who, alongside the Yugoslav
pathologists and judicial authorities, would carry out that
task.

Official Yugoslav representatives have reaffirmed
their readiness to cooperate with the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, whose office in
Belgrade carries out its activities on the entire territory of
Yugoslavia undisturbed.

Terrorist actions and secessionist goals cannot be
equated with the legitimate struggle against terrorism: the
defence of a State, its sovereignty, its integrity and the
safety of its citizens.

Serbia and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia have
nothing to hide in Kosovo and Metohija. Foreign
diplomats and other representatives, and hundreds of
foreign journalists and parliamentarians visit and travel up
and down Yugoslavia and Serbia every day. Besides, the
International Committee of the Red Cross and other
international humanitarian organizations and governmental
and non-governmental organizations operate in Kosovo
and Metohija undisturbed. These are facts that cannot be
denied.

Kosovo and Metohija is an integral part of Serbia,
and every problem arising in that Serbian province is an
internal matter. Serbia is firmly committed to an
unconditional dialogue with the members of the Albanian
minority and to the solution of all questions through
political means in accordance with European standards.

As a signatory of the Helsinki Final Act and as a
European country, the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
accepts all standards of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and of the Council of Europe
relative to the rights of national minorities, and is open to
full and constructive cooperation. However, questions of
constitutional and State organization, relations between
various levels of government and relations between
government and self-rule belong to the internal
jurisdiction of States. Such questions are internal matters
for each sovereign State and hence for Serbia and the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. Such questions brook no
foreign intervention or internationalization. It is my firm
belief that this position is in full conformity with the
Charter of the United Nations.

The call of some countries for solutions to be sought
outside Serbia - or, as they say, within the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia - constitutes a violation of the
territorial integrity of Serbia, a State which has been in
existence for more than 13 centuries, much longer than
even the first ideas of "Yugoslavness". The United
Nations must not allow itself to be a confederate of those

 

who loath the idea of one integrated Serbia as a republic of
equal citizens. The Security Council should continue to
uphold the noble principle that all countries, big or small,
are equal. It should not harbour policies of force and double
standards.

