Mr. Yamamoto: The National Unity Government is
almost halfway through its five-year term. We have seen
some of the fruits of its efforts, and yet much remains
to be done. Fortunately, the ground is being prepared
to make Afghanistan a success. Internationally,
Warsaw and Brussels set the stage for steady progress.
Domestically, the National Unity Government has
introduced programmes to improve social services and
promote growth and development. Now is the time for
action to deliver concrete outcomes that will improve
Afghan lives today and for the future.

A major challenge is at hand. The Government has
to pursue both an inclusive peace process and economic
growth against the backdrop of an intensifying
insurgency and worsening security. As the Afghan
Government redoubles its efforts to tackle these
challenges, strong international backing - political and
financial - is required for the work ahead. Allow me
to highlight three areas where the Afghan Government
has made visible steps forward. These areas include
anti-corruption, the electoral process and women's
economic empowerment.

First, the Government is making a break with the
past by taking new steps to address corruption. The
Anti-Corruption Justice Centre is now prosecuting
cases. In parallel, the Government has taken steps to
address corruption through a range of institutional
reforms, such as efforts to restore integrity to the
management of public services. We need, however, to
acknowledge that much remains to be done, including
addressing corruption in the security institutions.
That will require political leadership and strong
determination. I have the pleasure to inform the
Council that the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) will launch its first
anti-corruption report, entitled "Afghanistan's other
battlefield: The fight against corruption", very soon.
The report highlights the Government's achievements
in addressing corruption and recommends options for
further progress.

Secondly, the Government has committed at the
highest levels to hold parliamentary elections that are
seen as fair, inclusive and transparent by the Afghan
people. The commissioners of the Independent Election
Commission and the Independent Electoral Complaints
Commission are appointed. It is encouraging to see
them making preparations for elections and pushing the
electoral reform agenda forward. However, rebuilding
trust in the electoral process will be challenging. I am
hopeful that all stakeholders will invest in an inclusive
process and build the broad political support necessary
for improved elections.

Thirdly, just two days ago, on International
Women's Day, the Government launched the Women's
Economic Empowerment National Priority Programme.
The plan recognizes women as key economic actors
whose contributions to Afghanistan's future are
essential. While this is an important step forward,
Afghanistan remains one of the most difficult places
in the world to be a woman. For many women, the
story is one of discrimination, poverty and oppression.
If that story is to change, women must be allowed
full participation and leadership and be respected as
decision-makers at all levels. This will require the
strong support of the Afghan Government, civil society
and international partners.

Let me elaborate on the issues of development
and economic growth. It is imperative that growth
strategies start to deliver concrete results. In part
due to the worsening security situation over the past
two years, service delivery has become increasingly
difficult. We have witnessed some downward trends
in key indicators, such as access to health clinics and
education facilities. Nine million people, or close to
one-third of the population, live below the poverty line,
and given population growth, per capita gross domestic
product is expected to go down. We need to act now to
reverse this course.

The commitments made in Brussels, as well
as the Afghan National Peace and Development
Framework and the Citizen's Charter provide an
essential opportunity for progress in that regard. This
is, however, neither an easy nor a simple process. The
efforts of the Afghan Government will require the
continuing, well-coordinated support of international
partners. More focused action on governance, social
services and private sector development to promote
equitable growth will be necessary. We must work hand
in hand to make a discernible change in the lives of all
Afghans so that they feel the upwards lift of economic
and social progress.

Developing a nation while fighting an insurgency is
an uphill struggle. Improving the security environment
is essential to realizing economic growth and delivering
on the ambitious plans which that country's citizens
deserve. The deteriorating security situation remains
of great concern. Armed clashes continued unabated
in early 2017, despite the cold winter months. I am
gravely concerned about reports pointing to an intense
spring fighting season. Everything should be done to
improve security. We must also remain vigilant about
the presence of foreign fighters, including Da'esh.

Last year, UNAMA recorded the worst number
of civilian casualties since we began keeping records
nearly a decade ago. The horrific attack two days ago
is testimony to the heavy price Afghans pay. This
trend must be reversed. While parties to the conflict
have expressed commitments to protecting civilians,
concrete efforts must be made to ensure that such
statements translate into real protection for Afghan
civilians and reduce casualties. I look forward to the
formal adoption and implementation of the national
policy on civilian casualty prevention and mitigation by
the Government of Afghanistan. Civilian casualties are
preventable. I also encourage the Government to follow
through on steps taken to break the culture of impunity
and to make it clear that nobody is above the law.

Deteriorating security also led to the highest-
ever level of internal displacement in 2016. More than
650,000 Afghans were displaced; returns from Pakistan
exceeded 620,000 people. Displacements and returns
for 2017 are likely to remain at these levels. These trends
demand a major humanitarian response in the short
term. The Government has shown strong leadership in
developing plans for the long-term integration of the
displaced and returnees, but sustained international
assistance is essential.

There clearly can be no military solution in
Afghanistan. It must be acknowledged that a prolonged
conflict will lead only to further misery for the
Afghan people and undermine the very foundations for
economic growth and development.

Since my last briefing (see S/PV.7844), I have
travelled the region extensively to discuss how
neighbouring countries can support or play a proactive
role in peace efforts. I have been encouraged. I sense
that countries in the neighbourhood are more ready
to work towards bringing peace to Afghanistan.
They recognize the importance of establishing an
environment conducive to peace and regional stability.
For these reasons, I urge the countries concerned,
particularly in the neighbourhood, to support the
Afghan Government's interest in an intensified regional
peace effort. UNAMA is working closely with the
Afghan Government for that purpose. In that regard, I
am deeply troubled by the heightened tensions between
Afghanistan and Pakistan, and call for the reduction of
tensions through dialogue.

The future of Afghanistan has to be built through
an Afghan-owned and Afghan-led process for all
Afghans. The path of peace must be pursued through
negotiations and not through violence. The Taliban
should enter peace talks without preconditions. I call
on all relevant actors to exercise their influence to that
end. The Government, neighbouring countries and
other key Powers should reinforce the message that the
Taliban can be a part of Afghanistan's future and its
political and social fabric.

Afghanistan's future must be placed above all
considerations. An endless conflict and violence are
simply not acceptable. We all need to make peace our
new and absolute imperative. In close consultation with
the Afghan Government, UNAMA stands ready to move
the process forward and to help generate momentum
for peace. Afghanistan's most important battle ahead
is that for a lasting peace. UNAMA looks forward to
the adoption of the renewed mandate by the Council.
We wish to reassure you, Sir, of our commitment to the
ever-more effective discharge of our mandate for the
benefit of the people of Afghanistan.

