Mr. Djani (Indonesia): At the outset, I would also
like to join my Kuwaiti brother in extending our deepest
condolences to the people and the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo following the tragic
train crash in Kasai. I also thank my Kuwaiti brother
for his condolences on the recent natural disaster in
eastern Indonesia, as well as in other parts of the world.

I would also like to thank Ms. Leila Zerrougui,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
her important briefing. Her vast experience in the
Democratic Republic of Congo has given weight to
the updates, and we commend her tireless efforts
in ensuring the effective contribution of the United
Nations to peace and stability in the country.

Like others, I also wish to thank Ms. Anny Tenga
Modi, Executive Director of Afia Mama. Ms. Modi's
statement on women's participation in peacebuilding
efforts in the Democratic Republic of Congo indeed
provides viewpoints for the Security Council in
moving forward on the country. In my view, we
cannot separate the peaceful transfer of power in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo from the role that
women play in it. During last week's series of meetings
of the Commission on the Status of Women, we were
constantly reminded of the important role that women
play in maintaining peace and security, and of course
we applaud the work that Ms. Modi has been doing.

The Secretary-General's report of 7 March 2019
(S/2019/218) provided ample food for thought. Indonesia
is certainly ready to work with the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo for the country's
future. I would now like to focus on three pertinent
points, which are, first, progress in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo; secondly, the role of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO); and
lastly, providing resources for MONUSCO.

With regard to the first point, I would like to echo
the Secretary-General when he says that the peaceful
transfer of power in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is a turning point in the country's history.
Like others, we welcomed the peaceful holding of
presidential elections in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and we hope that the local elections still to
come can be conducted peacefully. Now is the time for
reconciliation and building a prosperous country, and
I believe the people of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo are expecting to see peace, stability and growth.
We also welcome the support that has been provided by
regional and subregional partners and their willingness
to remain engaged in the post-electoral process.

Nevertheless, we realize that there is still a lot
of work to be done, as the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General also said. We must ensure a
successful start for the delayed elections in Beni,
Butembo and Yumbi now scheduled for the end of the
month. We must work on the issue of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of armed groups, as
well as enabling the new Government, once it has been
formed, to tackle a number of problems, including
the outbreak of the Ebola virus and the establishment
of good governance. With regard to the progress that
we hear has been made on the ground, as well as
the challenges that remain and that Ms. Zerrougui
mentioned, such as the attacks in northern areas and on
civilians in various places, it is clear that MONUSCO's
role is as important as ever.

For my second point, we commend MONUSCO
on its role in keeping the peace during the transfer
of power in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We urge it to engage in close consultation with the
new Government so as to be able to give it effective
assistance. We are also encouraged to know that armed
groups in three provinces - Kasai, Tanganyika and
Ituri - have shown a willingness to disarm and give
up their weapons through MONUSCO. In our View,
this represents important progress in this aspect of the
Mission's work. Indonesia takes pride, along with South
Africa, also here in the Chamber, in being one of the
largest troop contributors to MONUSCO, contributing
more than 1,000 peacekeepers - 1,041, to be exact, of
whom 28 are women. Our contribution also includes
an 850-member rapidly deployable battalion (RDB),
requested by the Secretary-General, and we are proud
to learn through the report that in February, through
its close community engagement, the Indonesian RDB
facilitated an armed group's handover of its rifles,
magazines and uniforms to MONUSCO. Beyond the
protection of civilians, such community engagement is
an important aspect of peacekeeping.

My third point concerns MONUSCO'S operation
and resources. Its approved budget for the period
from 2018 to 2019 was $1.11 billion, which I believe
is the second largest after the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan. However, if we look at the numbers
closely, we can see that the burden borne by individual
peacekeepers in MONUSCO is quite heavy. MONUSCO,
with 17,000 peacekeepers, is currently responsible for
the whole of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
which has a population of 84 million people and an
area of 2.34 million square kilometres, which is much
larger than many parts of Europe. That means that on
average, the mandate assigned to a single MONUSCO
peacekeeper involves protecting 4,941 persons across
an area of 137 square kilometres.

I am citing this data in order to bring some
perspective to our discussion of the renewal of the
mandate. Peacekeepers in MONUSCO are still facing
direct threats, and in that connection, I want to pay
tribute to all our fallen peacekeepers. There is no
question that the Mission needs adequate resources in
order to maintain peacekeepers' safety and ensure that
its mandate is effectively fulfilled. While we support
the plan for an exit strategy and MONUSCO's eventual
drawdown, we are concerned about the fact that an
important United Nations peacekeeping mission like
MONUSCO is being required to reduce its capabilities
at the height of its work. The situation is still fragile.
We should keep building on the success so far, and as
long as civilians in particular continue to be victims,
MONUSCO will be needed more than ever. The
mandate and the resources should work together. The
Council cannot continue to work in a silo, and we must
engage in discussing the peacekeeping budgets with
the General Assembly if we are to ensure mandates'
smooth operation and fulfilment. And a commitment
to the peacekeeping budget should be followed with
that commitment's realization. It is high time that we
re-examined the overall guidelines and resolutions
that relate to peacekeeping financing in order to
help the Secretariat fulfil its mandate in support of
peacekeeping operations.

As we are approach MONUSCO's mandate renewal,
I also want to reiterate the importance of meaningful
consultations with the troop- and police-contributing
countries and the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. At the end of the day, the
Government should have ownership when it comes to
securing peace and stability in its country. And I want
to highlight once again that at the end of the day, we are
here to save lives and to protect the weak and needy.
Peace is a luxury that the Congolese people have been
deprived of for far too long. Let us work together with
them and their new Government to ensure lasting peace
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

