Mr. Dangue Rewaka (Gabon) (spoke in French):
Before I begin my statement on the issue before us today,
I would like to extend to the royal family, the
Government and the people of Morocco our sincere and
profound condolences over the sudden death of King
Hassan II. We will forever remember his great work to
bring peoples together and to seek peace among nations.

The issue which brings us together today has been
considered within the context of the report of the
Secretary-General submitted to the Security Council in
April 1998 (S/1998/318). At that time we discussed at
some length and adopted measures that I shall speak
about later.

I would like to thank Mrs. Sadako Ogata, the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, for the
important statement she has just made to the Council on
the situation of refugees in Africa. She greatly stressed
the underlying causes of the mass exodus of refugees to
African countries where there is some stability.

I will not go over those causes again; I just want to
draw attention to the role that the Security Council must
play to help countries in conflict to return to the peace
that is so essential. Without peace, no lasting economic
and social progress can be achieved.

In 1998, after considering the report of the
Secretary-General, we adopted resolution 1208 (1998) of
19 November. The operative part of that resolution
requests the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and the Secretariat
to take certain actions to alleviate the suffering of
refugees in the African countries. The measures adopted
included personnel training to cope with the large
numbers of refugees in Africa.

Just a few moments ago, Mrs. Ogata, describing the
situation of refugees in Central Africa, spoke of refugees
from countries neighbouring Gabon, refugees that we took
in. I should like to reaffirm to her now that we are ready,
with the hospitality which has always distinguished the
Gabonese people, to continue to cooperate with her and
with the UNHCR staff with a View to ensuring the best
possible conditions for the refugees in our country

 

pending their return to their countries of origin. Mrs. Ogata
will soon be receiving at her office a request, within the
context of the resolution I mentioned earlier, for assistance
to the Gabonese staff and national Gabonese organizations
responsible for receiving the refugees to help them with the
arrival and handling of refugees coming from neighbouring
countries.

We have some problems in Gabon. It has not been
easy to take in the refugees because some have been armed.
There was also the problem of how to settle them with the
local population. Sometimes this led to trouble, but we were
able to control the situation. However, we would appreciate
receiving proper training, particularly of the security forces.

With respect to funding, we have General Assembly
resolution 52/103, adopted 12 December 1997, which calls
on the international community to establish funds for
UNHCR because most often funds are unavailable at
UNHCR. I would like to ask the High Commissioner what
the situation is regarding pledges and what funds have
actually been received to help African refugees.

We have become party to all of the conventions
relating to refugees and have signed the Organization of
African Unity convention on refugee problems. We
recognize that we must grant access to the staff of all
humanitarian organizations besides UNHCR to the refugees
so that they can give the assistance needed. We would like
to reaffirm here that we will do this and will continue to
work in cooperation with UNHCR.
We also have the problem of refugees linked to
conflict resolution. That is the case with the conflicts in
Sierra Leone and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
On both fronts there has been significant progress. It is
important that the Security Council not delay any further in
taking the initiatives incumbent on it so that the absence of
a group to monitor the ceasefire observance and the
implementation of the agreements signed by the parties will
not be used as a pretext by some people who might Violate
the agreements. This applies also to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Therefore, we urge the Security
Council to work on this so that it can accept without
reservations the proposals made by the Secretary-General
with regard to the two countries.

As we know through the media, recently there have
been clashes on the borders in eastern Africa. These involve
organizational problems of receiving the refugees. Here I
am referring to what happened not so long ago between
Burundi and Tanzania. It is important that countries that are
taking in refugees be given sufficient resources so that
situations such as those that occurred in Rwanda and
Burundi in 1994 will not recur. Here again, UNHCR has
the responsibility, and the necessary resources must be
given to the countries so that they can deal with this mass
movement of refugees. It is my delegation's hope that
follow-up to and implementation of Security Council
resolution 1208 (1998) can be assured.

