Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank Under Secretary-
General Lacroix for his briefing. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2017/565).

Like others, we are deeply concerned about the scale
of violence, violations of international humanitarian law
and the grave human rights violations and abuses taking
place with widespread impunity in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo right now. The situation in
the Kasai, as well as the negative development in the
eastern part of the country, are particularly worrying.
Children are disproportionally affected, as we have
heard. We must act with determination to ensure that
these violations come to an end and prevent further
conflicts from erupting or spreading. Political means
must be given priority.

The implementation of the 31 December agreement,
paving the way for free, peaceful and credible elections,
is key in that regard. We again call upon all signatories
to fully implement the agreement, which, together with
a sustainable settlement of outstanding issues in the
political process, provides the only viable way out of
the current humanitarian, economic and security crisis.

We again welcome the important work conducted
by Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Mamam Sidikou in his good offices function, and we
support his call on the Independent National Electoral
Commission to publish without delay an official and
consensual calendar for the organization of the elections.

A peaceful and stable Democratic Republic of
the Congo is critical for stability in the subregion and
the region as a whole. We encourage constructive,
concerted and continuous engagement by regional
actors. In that context, we welcome the joint delegation
of the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region, the Southern Africa Development Community,
the African Union and the United Nations in Kinshasa
in May and hope for a speedy follow-up.

The mandate of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, which we adopted this spring, with its focus on
support for the political process, compels the United
Nations to act strategically and efficiently. We stand
ready for continuous and close consultations with the
Secretariat to ensure the Mission's ability to fulfil the
mandated tasks, not least related to the protection of
civilians. The strategic review will provide important
input to such discussions.

We welcome and fully support the Human Rights
Council resolution co-sponsored by us requesting the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
to dispatch a team of international experts, including
from the region, to investigate allegations of gross
violations and abuses in the Kasai region. We urge the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to cooperate fully with the investigation team and the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights in
this regard.

Lastly, no stone should be left unturned in our
efforts to deliver justice for those who lost their lives
in the service of the United Nations, including the two
United Nations experts - Zaida Catalan and Michael
Sharp. Sweden, in cooperation with the Secretary-
General and partners concerned, will continue to look
into concrete proposals on how the United Nations
system, including the Council, can further support the
ongoing national investigations in order to establish the
truth and bring the perpetrators to justice. One such
option would be an additional investigative mechanism.
