Mr. Kadangha-Bariki (Togo) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank you, Madam, for organizing this
debate on the protection ofjournalists in armed conflict.
I would also like to thank the four journalists who
shared their moving stories. Finally, I thank the Deputy
Secretary-General for his briefing on the situation.

Journalists work in increasingly dangerous
situations, risking their lives in war zones in their
professional capacity to report on the horrors of conflict
and violations of humanitarian law and international
human rights law. In 2012 alone, 121 journalists were
killed and more than 200 imprisoned. In 2012, the
murder of journalists in armed conflict increased by
49 per cent, by comparision with 2011.

We have seen and heard Kathleen Carroll's long
list, which we found very touching. The story told by
Mr. Mustafa spoke eloquently about the risks taken
by journalists in armed conflict. However, ever since
the Hague Convention of 1907, journalists have been
protected by international humanitarian law. This was
followed by the 1949 Geneva Conventions and their
1997 Additional Protocols, as well as by resolution 1738
(2006), not to mention situation-specific resolutions
and presidential statements adopted by the Security
Council.

Togo welcomes the initiatives taken by regional
entities, including the African Union workshop on
security and the protection of African journalists,
to reaffirm their dedication to defending liberty and
freedom of information, including in times of war and
danger. My delegation believes that these initiatives
should contribute to the establishment of a legally
binding regional instrument, ensuring the protection of
journalists in situations of armed conflict.

Despite their protection, attacks on media
professionals are linked to the inadequacy of their
protection, wartime practices, the very objectives of
journalism itself, and impunity. As far as the inadequacy
of protection measures is concerned, the responsibility
may lie with the decision taken in 1975 to consider
journalists as civilians, rather than according them
special status so as to avoid weakening the protection
of civilians. Progress in communications over the past
20 years has allowed information in modern conflicts
to be used as a weapon of war that belligerents either
covet or destroy, even as they target the journalists who
furnish it.

When it comes to wartime practices, belligerents
want to cover up proof of atrocities, prompting them
to intimidate and silence journalists so that they can
escape prosecution. Moreover, in order to protect
themselves, journalists sometimes bear arms or are
accompanied by armed forces, undermining the
protection from which they could benefit. As to the
objectives ofjournalism, journalists' efforts to remain
impartial may be misperceived by belligerents, who
may rightly or wrongly overestimate the subjectivity
of the information provided by journalists, and thus
identify the latter as enemies.

Furthermore, in an effort to remain competitive,
news agencies may step up pressure on journalists
to take unjustifiable risks. Finally, the impunity of
perpetrators in carrying out attacks against journalists
largely explains continued violations of their protected
status in situations of armed conflict. Punishing the
perpetrators of such violations effectively would serve
as a real deterrent to non-State armed groups that
do not feel bound by international laws protecting
journalists. National armed forces may also be guilty
of such violations. They should also bear a large part of
the responsibility.

Togo feels that the protection of journalists in
situations of armed conflict goes beyond States and
requires the undivided attention of the United Nations
and the Council with a View to identifying more
protective regulations, which should be adapted to
modern realities. The Council should include the issue
of the protection of journalists in situations of armed
conflict on its programme of work more frequently.

Togo also recommends including modules on
the protection of journalists in armed conflict within
curriculums for training national armed forces and
soldiers in peacekeeping operations.

