Mr. Richmond (United Kingdom): I would like to
make a statement on behalf of the European Union. The
Central and Eastern European countries associated with
the European Union - the Czech Republic, Hungary,
Poland and Romania - as well as the European Free
Trade Association country, Norway, a member of the
European Economic Area, align themselves with this
statement.

The European Union is deeply concerned at the
threat to regional peace and security posed by the
situation in Kosovo. The international community must
send a clear message to the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and the Serbian authorities that the excessive
violence by military police units, involving deaths and
injury among the civilian population, is unacceptable.
Equally, we condemn unreservedly all terrorist acts and
call on those supplying financial support, arms or training
to cease to do so. We urge both sides to engage
immediately in genuine and unconditional dialogue,
including with the participation of an outside
representative.

The European Union fully supports the statement
made by the Contact Group Foreign Ministers in Bonn on
25 March. It endorses their assessment that while some
positive developments have occurred - notably the deal
on the implementation of the Education Agreement, which
is a particularly welcome step forward - progress has
not been sufficient to meet the requirements set out by the

 

meeting of Contact Group Foreign Ministers in London on
9 March.
The European Union has nominated Mr. Felipe
Gonzalez as European Union Special Representative, with
a view to enhancing the effectiveness of the European
Union's contribution to resolving the problems in the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, including Kosovo, and the
European Union strongly supports the mission by
Mr. Gonzalez as Personal Representative of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
Chairman-in-Office for the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.

The European Union believes that pressure must be
maintained to bring the Belgrade authorities to the
negotiating table. That means implementing forthwith the
measures agreed at the London Contact Group meeting.

Against this background, the European Union strongly
supports the resolution which has just been adopted by the
Council. The Union already has a comprehensive arms
embargo in place against the countries of the former
Yugoslavia. We wish to see all other Member States taking
an equally stringent position. This resolution is an
expression of the international community's rejection of the
policy of violence, whether carried out by military police or
by terrorists.

It is essential also that the international response to the
crisis be a united and coherent one. We know, to our cost,
from the early days of the Bosnian war, that international
divisions undermine our efforts. The resolution we have
adopted today sends a powerful signal to the authorities in
Belgrade that the international community is united in its
desire to see real progress on Kosovo and is monitoring
events there closely. Neighbouring States have already
expressed concern that further turmoil in Kosovo might
spread instability beyond the borders of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia. We owe it to them to take a firm
line.

The European Union favours granting a large degree
of autonomy to Kosovo within the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia. This must include meaningful self-
administration for the local population. But the key is
getting both sides to talk, and we will support a settlement
on Kosovo's status reached by mutual agreement.

