I wish to thank the three Force Commanders for their presentations. We very much appreciate the regular direct interaction with the Force Commanders; it is extremely helpful. We would like to thank them for their service and their leadership. We would also like to pay tribute to all troops under their command for their service exercising and to express our deepest condolences to the families of all those who have lost their lives while performing peacekeeping duties. It is always good to have a direct exchange with the Force Commanders, especially this year, as we are discussing the implications of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. It is very important for us to learn and better understand how the pandemic and its implications affect the implementation of the peacekeeping missions' mandates. It was very good to hear from the three Force Commanders how that has been done, and it was very interesting to hear from them how they integrate an efficient pandemic response into their daily work on the ground and what can be done further to improve their pandemic readiness. Before I turn to the three missions, let me make three brief general points. First of all, we express our strong support for the Secretariat's efforts to increase the number of women in peacekeeping, especially in senior leadership positions. It is promising that this year we see more diversity, including in our conversations, and welcome Brigadier General O'Brien as Acting Head of Mission and Force Commander of the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF). Secondly, we also had a very productive exchange last year when we focused on cooperation with host States. In the light of the current COVID-19 pandemic, cooperation with host nations is more important than ever. Without their consent, no life-saving goods and equipment will reach the missions, and peacekeepers cannot receive the medical treatment they need. Host nations, of course, bear the primary responsibility for the safety and security of peacekeepers and for full compliance with the respective status of forces agreement. Thirdly, safeguarding viable medical evacuation destinations is a challenge at the moment. Germany stands ready to help and to contribute as a medical evacuation destination, but with some limitations, since we still have a high number of domestic cases and we have to take precautionary measures for a possible second wave. I would like now to say a few words about the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). In particular, I would like to focus on the force adaptation plan and to thank the Force Commander for leading it. The force adaptation plan is indispensable for further improving operational efficiency. And it is, as was said, the driver for change to the Mission. The force adaptation plan is therefore critical. The recent Force Generation Conference demonstrated that there is strong support for the plan and that we need more pledges for certain critical capabilities, in particular helicopters. Turning to my country, Germany, I would like to stress that, since the start of MINUSMA, in 2013, Germany has been a strong supporter of the Mission and has contributed both troops and police to it. We will maintain our commitment. In that vein, we announced an additional contribution in support of MINUSMA's force adaptation plan, thereby further expanding the range of our unmanned aircraft system Heron | in Gao. As we are going to discuss MINUSMA and the mandate in more detail soon, all I want to say at this point is that there is obviously a limit to what we can do with the capabilities we have at hand. Further and broader Mission tests will backfire if we do not collectively ensure that it has the right personnel and adequate resources. Efficiency gains go hand in hand with a mandate with a realistic scope. I would also like to recall that the Mission is multidimensional, as the name suggests - consisting of civilians, military and police. The force adaptation plan must be geared towards making the military component stronger and enabling the work of the other parts of the Mission. For that to occur, the civilian, police and military components must be better integrated. Turning to UNDOF, I think it is fair to say that, in these times, strong mission leadership is more important than ever. We once again thank Brigadier General O'Brien for her dedicated service. UNDOF continues to play a vital role in preserving the ceasefire between Israel and Syria. We remain concerned about the continued and increasing number of violations of the 1974 Disengagement of Forces Agreement, as reported by the Secretary- General in his most recent report (S/2020/219). We welcome and encouraged by the return of UNDOF to the Bravo side. Once the situation on the ground allows, operational activities such as night patrols and inspections, as agreed by Syria, should resume. However, we remain concerned that, due to host nation restrictions - particularly because of COVID-19 - essential personal protective equipment cannot always reach peacekeepers. We therefore call on both parties to ensure the safety and security of military and civilian personnel in UNDOF and the Observer Group Golan, and to extend their cooperation to UNDOF with a view to helping in fulfil its mandated tasks. We also call on the parties to allow UNDOF to operate safely, securely and freely in accordance with the Disengagement of Forces Agreement. It is important for UNDOF to be able to carry out its operations without any administrative obstacles. Finally, turning to the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), the precautionary and preventive measures taken by the Mission - some owing to unduly imposed Government restrictions - have resulted in a reduction of operational activities. All such status-of-forces-agreement violations must stop. Overall, we witnessed a detrimental impact on the security situation, probably due to the Mission's drastic reductions as a result of the outbreak of the pandemic. At the same time, it is clear that, given the medical and logistical conditions in South Sudan, UNMISS must take a cautious approach. We encourage the Mission to operate as effectively much as possible under the current circumstances, especially with regard to the violence in Jonglei state. We must also remind the Government that combating the pandemic must not divert attention from the implementation of the peace agreement, which is so critical. We ask the Government of South Sudan to fully and comprehensively implement the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan. I would echo the Force Commander's sentiment that the protection of civilians remains the core pillar of the Mission's mandate. That remains key, and the COVID-19 pandemic poses a particular challenge to the protection-of-civilian sites and camps. Those sites are densely populated and social distancing and hygienic measures are difficult to implement. My last point on UNMISS is that safeguarding viable medical evacuation destinations for UNMISS personnel is also a challenge at the moment. We would like to ask the Secretariat to keep troop-contributing countries informed about the state of play and underline that a robust solution must be found as soon as possible. We also call on South Sudan and neighbouring States to fully cooperate with the United Nations.
