The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Bangladesh, Cuba, the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, Egypt, Iceland, Indonesia,
Israel, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Malaysia, Morocco, Nicaragua, Pakistan, the Syrian
Arab Republic, Turkey, Uganda and the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela to participate in this meeting.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 21 July 2011 from the
Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United Nations,
which will be issued as document S/2011/444 and
which reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the meeting of the Security Council that will
be held on Tuesday, 26 July 2011, regarding the
situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question."

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the meeting in accordance with the rules
of procedure and previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

Under rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Robert Serry, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General, to
participate in this meeting.

Under rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Pedro
Serrano, Acting Head of the Delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations, to participate in
this meeting.

Under rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Abdou
Diallo, Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of
2
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, to
participate in this meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I now give the floor to Mr. Serry.

