Mr. Antonio (spoke in French): Allow me to
apologize, on behalf of President Buyoya, who was
unable to come to this meeting as the result of a
scheduling conflict. He is in the General Assembly,
which is holding a special commemoration of the
fiftieth anniversary of the Organization of African
Unity and the African Union. President Buyoya has
therefore given me the task of speaking on his behalf.

"Allow me at the outset, on behalf of the
Commission of the African Union and in my own
personal capacity, to convey my gratitude to you,
Sir, for having afforded us this opportunity to take
the floor and deliver our message during the so
important meeting on the situation in Mali. The
Council will recall that the African Union and the
Economic Community of West African States have
been seized of the issue since the very eruption
of the comprehensive and complex crisis that has
struck Mali. The efforts of the two organizations
will continue to be focused on assisting the Malian
authorities to ensure that the country is able to
restore its national unity, its territorial integrity
and the constitutional order in a peaceful climate,
one marked by genuine reconciliation between the
various communities in Mali.

"To achieve that objective, the two organizations
have advocated a double strategy based on two
axes of action, one a political process and the
other military action, if necessary. Of course, we
focused first on a dialogue process, based on our
belief that we had to use every possible peaceful
way to resolve the situation before resorting to
military action.

"With the subsequent realization that the
political processes needed to be strengthened by a
strategy requiring the armed groups to fulfil their
commitments, we felt obliged to take the necessary
steps for a possible military intervention in support
of the political process. The attack on the town of
Konna on 10 January 2013 by terrorist and criminal
groups justified this approach. Indeed, that attack
undermined the efforts at dialogue with elements
among those armed groups, which we had been
making up until that time, and led to the deployment
of the African-led International Support Mission in
Mali (AFISMA).

"We have carried out all of these actions in
close collaboration with the United Nations. It is
therefore normal for us to support the initiative
of transforming AFISMA into a United Nations
mission. Indeed, we requested such a change. We
support the decision to transform AFISMA into a
United Nations stabilization mission. We welcome
the fact that a number of our concerns with the
draft resolution have been taken into account in the
current text. We are encouraged by the statements
made by several parties that our remaining
concerns will be taken into account when it comes
to implementing the resolution.

"As our efforts regarding the crisis in Mali
proceed, and in the light of our experience and
added value in certain areas, we vigorously
advocate for the following points. First, the
central political roles of the African Union and
the Economic Community of West African States
should be recognized, in full partnership with the
United Nations mission. In that regard, the two
organizations would maintain a strong presence in
Bamako to pursue their political commitment in
Mali. Secondly, the practice of consultations that has
characterized all of ourjoint action on Mali to date
should continue, especially with respect to taking
major decisions, such as choosing contingents and
selecting military and civilian leadership. Thirdly,
there must be strong coordination between the
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali, the French force and
the Malian army, which could be achieved through
the appointment of liaison officers in the command
structures of each force.

"The process of transforming AFISMA into a
United Nations mission is an eloquent illustration
of the partnership between Africa and the United The President: The Security Council has thus
Nations, which we strongly hope will lead to a concluded the present stage ofits consideration of the
lasting solution to the ongoing crisis in Mali and item on its agenda.

for the well-being of all ofthe Malian people. The meeting rose at 10.35 am.
