Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the
outset, Madam, I wish to welcome your presence leading
this meeting of the Security Council. I thank Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon and Ms. Beerli, Vice-President
of the International Committee of the Red Cross, for
their briefings. I wish to express my appreciation and
thanks to Australia for the preparations it made for this
meeting.

The illicit trade in and excessive accumulation and
proliferation ofsmall arms and light weapons have posed
a major challenge to the international community. The
international security station is complex and volatile
and rife with both traditional and non-traditional
security threats, such as regional unrest, terrorism
and transnational organized crime. Globalization, IT
applications and new technological revolutions have
added complexity to the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons.

All of this poses new challenges to many countries,
in particular developing countries in Africa and Latin
America. The Security Council should continue to play
a positive role and urge the international community to
redouble its efforts in the fight against the illicit trade
in small arms and light weapons.

In that regard, I wish to make the following
proposals. First, we should take a holistic approach
in addressing both the symptoms and the root causes.
The international community should commit itself to
resolving disputes through political and diplomatic
means and to safeguarding regional and international
peace. At the same time, we should enhance
peacekeeping and post-conflict reconstruction and help
the relevant countries to achieve economic development
and social stability in an effort to eliminate the root
causes of wars, conflict, terrorism and organized crime.
This would pave the way for a fundamental solution to
the issue of small arms and light weapons.

Secondly, we should bring into full play the role
of the United Nations as the major actor. We should
comprehensively and effectively implement the
outcomes reached under the framework of the United
Nations, work for steady progress in the relevant
processes, and intensify the fight against the illicit
trade in arms at the national, regional and international
levels. The United Nations should play an even greater
role in promoting international cooperation and
assistance in that regard.

Thirdly, we should strengthen international
cooperation. The law-enforcementbodies of all countries
should enhance their coordination and maintain closer
links with multilateral institutions, such as INTERPOL,
with a view to increasing information exchange and
practical cooperation through bilateral and multilateral
channels. Different regions can establish their own
priorities and develop effective measures in the light
of their specific situations. Developed countries should
provide greater assistance to developing countries in
the areas of institution-building, personnel training,
capital and technology.

Fourthly, Governments need to enhance their
capacity-building. National Governments bear the
primary responsibility to fight the illicit trade in arms.
All countries should comply with Security Council
resolutions involving arms embargoes, improve their
domestic legislation in the light of national conditions,
and tighten control on small arms and light weapons so
as to cut off the source of their illicit trade.

The Chinese Government has been consistently
and firmly against the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons. We fully understand the concerns of the
relevant countries and regions and deeply sympathize
with them. Over the years, China has taken an active
part in international cooperation in this area and
improved its domestic management of the small arms
trade, thereby contributing to efforts to combat the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons.

First, we have enhanced legislation, law
enforcement and capacity-building. The Chinese
Government has exerted strict controls over small arms
and light weapons in accordance with the law of the
People's Republic of China on the control of firearms
and other laws and regulations. We have promulgated
precise regulations for small-arms marking that
provide for the detailed marking of small arms and
light weapons, and put in place an information system
for the management of guns used for official purposes.
Chinese law enforcement departments have carried
out several special campaigns to confiscate guns and
combat violence. As a result, the gun-related crime
rate has gone down year after year, contributing to
continued social stability and the safety of people and
their property.

We have actively engaged I bilateral and multilateral
exchanges and cooperation and in providing foreign
assistance. The competent departments in China have
played an active role in international exchanges and
practical cooperation. We have provided assistance to
other countries and multilateral organizations in the
form of capital, technology and personnel training
within the frameworks of the United Nations, the
Organization of American States, the Forum on China-
Africa Cooperation, the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization.
In addition, China has provided assistance in various
forms to approximately 40 countries in Asia, Africa
and Latin America in order to help them address
humanitarian crises that have been triggered by mines
and explosive remnants of war.

Thirdly, China has adopted a prudent and
responsible approach towards the export of small arms
and light weapons. Acting in strict compliance with
the principles of never impairing regional peace and
security and of non-interference in the internal affairs
of recipient countries, China has exported no small
arms and light weapons to countries or regions that
are subject to Security Council arms embargoes or to
non-State entities and individuals.
The Chinese Government has put in place a sound
arms-export control system that includes end-user
certification and export licensing, among other things.
In particular, China has established a record-keeping
system for the export of small arms and light weapons.

Building a peaceful and prosperous world free from
gun violence is an aspiration shared by the Chinese
people and the people of all countries alike. China will
work with the international community and continue
to strive tirelessly to find a solution to the issue of the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons.

