Mr. Mcakuvana (South Africa): Mr. President,
let me join others in congratulating you and your
country on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council during the month of July. My delegation
expresses its appreciation to Mr. Robert Serry for
briefing the Council today. We associate ourselves with
the statement delivered earlier by the representative
of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and
thank the Ambassadors of Palestine and Israel for their
statements.

Since October 2010, there has been no significant
signal that direct negotiations between Israel and
Palestine would resume any time soon, despite regional,
international and other efforts to defuse the stalemate
in the peace process. The agile re-engagement of the
United States in the peace process in recent times
is commendable. We appreciate in particular the
efforts undertaken by Mr. John Kerry to facilitate the
resumption of the peace talks between the parties.

South Africa welcomes the announcement that an
agreement has been reached between Israel and Palestine
that will form the foundation for the resumption of final
status negotiations, despite outstanding disagreements
especially with respect to the critical issue of the illegal
settlements that Israel continues to construct with
impunity. We call on Israel to reconsider its position on

settlements and refrain from these illegal acts, which
may negatively affect the spirit of negotiations.

We commend the Palestinians for agreeing to
return to negotiations under such arduous and difficult
conditions. That shows their commitment to peace
through a spirit of compromise, which is essential if
this intractable conflict is to be resolved. We call on
all the Palestinian parties and organizations, including
Hamas, to see that as a positive step towards lasting
peace. The future ofPalestine is significantly dependent
on the unity of its people. Therefore, we encourage the
Palestinians to strive for unity as a weapon against those
who are bent on dividing them for their own benefit.

On a positive note, we welcome Israel's decision to
free some Palestinian prisoners as a confidence-building
measure and a gesture of their commitment to the peace
talks. However, South Africa is deeply concerned at the
plight of the Palestinians who are illegally imprisoned
in Israeli jails and have long lived in appalling
conditions. We once again call on Israel to respect the
human rights of all Palestinian prisoners and abide by
relevant international human rights and humanitarian
law, including the Fourth Geneva Convention. As the
international community, we have a responsibility to
put our shoulders to the wheel and assist the parties in
all manner of ways to ensure that the negotiations yield
positive results.

Clearly, the success of negotiations requires an
immediate end to acts of aggression occasioned by
continued home demolitions, price tag attacks, illegal
excavations of religious sites and the restriction of
access and movement. Settler attacks on civilians, the
desecration of Palestinian mosques and churches, the
destruction of property and the felling of olive trees
should be condemned in the strongest possible terms
and ultimately stopped.

With regard to the situation in Gaza, South Africa
remains deeply concerned about Israel's continued
blockade. The blockade and restrictions imposed are in
violation of international humanitarian law, including
article 23 of the Fourth Geneva Convention, and
contrary to the will of the international community
as expressed in various Security Council resolutions,
including 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1515 (2003) and 1860
(2009), among other international legal instruments
and frameworks.

We welcome the decision of the European Union
(EU) to put pressure on Israel by publishing new
guidelines banning the Union's funding for entities
linked to settlements or territories occupied since the
1967 war. As is well known, that decision is in line with
the EU's position on settlements and should be a clear
sign to Israel that settlements are not just illegal but
can also attract retributive actions from law-abiding
nations and organizations. We hope that other countries
and organizations will also consider applying pressure
on Israel so as to coerce it to abandon its regressive
policy of settlement construction.

South Africa is deeply concerned about the situation
in Syria and hopes that a solution will soon be found
before many more are killed, injured or displaced. We
would like to emphasize our concern about the plight of
the Palestinian refugees in Syria, some of whom have
now left the country due to the ongoing violence. It is
encouraging that, despite the hardships that come with
being a refugee, a Palestinian refugee emerged recently
as the winner of the Arab Idol singing competition.
That is one of those achievements that are a testimony
to the resilience of the human spirit. The decision
by the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) to
name Mohammad Assaf the UNRWA Regional Youth
Ambassador for Palestine Refugees is most welcome.
That should encourage the Palestinians to continue
with their struggle until their liberation is complete.

Finally, last week we celebrated Nelson Mandela
International Day and reflected on the life of President
Mandela, who has dedicated his life to the freedom of
his people and that of the Palestinians. I believe it would
be appropriate for me to conclude with his wisdom as
regards the issue of Palestine: "We know too well that
our freedom is incomplete without the freedom of the
Palestinians". Let us therefore work together to free
the Palestinians from the bondage of occupation and
deliver them to the promised land of freedom, for which
they so yearn.

