Mr. Vrailas: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and its States members.
The candidate countries Turkey and Montenegro; the
country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate Albania; as well as the Republic
of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with this
statement.

I shall deliver a shortened version of my statement,
the full version of which will be circulated in the
Chamber and be made available on our website.

I would like to thank the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs, the High Commissioner for
Human Rights and the representatives of the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and the International
Committee of the Red Cross for their briefings. I also
thank the Lithuanian presidency for organizing this
timely debate.

Let me start by stating that the EU continues to
be concerned about the heavy civilian casualties,
massive displacement of populations, serious human
rights violations and worsening of the humanitarian
situation in the Central African Republic. In that
context, the EU is currently drawing up support for the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights so that human rights monitors can be
deployed. We welcome the recent appointment of the
members of the commission of inquiry and encourage
the United Nations to swiftly deploy it on the ground.
We look forward to working with the United Nations,
the African Union and other actors in ensuring the
complementarities of ongoing initiatives.

A more robust response to the crisis is urgently
needed. For its part, the European Union has responded
swiftly through a combination of humanitarian,
stabilization and development support. The European
Commission has increased its allocation up to
€39 million and has furthermore substantially scaled
up its humanitarian engagement, moving to a collective
contribution by the EU and its member States of
€76 million by the end of 2013. The EU has been fully
mobilized since the beginning of the crisis to support
the efforts of our African partners.

As authorized by the Council, the EU is committed
to sending a crisis management mission in order to help
provide a safe and secure environment, protect civilians
in the Bangui area and permit internally displaced
persons to return to their homes, as well as to create
the conditions for humanitarian actors to operate freely.
The European Union thanks the Council for adopting
resolution 2134 (2014), which authorizes that action.

With regard to the situation in Syria, the EU
remains gravely concerned about the continuing and
indiscriminate bloodshed among the civilian population
and calls for the cessation of all violence so as to allow
urgent humanitarian access on the ground. It strongly
condemns the regime's escalating and indiscriminate
attacks, including the use of Scud missiles, barrel
bombs and air and artillery strikes, and its brutality on
the ground, notably in Aleppo. The regime bears the
primary responsibility for the conflict. Its actions on
the ground are undermining the potential for genuine
political transition and are fuelling extremism.

We call on all parties to the conflict to immediately
uphold their obligation to protect civilians, as well as
medical personnel, facilities and transport, to allow
and facilitate immediate and unimpeded humanitarian
access to the whole of the territory and to guarantee,
without delay, the safety and security of humanitarian
personnel in the exercise of their duties. The EU will
continue to defend human rights and will remain active
in ensuring accountability for the widespread and
systematic violations and abuses of human rights and
international humanitarian law perpetrated in Syria.

The EU reiterates its call on the Security Council
to urgently address the situation in Syria with regard
to those aspects, including a possible referral to the
International Criminal Court (ICC), as requested in
the Swiss letter to the Security Council of 14 January
2013. The EU recalls that all those responsible for
crimes against humanity and war crimes must be
held accountable. We reaffirm our support for the
Independent International Commission of Inquiry on
the Syrian Arab Republic, established by the Human
Rights Council.

The annual report of the Secretary-General on
children and armed conflict (S/2013/245) reminds
us of the challenges ahead. We have seen progress in
some areas. However, children in too many countries
are suffering terribly as a result of armed conflict. The
situation in Syria is of special and most urgent concern.
The EU reiterates its call in support of the "No Lost
Generation" strategy for the children of Syria. The
difficult situation of children in Mali and the Central
African Republic is also highlighted in the Secretary-
General's report.

Strengthening accountability is an important
element in enhancing compliance by parties to
armed conflict with their international obligations.
National authorities have the primary responsibility to
provide accountability for violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law. In cases where
the national authorities fail to take the necessary steps
to ensure accountability, the Security Council can, as
appropriate, play a more proactive role.

The ICC continues to play a crucial role in fighting
impunity. Serious crimes of international concern
should be dealt with by national judicial systems but,
when they are unwilling or unable to do so, States
parties to the Rome Statute should consider referring
those situations to the ICC. Further institutional
dialogue between the ICC and the Security Council
and the effective follow-up of referrals made by the
Security Council to the ICC could assist in ensuring
accountability.

In addition to bringing perpetrators to justice, we
strongly believe in early and decisive action to try to
prevent such crimes from being committed and in the
need to forcefully remind the authorities responsible of
their primary responsibility to protect civilians, or be
held to account. There is much room for improvement,
including in the way in which the United Nations
system responds to early warnings and evolving
situations. The EU welcomes the Secretary-General's
"Rights up front" initiative as an important element of
the Organization's efforts to strengthen early warning
and prevent atrocities against civilians.

For a number of years, the mandates of many
peacekeeping and other missions have included
protection-of-civilians activities. Many challenges
remain in terms of the effective implementation of
those protection mandates, and we need to continue
to address them. The implementation of protection-of-
civilians mandates requires better planning support to
missions, gleaning the lessons learned effectively and
improving understanding of how to support host States
in protecting civilians.

The EU also welcomes the use ofnew technology in
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which
supports the delivery of its protection mandate. We
encourage the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
to further explore opportunities to use state-of-the-art
technology in peacekeeping missions.

In many ways, training is the cornerstone for
improving the implementation of the protection of
civilians by missions. For its part, in Somalia, the
EU has provided training to Somali soldiers, with
the prevention of the perpetration of war crimes and
other premeditated acts of violence against civilians,
human rights law and international humanitarian law,
among other elements, as an integral part. In future,
the European Union Training Mission in Somalia
will also provide strategic advice to the General Staff
in Mogadishu on designing and developing training
concepts, policies and programmes.

With the aim of assisting Malian authorities in
consolidating peace and security and, more generally,
in order to find lasting solutions to the crisis in the
Sahel region, in close coordination with other regional
and international stakeholders, from the beginning the
EU Training Mission in Mali has been incorporating
the issues of the protection of civilians, human rights
and gender in the training curriculum.

The EU civilian mission launched at the request
of Niger's Government in the summer of 2012 aims,
in part, at strengthening the rule of law by developing
criminal investigation capacities and ensuring respect
for the criminal justice system.

Let me end by saying that the Security Council
should continue to request the Secretary-General to
explicitly report on the implementation of protection-of-
civilians mandates by peacekeeping operations.
The protection of civilians should also be a standard
benchmark against which we measure the success of
peacekeeping operations.

