Mr. Diallo (spoke in French): Allow me, at the
outset, on behalf of the Committee to thank you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to address the
Council during this important debate. I wish the
Council the greatest success in its deliberations in the
month of October under your presidency, Sir.

The tragic events of recent days in and around
Gaza is a sobering reminder that resolution 1860
(2009) has yet to be fully implemented. The Committee
condemns all attacks against civilians, regardless of
their perpetrators. Indiscriminate rocket fire, targeted
assassinations and military strikes must cease, as
must provocations, threats and acts of incitement. The
policy of brinksmanship employed by the parties is
irresponsible and dangerous. Any major incident risks
unleashing a spiral of violence and provoking a deadly
conflict.

At its high-level meeting on 22 September 2011 on
the prevention of armed conflict (see S/PV.6621), the
Council resolved to strengthen efforts in this regard. It
is now high time for action. While we applaud Egypt's
efforts to restore calm, the Council has the Charter
responsibility and the tools to act to stabilize the
situation, protect civilians, prevent the eruption of new
hostilities, and fully implement resolution 1860 (2009)
before it is too late.

Over the past few years, the Palestinian Authority
has built strong institutions, reformed its finances and
restored law and order. It is a major force of stability and
security in the area. However, those accomplishments
are starting to unravel owing to a financial crisis that is
triggering social unrest among the Palestinian people.
The donors' meeting ofthe Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
for the Coordination of the International Assistance
to Palestinians did not result in significant new aid
inflows. Our Committee strongly urges donors to step
up efforts to provide the assistance so urgently needed,
without politicizing the issue.

The Committee is aware that donor-driven
development is unsustainable in the long run.
Palestinians need a healthy economy to underpin a
viable State. At its meeting in August, our Committee
heard a briefing by the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and the Norwegian Refugee Council on the devastating
humanitarian toll of Israeli restrictions and settler
violence on Palestinians in Area C, which is under full
Israeli control. Let me recall that Area C covers some
60 per cent of the West Bank.

The Area is also strategic for a viable Palestinian
economy. Our Committee calls for a speedy transfer
of additional portions of the West Bank to Palestinian
control, a process that began under Oslo that was frozen
after 2000 and never restarted.
Our Committee is concerned by the assessment
contained in the latest report of the Secretary-
General (S/2012/701) that the two-State solution must
be urgently implemented to avoid the fait accompli
of a one-State reality. In that regard, our Committee
feels that an upgrade of the United Nations status of
Palestine can open up new opportunities to revitalize
the political process, rescuing the two-State solution,
before it is too late. At the same time, we reiterate our
principled position that settlements are illegal and an
obstacle to peace.

At its meeting on 8 October, our Committee heard a
briefing by members of the jury of the Russell Tribunal
on Palestine, a civil society initiative thatjust concluded
its fourth session in New York. We were struck by the
assessment of eminent jurists that the United Nations
failure to take action commensurate with the duration
and severity of Israeli violations testifies to a failure of
the international community. Our Committee takes its
responsibilities extremely seriously. We will continue
to promote accountability and will continue to make
a constructive contribution to our shared goal of two
States living in peace and security. We encourage the
Council to do the same.

