Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting to wrap up
a very busy month of November during Australia's
second and last presidency of the Security Council.

Looking ahead to the draft programme of work
for December, the year 2014 will be a good one for the
transparency of the Security Council, with 9 wrap-up
sessions in 12 months, including 5 under the format of
a public briefing. We hope that in the coming months
the Council's Presidents will also mobilize the United
Nations membership, including through the original
groupings, to ensure better attendance by non-Council
members. Indeed, wrap-up sessions are organized
first and foremost for the United Nations general
membership, which mandated the Council to maintain
international peace and security. We therefore believe
that their participation in these meetings should be
enhanced. Wrap-up sessions are a unique opportunity
for Member States to receive first-hand information on
the activities of the Council, including an assessment of
its work, progress and effectiveness.

Rwanda congratulates you, Mr. President, for the
excellent manner in which you conducted the business
of the Security Council for the month of November.
We particularly appreciated the attention that The
Honorable Julie Bishop, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Australia, paid to the work of the Council by presiding
over three important meetings - on counter-terrorism
(see S/PV.7316), United Nations policing (see S/PV.7317)
and the Ebola virus disease (see S/PV.7318). We extend
our appreciation to Ambassador Philippa King, Deputy
Permanent Representative, to Michael Bliss, Political
Coordinator, and to the whole Australian team for its
excellent job in making this presidency a success. I
also take this opportunity to congratulate Ambassador
Mahamat Zene Cherif of Chad on assuming the
presidency of the Council for the month of December,
the last month during Rwanda's present term. I am
convinced that with his extensive diplomatic experience
and demonstrated commitment to peace and security,
especially on the African continent, Ambassador Cherif
will enable the Council to make substantive progress on
the main items on its agenda.

November was one of the Security Council's busiest
and most productive months this year. I will begin by
mentioning the first-ever briefings on United Nations
policing (see S/PV.7317) and on UnitedNations sanctions
(see S/PV.7323). In its meeting on policing, the Council
adopted resolution 2185 (2014), which highlights the
critical role of United Nations policing in peacekeeping
missions and special political missions. In the sanctions
meeeting, the Australian presidency proposed an
important draft resolution on United Nations sanctions,
which we hope will be adopted by consensus in the days
to come. The Australian presidency also convened an
open debate on counter-terrorism (see S/PV.7316) and
a briefing on the Ebola virus disease (see S/PV.7318).
At those meetings, it adopted presidential statements
S/PRST/2014/23 and S/PRST/2014/24, which express
the Council's continued commitment to fight two of
the current threats to international peace and security.
November was also the month of the election of five
judges of the International Court of Justice, which was
a New York marathon in itself. The month also included
the twelfth annual workshop for newly elected members
of the Security Council, also known as the Finnish
workshop, and the presentation of the 2013-2014 annual
report of the Council to the General Assembly (A/69/2).

Furthermore, the Council continued to closely
follow country-specific situations on its agenda and
to discuss conflicts in Africa, the Middle East and
Eastern Europe. However, while the Security Council
usually garners consensus on African conflicts, the
Council's unity was once again put to the test with
respect to conflicts in the Middle East, in particular
in Syria and between Israel and Palestine, as well as
in Eastern Europe, mainly Ukraine and, to a lesser
extent, Bosnia and Herzegovina. Resolution 2183
(2014), which extends the mandate of the European
Union-led peacekeeping force Operation Althea, was
adopted without consensus for the first time. We call
on all members, particularly the permanent members,
to enhance consultations and deepen dialogue with a
view to finding common ground for the common good.

With respect to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, I will only recall without comment presidential
statement S/PRST/2014/22, of 5 November, through
which the Security Council expresses its deep concern
over the lack of progress in the voluntary disarmament
process of the so-called Democratic Forces for the
Liberation of Rwanda (FDLR) and stresses again that
there should be no further delay beyond the 2 January
2015 end date set by the region for the voluntary
disarmament process.

The Security Council went on to call on the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Government
of that country to immediately update operational plans
for military action against the FDLR commencing
no later than January and to immediately undertake
military action against those leaders and members of
the FDLR who do not engage in the demobilization
process and who continue to carry out human rights
abuses. Here the Council has a clear blueprint, and
there should be no further excuse or reason for failure.

In conclusion, I would like to commend Australia
for carrying out a successful mandate in the Security
Council over the past two years, in which it has made
the best use of its presidencies in September 2013 and
November 2014. It has enabled the Council to explore
new territory, such as United Nations policing and
United Nations sanctions, and to revive consideration
of critical issues such as small arms and light weapons.
In that regard, Mr. President, you introduced our first-
ever resolutions on those three topics - small arms
and light weapons, policing and sanctions - of which
the first two have been adopted by the Council as
resolutions 2117 (2013) and 2185 (2014), and the third
will hopefully be adopted early next month.

Considering your decisive leadership, together
with that of Jordan and Luxembourg, in the unanimous
adoptions of resolutions 2139 (2014) and 2165 (2014),
on the humanitarian situation in Syria; your effective
chairing of critical sanctions committees, such as the
Committee established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities, and the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), on Iran;
not to mention your able penholdership on Afghanistan,
I think that Australia can be proud of its legacy in the
Council for the period 2013-2014.

