Mr. Ouane (Mali) (spoke in French): I should
like first of all to thank you, Mr. President, for having
convened this public meeting to consider the report of
the Panel of Experts on the Illegal Exploitation of
Natural Resources and Other Forms of Wealth of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

I note the presence at this important meeting of
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Minister of State for
Foreign Affairs and Regional Cooperation of Uganda,
the Special Envoy of the President of the Rwandese
Republic and the Minister of Finance of Burundi. I
should also like to express my delegation's gratitude to
Ms. Safiatou Ba-N'Daw, Chairperson of the Panel of
Experts, and, through her, to all the members of the
Panel for the important work that they have carried out.

The report before us deals with a matter of
concern to this Council: the link between the illegal
exploitation of a country's natural resources and the
continuation of the conflict that is affecting it. In this
regard, I should like first of all to restate Mali's
position of principle, which resolutely rejects any
illegal exploitation of the natural resources and other
forms of wealth of a sovereign and independent State.

In this regard, my delegation believes that the
Security Council should thoroughly examine the
information and recommendations contained in the
report with a view to putting an end to the plundering
of the natural resources and other forms of wealth of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Such
plundering is fuelling the continuation of the conflict,
causing unspeakable suffering to the Congolese people
and destabilizing the whole region.

The message of this report is clear: measures
must be taken to end the plundering of the natural
resources and other forms of wealth of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. From this standpoint, the
international community and the Security Council must
take steps to promote the peace process, which has
recently taken a positive turn with the launching of
phase II of the deployment of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC). As the Secretary-General
emphasized in his seventh report (S/2001/373) on
MONUC, everything must now be done to promote the
successful transition to phase III.

In this context, we believe that the discussions
begun today should be continued, in particular during t
the Security Council's mission to the Great Lakes
region. It is essential to maintain the impetus of the
Lusaka process, while respecting the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo as well as that of other countries in the
region, thus contributing to the return of lasting peace
and stability in the Great Lakes region.

Mali looks forward with interest to the final
report of the Panel of Experts; we will then state our
views on the recommendations contained therein. That
is why we support the request for an extension for a
further three months of the mandate of the Panel of
Experts.

In conclusion, I should like to join in condemning
the murder, in the Bunia area, of six staff members of
the International Committee of the Red Cross and to
express our condolences to their families.

