Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Vladimir Voronkov
for his briefing on the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2018/80) on the threat posed by Da'esh to
international peace and security. Allow me to share a
few thoughts.

As a result of coordinated combat operations, the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) has lost
a significant part of the territory it once controlled.
Although international coalition efforts have decreased
ISIL's revenue, terrorist groups such as ISIL and its
affiliates operating around the globe remain capable of
conducting terrorist attacks. We look forward to this
year's Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy review. We
firmly believe that capacity-building and countering
and preventing violent extremism should be given the
highest priority.

Let me express my appreciation for the input of
the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring
Team and the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate. Their efforts to provide strategic level-
reports that reflect the gravity of the threat are
important. We welcome the fact that the recent report
of the Monitoring Team emphasized threat assessment,
information-sharing and the strengthening of cross-
border monitoring of the movement of individuals. We
reiterate the importance of strengthening wide-scale
cooperation between the United Nations and the
regional bodies of the Financial Action Task Force,
bearing in mind the growing threat of new terrorist-
financing technologies that make possible the
anonymous acquisition of funds. We are fully aware
that advances in technology mean that funds-gathering
and recruitment by terrorists is a more complex
challenge facing the international community. ISIL
members and sympathizers can still use social media,
including encryption technology and communication
tools in the Dark Web, to communicate, coordinate and
facilitate attacks.
We cannot forget about the traditional methods
of terrorism financing - which remain simple and
effective and are popular among returning foreign
terrorist fighters - such as the robberies that took place
in Mosul and Al-Arish. Developing hypothetical trends
with regard to terrorist financing and possible terrorist
attacks should be a priority for Member States. We can
today address only preventive measures when we face
specific actions undertaken by terrorists. However, it
seems that we are not adequately prepared to swiftly
respond to the creativity of terrorists, whose methods
continue to change. It is therefore critical to understand
methods and trends in order to predict the potential
financial trajectory and activities of terrorists.

Terrorism is a cross-border phenomenon. Therefore,
the further strengthening of cooperation among the
United Nations, regional and subregional organizations
and States remains key for its effective eradication,
in particular when addressing accountability. As a
member ofthe international coalition, Poland is ready to
cooperate closely with the United Nations in that area.

