Mr. Spatafora (Italy): I think the timeliness of
this debate is reflected in the food for thought it is
generating. At the outset, I would like to express deep
appreciation and support for what Ambassador Gaspar
Martins, Chairman of the Organizational Committee of
the Peacebuilding Commission, said earlier in this
meeting, and to draw the attention of Council members
to it. Let me quote him briefly. He said, "Let us all
agree that our theoretical differences in New York are
meaningless to those who are directly suffering from
the consequences of conflict on the ground. What
matters for them are concrete actions ..." (Supra). I
think that this is a benchmark that must remain clear in
our minds. What we do has an effect on the ground.
In general terms, I think we have to express the
strongest support for the Chairman of the
Organizational Committee. If he does not feel that he
has the House behind him, he will not be able to be
effective. As our colleague the representative of Sierra
Leone has said, we will need creativity, flexibility and
adaptability. When it comes to the Commission, it will
be mainly the responsibility of the Chair to inspire
flexibility and creativity. But he will not be able to be
creative if he does not feel that the House is behind
him. That was the first point I wanted to make.

Secondly, I fully endorse the statement that my
colleague, the representative of Germany, will deliver
later on behalf of the European Union. I want to stress
the importance of the points that he will make. Because
of time constraints I will not repeat his words, except
to quote briefly from what he will say, according to his
advance text:

"If the Commission is to add value to
peacebuilding efforts worldwide...it will have to
be ambitious. It will have to be more than the
tools we already have: more than a mere
coordination mechanism and more than a donors
conference. Promoting the development of a
viable peacebuilding strategy is where the
Peacebuilding Commission can really create
added value."

Here, we should bear in mind what Assistant Secretary-
General McAskie said on this matter.

I will now limit myself to a few additional
remarks. I think that, in shaping and implementing our
strategies, we will need, first, to focus strongly on
institution-building, as mentioned in operative
paragraph 2 (b) of Council resolution 1645 (2005) and
General Assembly resolution 60/180, in line with the
inspiration of the Peacebuilding Commission: to
strengthen the sovereignty of post-conflict States by
increasing the effectiveness and credibility of national
policies and institutions, with particular reference to
the rule of law. As my Belgian colleague said, this will
increase the attractiveness of such States to private
foreign investors.

Secondly, we will need to include a clear
sequencing of actions and clear indications to all
stakeholders, including donors, of what needs to be
done.

Thirdly, the strategy should be based on a broad
sense of ownership. National responsibility should be
at the centre of the peacebuilding process. Institutional
donors and relevant regional organizations should be
fully on board, through regular consultations both in
New York and at the country level. I hope involvement,
like that we have seen today, by the World Bank and
the International Monetary Fund (IMF) will be
structured and will continue in the future.

Fourthly, the involvement of civil society,
including the national and international private sectors,
should be deepened and widened. I will not elaborate
further here.

Finally, the Peacebuilding Commission should
also elaborate a system of benchmarks to monitor
progress in implementation. We need monitoring, but
monitoring is not just making reports after a certain
number of months on what has been done. We are
submerged in reports. What is needed is proactive
monitoring along the way. It should not point out who
is doing well or who is doing badly, but it should just
point out where we stand week after week and what
has to be done. We know what proactive monitoring is.
This is an aspect that has to be injected into the work
of the Peacebuilding Commission and into that of the
parent bodies of the Commission: the General
Assembly and the Security Council.

Of course, we should start developing objective
criteria for phasing out the involvement of the
Peacebuilding Commission in countries that are under
consideration and that are successful. We should also
start thinking - as we are, in fact, doing - about
possible new entries on the Commission's agenda.

On a final note, we believe that the Security
Council should work together with the Peacebuilding
Commission with a view to designing conflict-sensitive
peacekeeping and peacebuilding strategies. When I say
"work together", I mean not only having a meeting like
today's from time to time, but rather having more
interactive meetings where we can see a ways and
means process, together with the General Assembly. As
we are all aware, and as has to be clear in our minds,
the issue is not only how the Commission can assist or
advise the Council; it is also how the Council can
provide the Peacebuilding Commission with
operational input.

We, therefore, believe that the Security Council
should, for example, request the advice of the
Commission when renewing the mandates of existing
peacekeeping missions or when establishing new ones,
with a view to developing integrated mission planning
processes. The renewal of the peacekeeping mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, for example,
could present the first opportunity for an early
peacebuilding planning process. Then, it would act on

the advice of the Commission by supporting the crucial
functions of the United Nations Integrated Office in
Sierra Leone and the United Nations Operation in
Burundi on the ground, with a clear mandate and ad
hoc expertise. In particular, the role of the United
Nations Integrated Offices in facilitating coordination
and consultation among all stakeholders, including
donors, should be strengthened, as has been mentioned
by some of my colleagues.

Finally, the promptness of the Commission's
responses to Security Council requests for advice
should be promoted. We need timely advice. The
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the
Department of Political Affairs and the Peacebuilding
Support Office should pool their resources and
coordinate their efforts in support of the
Commission - and I am very grateful to Assistant
Secretary-General McAskie for her earlier statement in
that regard - in order to ensure smooth and efficient
interaction between the two bodies and, of course,
between the Peacebuilding Commission and the
General Assembly.

