Mr. Sharma (India): Thank you, Mr. President, for
calling this open meeting on the crisis in Sierra Leone.

The United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL) was set up on the assumption that all parties
to the conflict in Sierra Leone had at last decided to
resolve their differences peacefully through the Lome
Peace Agreement, which they had all freely accepted.
UNAMSIL was despatched to help implement the
Agreement through its impartial and reassuring presence
and by taking charge of the process of voluntary
demobilization and disarmament, which was absolutely
essential to pave the way for a lasting peace.

It now appears from recent events that the leadership
of the Revolutionary United Front (RUF) had no
intentions of honouring their commitments under the
Agreement. The tensions, which, from the actions of their
cadres, started to build up from late last month, have now
erupted into a full-scale crisis, whose immediate brunt is

 
being borne by the people of Sierra Leone and
UNAMSIL's peacekeepers, but which will have far wider
repercussions.

The leaders of the region have individually and
collectively denounced these actions of the RUF and of
their leader, Mr. Foday Sankoh. Unfortunately, that has had
no visible effect so far. There are unconfirmed reports that
Mr. Sankoh may have received sanctuary. If so, we trust
that those to whom he is beholden, or who have influence
upon him, will also persuade him to call off immediately
the military action that he has started, to release the
UNAMSIL personnel he has taken hostage and to commit
himself again to the Lome Agreement. We expect the
Security Council to pronounce itself forcefully on this
matter, making it clear to the leadership of the RUF that the
international community is united in its condemnation of
their actions.

What then? There are two options that seem to be the
obvious ones, which have been spoken about in the
corridors and mooted in the media, but which we would
strongly advise against. The first is to wind down and
withdraw. UNAMSIL was sent to Sierra Leone to keep a
peace that has unravelled, and it could be argued that if the
people of Sierra Leone do not want peace, the United
Nations can hardly impose it upon them. That, of course,
would be terribly unfair to the people of Sierra Leone, who
are the victims of this violence, not its cause. In Rwanda in
1994, in a comparable crisis, when peacekeepers came
under threat, the United Nations decided to abandon the
operation, with consequences that no one would wish to see
repeated.

Certainly, even though India has troops on the ground,
we have no intention of pulling out, and we very strongly
urge the Council not to consider this as an option. We are
in fact sending a second battalion urgently, together with
other reinforcements, to bolster UNAMSIL's strength.

The second option, which might seem logical if the
first is rejected, is to change UNAMSIL's mandate
immediately into peace enforcement, under a Chapter VII
operation. However, we would like the Council to bear in
mind that UNAMSIL presently does not have the troops,
the equipment or the logistics needed to mount a peace-
enforcement operation. Giving UNAMSIL a mandate it
cannot implement will not help it; it might even compound
its difficulties in two ways. On the ground, if the RUF goes
on an all-out offensive in retaliation, UNAMSIL, and
particularly the hostages, might suffer heavy and needless
casualties. Politically, critics of the United Nations will
argue that even with a Chapter VII mandate the United
Nations has been able to do nothing.
Therefore, we would say that the question of a
change in UNAMSIL's mandate is one that the Council
may wish to keep under review, in the light of
developments. In this event, we expect that troop
contributors will be associated in the Council's decision-
making process, in the spirit of Article 44 of the Charter.

There are some who believe that the United Nations
cannot do what needs to be done now in Sierra Leone and
that force should be deployed and used by others, with
the blessings of the Security Council. As long as
UNAMSIL is in place, we cannot warn too strongly
against this. Somalia showed us the dangers inherent in
forces outside United Nations command taking military
action in a theatre where peacekeepers are deployed. Both
the backlash and the blame for failure fall on the United
Nations and its Blue Helmets.

In the current crisis, it is essential to preserve the
unity of command of UNAMSIL, and it must function as
a cohesive force. Undermining the leadership of
UNAMSIL is fraught with dangerous consequences for
the Mission as a whole and of the troops under its
command.

In our opinion, UNAMSIL needs to consolidate. In
present circumstances, it clearly cannot implement many
of the tasks given to it. Little in the way of humanitarian
assistance is being provided; the providers have left. Nor
can UNAMSIL keep thoroughfares open when it is itself
under siege. It is spread out all over the country, showing
the United Nations flag, but this also means that its
soldiers are dispersed in penny packets, trying to do a job
that presently cannot be done.

With the professional and well-equipped
reinforcements that are coming in, UNAMSIL must
concentrate on measures that would make it impossible
for power, or the institutions of government in Freetown,
to be seized by force. It already has a Chapter VII
mandate to provide security at key locations and
Government buildings and to use force in self-defence.
The rules of engagement are clear. If all units in
UNAMSIL act with discipline and courage in accordance
with the mandate that they already have, they will be able
to serve the United Nations and the people of Sierra
Leone well.

 

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate, that, as we have
always done in other difficult peacekeeping operations in
which we have participated, India will stay the course. I
will share with members of the Council the fact that this
decision has not been easy to take. It is not an easy matter
to answer the question why the lives of Indian soldiers
should be put at risk in an operation that currently has
some serious weaknesses and imponderables. To the
question, what interests are we defending in Sierra Leone,
we have said that we are there, and must stay there, for two
reasons. First, because to leave now would be to abandon
the people of Sierra Leone to a terrible fate, and secondly,
because the credibility of the United Nations is at stake. We
believe those are also the two considerations uppermost on
the Council's mind.

