I would like to warmly welcome Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC), and thank her for her valuable briefing to the Security Council. Let me first reiterate Belgium's unwavering support for the International Criminal Court as an independent and impartial judicial institution. We express our deep concern over recent threats made against Court officials and their families. The ICC and its staff can count on my country to continue to uphold and defend the principles and values enshrined in the Rome Statute and to preserve its integrity. The continued escalation of violence in Libya resulting in multiple incidents and attacks against the civilian population and infrastructure with total impunity demonstrates why the ICC is needed more than ever to ensure accountability for the most serious crimes of international concern. Justice must be brought to the victims and is necessary also to prevent future violations of international humanitarian law. Reports of such attacks are numerous and continue to be published frequently, including reports of attacks against civilian homes, schools and hospitals in Tripoli. Those attacks may constitute war crimes under the Rome Statute and should therefore be investigated and prosecuted thoroughly by national jurisdictions or the International Criminal Court. In that regard, Belgium welcomes the Office of the Prosecutor's significant progress in the ongoing investigations, including with respect to current hostilities, and takes note that preparations are also moving ahead for possible new applications for arrest warrants. We very much appreciate the close attention given by the Prosecutor to certain crimes, such as the propagation of hate speech, because of the significant impact it can have on the ground in an ongoing armed conflict, and serious alleged crimes against the most vulnerable categories of victims, including children, migrants and refugees. Despite those efforts by the International Criminal Court, we all know that the Court cannot be effective without the cooperation of all stakeholders. That is why the Security Council decided in paragraph 5 of resolution 1970 (2011) to urge "all States and concerned regional and other international organizations to cooperate fully with the Court and the Prosecutor". Yet, the lack of sufficient cooperation is obvious. We are pleased with the continued engagement of the competent authorities of Libya, the Government of National Accord and some States and organizations. However, we are deeply concerned over the information in the report that other relevant parties still fail to cooperate significantly with the Office of the Prosecutor. That is true especially of the execution of arrest warrants for Court fugitives by Egypt and General Haftar's Libyan National Army, but also of any request for assistance made by the Prosecutor. Accordingly, my delegation once again urges all the competent authorities to facilitate the immediate arrest of the three suspects and to surrender them to the Court. We also ask the Security Council to closely follow up on this and to take any appropriate measure in that respect. Belgium still believes that the only long-term solution for Libya is political. In that context, justice for the victims and their loved ones will most certainly be an essential element, and the Council cannot remain silent in the face of persistent impunity in relation to the most serious crimes that continue to be perpetrated in Libya.
