Let me first congratulate the Niger on its assumption of the presidency of the Security Council during this historic month in the long journey of the United Nations. We applaud you, Mr. President, for having convened today's timely debate. We thank all the briefers. Climate change is the single greatest threat facing humankind today. Climate- induced disasters such as flash floods, cyclones, strong winds, heavy rains, persistent drought and locust infestation are upending the lives of millions around the world. Our collective aspirations for peace and development are facing severe tests from climate-induced stresses. Indeed, wecannotdisentangle climate change from socioeconomic development. Population growth, migration, expansion of agriculture and industrialization often lead to the overexploitation of natural resources, environmental degradation and loss of ecosystems. As we all know, competition over increasingly scarce resources heightens communal tensions, resulting in conflict and increasing humanitarian needs. Millions of people, including in my own country, already rely on annual emergency humanitarian aid. Even before the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic hit, the trend had been projected to worsen in the coming decades. We believe that reversing that trend and tackling the multidimensional impacts of climate change requires concerted global actions and a genuine commitment to multilateralism. It is clear that climate change exacerbates new and existing challenges. Its adverse effects transcend national borders. The transboundary nature of climate change and environmental degradation should therefore compel us to pursue robust cooperation at all levels on mitigation and adaptation as well as natural-resource utilization and management strategies. The health and future of our environment depends on the collective and coordinated efforts of Member States and international, regional and subregional organizations. Poor people, especially in the least developed countries, contribute little to the problem, but they are bearing the brunt of climate-change-induced disasters. To mitigate such catastrophes, developing countries need capacity- building support on risk assessment and to develop early-warning systems and build local resilience to a changing climate and environment. Regional efforts to combat desertification and drought such as the African Union-led Great Green Wall initiative, which strives to grow trees and other vegetation across the Sahel, and from Dakar to Djibouti must be encouraged and supported. The Security Council should explore mechanisms to help the most vulnerable countries and regions, including through efforts to mainstream the impacts of environmental degradation across the peacebuilding architecture. In the Sahel, the Lake Chad region and countries in the Horn of Africa region, the destabilizing effects of climate change have slowed progress towards peace and prosperity. It is important that the international community recognize the fact that environmental change, life- threatening economic problems and lack of social cohesion have enabled terrorist groups such as Boko Haram and Al-Shabaab to exploit the genuine grievances and development needs of local communities. To tackle those challenges, United Nations peacebuilding, prevention and peacekeeping efforts should incorporate programmes such as quick-impact projects into their respective prioritization and mandates to support local efforts aimed at reducing vulnerability to climate change and factors that contribute to environmental degradation. Nothing drives home this point more than the fact that eight of the 10 largest peace operations are deployed in countries with high exposure to climate change. Climate change has to be a big part of all our policy interventions at the national, regional and international levels. We in Ethiopia are taking practical steps to combat ecological factors that degrade the environment, including desertification, lack or loss of water, soil erosion and the illegal exploitation of natural resources. In that regard, the Green Legacy Initiative, launched in 2018, is not just a conservation or afforestation program. It is part of our 10-year national development plan, which envisions a green and climate-resilient economy. The plan promotes climate-resilient agriculture to prevent ecosystem deterioration, including the enhanced recovery of small springs and wetlands. This is a national imperative for us. We strongly believe that our ability to end hunger and poverty; ensure access to sanitation and sustainable energy; and guarantee decent work for the youth and women all depend on the actions that we take today. We must raise public awareness about the dangers of environmental change and make our citizens part of the solution. That is why we mobilized Ethiopians from all walks of life in the context of the Green Legacy Initiative, planting 5 billion tree seedlings this year alone, even despite the COVID-19 pandemic. This has now become an annual tradition, and we are seeing an encouraging shift in attitudes towards the environment and conservation. Our target is 20 billion seedlings by 2024. Our endeavour to overcome the multifaceted climate-related challenges in the Intergovernmental Authority on Development and Horn of Africa region deserves attention and robust support from partners. Flooding in Ethiopia, the Sudan, South Sudan, Somalia and Kenya have displaced tens of thousands of already vulnerable people. The massive locust infestation across the region has also left already food-insecure communities in dire straits. The loss of stocks in those displaced communities needs strong restocking intervention in order to prevent resource- induced conflicts and uncontrolled migration. In conclusion, to build back better after this pandemic, all Member States must redouble multilateral efforts to achieve our commitments under the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the African Union's Agenda 2063 and the Paris Agreement on Climate Change, as well as the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction. We are glad that the Security Council has, in recent years, given due attention to that issue. This is an area where we believe that the United Nations system as a whole should continue to deepen cooperation and partnership with a view to providing meaningful capacity-building support to national and regional efforts. Ethiopia remains fully committed to doing its part in accelerating the implementation of our international and regional commitments relating to the effects of climate change and environmental degradation.
