Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I have the honour to present the report of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006), in accordance with paragraph 18 (h) ofthe same
resolution. The present report covers the period from
18 December 2014 to 23 March 2015, during which
time the Committee held one informal meeting, on
4 February, and conducted additional work using the
no-objection procedure envisioned by paragraph 15 of
the guidelines for the conduct of its work.

In view of the recent developments relating to the
Joint Plan of Action, the Committee welcomes the
commitment of all parties to pursuing negotiations
towards a comprehensive agreement.

I would like to emphasize that the measures
imposed by the Security Council through resolutions
1737 (2006), 1747 (2007), 1803 (2008) and 1929 (2010)
remain in full effect as negotiations between the P5+l
and the Islamic Republic of Iran continue, and that
Member States remain obliged to duly implement
them. The Committee remains fully committed to the
implementation of all relevant resolutions and stands
ready to provide guidance to Member States that
request assistance.

In that respect, while no new incidents have been
reported to the Committee during the current reporting
period, I would recall that the Committee reached out
to the Islamic Republic of Iran for comment on several
occasions in relation to incidents investigated by the
Panel of Experts. The Islamic Republic of Iran has not
yet provided a response and the Committee continues
to call on Iran to do so.
The Committee continues to assist States and
international organizations in implementing the
relevant Security Council measures and has finalized
its deliberations on a number of such requests. This
includes considering requests for guidance covering
a range of issues, including whether proposals for
technical assistance to the Islamic Republic of Iran in
the fields of energy efficiency, refuelling services for
aircrafts, and mine action, as well as other cooperation
proposals, are permitted by the sanctions measures. The
Committee welcomes such collaboration on matters of
implementation and compliance, and encourages parties
to continue to seek guidance from the Committee on
the application of the Council's measures.

The Committee also received two notifications
from Member States in accordance with the relevant
resolutions. Paragraph 15 of resolution 1737 (2006)
and paragraph 4 of resolution 1747 (2007) allow
for payments owed by a designated entity under a
contract entered into force prior to its designation to
be made from that entity's frozen funds, subject to
prior notification to the Committee. The Committee
received such a notification from a Member State in
accordance with paragraph 15 of resolution 1737 (2006)
and paragraph 4 of resolution 1747 (2007). Similarly, a
Member State notified the Committee of its delivery of
equipment intended for use in a light-water reactor to
the Bushehr nuclear power plant, in accordance with
paragraph 5 of resolution 1737 (2006).

In view of actions taken by Member States to
implement the relevant Security Council measures,
the Committee encourages States that have not yet
submitted reports to do so as soon as possible in
recognition that national implementation reports are an
important means of promoting the implementation of
the sanctions measures.

In connection with the Panel of Experts, I am
pleased to report that the Committee concluded its
consideration of the recommendations contained in the
2014 final report of the Panel of Experts (S/2014/394)
on 31 December 2014, in particular in view of any
follow-up action by the Committee. The Committee
took note of the recommendations and finalized its
deliberations on additional information regarding
designated individuals, in particular bio-identifiers,
in the Committee's sanctions list. All updates have
been made available on the Committee website. The
Committee decided that, In the event ofa comprehensive
solution to the Iranian nuclear issue, it would revert at
the appropriate time to the Panel's recommendation
to provide specific guidance to Member States on
possible implications for the relevant Security Council
measures, once an outcome was known.

The Committee received an informal briefing
of the Panel's investigative and outreach activities
during its informal consultations on 4 February. As
to the activities undertaken by the Panel over the past
three months, I note that the Panel has participated in
a number of events that are listed in the annex to the
report, which has been distributed in the Chamber.

Finally, while recalling that the primary
responsibility for implementing the provisions of
resolutions 1737 (2006), 1747 (2007), 1803 (2008) and
1929 (2010) rests with Member States, the Committee
stands ready to facilitate the implementation of these
measures.

