Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We condemn the
dastardly attacks on the United Nations compound in
Mogadishu and convey our deepest condolences to the
families of the victims in the Somali Government.

We thank you for convening this open debate, Sir,
and particularly for your concept paper (S/2013/334, annex), which clearly highlights the correlation
between conflict and natural resources and outlines a
practical strategy for mitigating the potential risks. We
agree with the Council that effective and transparent
management of a country's natural resources can be
critical to preventing conflict. Natural resources, such
as oil, gas, minerals and timber, are nature's bounty.
In many countries the proceeds of extractive industries
have brought economic prosperity and development. But
in many other countries, regrettably, natural resources
have become detrimental to economic development.
In some instances, national and international elites
exploit natural resources, and Government officials
and mining corporate executives collude to siphon off
exorbitant profits that rightfully belong to the people.

It is true that extractive resources are not the only
cause of conflict. Poverty, ethnic and religious strife
and bad governance often exacerbate the tensions
created by the mismanagement of natural resources.
High dependency on extractive industries, combined
with unsettled disputes, lead to competition and conflict
over resources. Greater transparency enables citizens
to hold Governments and corporations to account and
ensure that the proceeds from extractive industries are
used for the public good.

Historically, almost all countries have experienced
conflicts triggered by natural resources, but today
many resource-rich countries in Africa are convulsed
by warfare. The Council's presidential statement on
conflict in Africa adopted in April (S/PRST/2013/4)
expressed concern at the role played by the illegal
exploitation of natural resources in fuelling some past
and current conflicts. In that regard, nature's bounty
has become a cause of suffering in several countries.
Elites profit from their land and fight for the spoils, but
the people remain poor. The conflicts in Sierra Leone,
Liberia and Cote d'lvoire, initially triggered by long-
standing grievances, were aggravated and prolonged by
illegal exploitation of natural resources. Experts point
out that Cote d'Ivoire, Liberia and the Democratic
Republic of Congo suffer from their incapacity to
effectively manage their immense natural wealth.

Natural resources continue to be illegally exploited
to finance militant activities, which reignites conflicts.
We know that there is no panacea or shortcut for
addressing the distortions created by the illegal or
inefficient exploitation of natural resources. A coherent,
strategic approach is needed. The United Nations is a
natural partner for countries caught in conflict over
natural resources. The Security Council's embargoes
and sanctions, experts' advice and the capacity-building
exercises undertaken by United Nations peacekeeping
missions and other United Nations entities have helped
to limit the menace. Its eradication will be a lengthy
process.

In our view, a strategic approach should include the
following elements. First, the Security Council should
devote more attention to natural resources in conflict
situations. Secondly, the Council should target measures
against those responsible for violating its embargoes
and for illegally exploiting natural resources. Thirdly,
more resources should be allocated to peacekeeping
and to special political missions in order to assist
affected countries in building their institutional and
legal capacities. Fourthly, regional approaches are
essential when there is a cross-border dimension of the
illicit trade in resources. In that regard, the adoption
of the African Mining Vision by the African Union in
2009 is an important step. Reform of the Extractive
Industries Transparency Initiative and the Kimberly
Process Certification Scheme would also help. Fifthly,
mining companies should be held accountable if they
engage in illicit activities. The private sector, when
entering into natural resource contracts, should ensure
that the land ownership and other rights of local
communities are fully respected. Finally, we should
use the full potential of the Peacebuilding Commission
in assisting transitions from natural resource conflicts
and encourage such countries to work more closely with
international financial institutions to build pressures
for transparency.

