Ms. Zerrougui: I would like to start by thanking
you, Mr. President, for giving me this opportunity to
speak before the Security Council today. The Syrian
conflict, now entering its third year, has been a
catastrophe for the civilian population. Children have
suffered most and in the most heartbreaking ways. The
emergency is indeed a children's crisis. There are now
more than 3 million children inside Syria who have
been affected, of whom almost 2 million are internally
displaced. Additionally, more than 600,000 children
are refugees in the subregion.

Although we can never know the extent of the
violations against children while the conflict continues
to rage, thousands of children have been killed and
thousands more have been injured and maimed in the
ongoing fighting. Children have been killed in their
homes and in their schools; some have died trying to
reach hospitals or while hiding in shelters. The use of
cluster munitions has resulted in hundreds of children
losing hands, arms or legs. Also of concern is the fact
that children in need ofurgent medical care are often not
able to gain access to adequate medical assistance. Well
over half of Syria's health facilities are either damaged
or cannot safely be reached, and approximately 40 per
cent of hospitals are inoperative. Many children have
recounted experiences of days spent in makeshift
hospitals and travelling under extreme conditions
to reach hospitals in safe areas or in neighbouring
countries.

Since the beginning of the conflict, the education
system has been deeply impacted, with many schools
being occupied by warring parties, damaged or
destroyed. In addition, we are receiving reports of
teachers being killed, threatened and forced to flee.
Recent figures show that an estimated 2,500 schools
are damaged or destroyed, while approximately 2,000
are being used as shelters for internally displaced
persons (IDPs). In certain areas, children have not
been to school in more than 18 months. In the Aleppo
governorate, school attendance has dropped to 6 per
cent. Girls' attendance has been particularly affected
by the insecurity. Future generations of Syrians are
being denied the right to learn in peace.

As previously noted, refugee children inside Syria
are in a difficult position. Palestinian and other refugee
children have been killed or forced to flee their homes
and to live in need in IDP shelters. Only 35 per cent of
Palestinian children have access to schools today, and
many have fled to neighbouring countries out of fear
for their safety. When I visited Damascus in December
of last year, I met many Palestinian IDP children in
Yarmouk Camp who were living in dire circumstances.
Today, the security situation in Yarmouk is precarious,
and I cannot help but think about those children and the
fear and anxiety they and their families must live with
each day.

In the current conflict, with no end in sight,
children are becoming increasingly vulnerable to
recruitment and use, both direct and indirect, by all
parties to the conflict. My Office has been gathering
information about the use of children as young as
10 years of age in various ways, such as porters,
messengers and combatants, by opposition groups. My
Office also received information regarding the use of
children as human shields by Government forces. I call
on all parties to take immediate measures to halt any
association of children.

The disproportionate use of force and the fact
that combat is largely taking place in civilian areas,
without any precautionary measures and with the
use of indiscriminate weapons, are having serious
effects on the child victims of bombardment and
other violence, but also on the wider societal fabric
that protects children, their families and caregivers. I
personally witnessed the extreme levels of destruction
in civilian areas in Horns and Rif Damascus during
my recent visit. Additionally, the impact of high levels
of violence on all children in Syria is serious and will
have a long-term effect for the future of the country.
When I last visited, all ofthe children and families with
whom I spoke recounted horrific stories of death and
destruction - a cycle of violence with no end.

I am here not only to brief the Council on the terrible
impact that the conflict is having on the children of
Syria, but to implore it to do more to make all parties
take up their responsibilities to protect the children
of Syria. My colleagues have explained in detail the
ever-smaller space afforded to the United Nations and
its partners to provide life-saving assistance. But we
continue to strive to do what is necessary and what we
can in those dire circumstances. I have held discussions
with both the Government and the opposition forces
and have received commitments from both sides, but
the space to act on those commitments is shrinking. In
particular, I would like to ask the Council to remind
all parties of their responsibilities to prevent violations
against children during conflict and to issue public
commitments.

The Government should commit to take all the
necessary precautions during combat to prevent child
death and injury, avoid the use of heavy weaponry in
civilian areas and cease immediately its use of human
shields and investigate all allegations in that regard.
In addition, it must ensure the safety of all health and
education facilities in areas it controls.

The opposition forces should fulfil their
commitments to respect applicable international
humanitarian law and, in particular, engage with the
United Nations on their commitment to address the
issue of children among their ranks.

The urgent action of the Council on behalf of those
children cannot wait another day, as each day is at the
cost of countless lives.

