Mr. Queta (Guinea-Bissau) (spoke in Portuguese; English text provided by the delegation):
Allow me, Madam President, to congratulate you on
behalf of my Government on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
July. Your country, Nigeria, has always played a
decisive role in the resolution of conflicts on our
continent, in particular in the West African subregion
in the framework of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS). We are convinced that the
Security Council will review the situation in Guinea-
Bissau with particular attention under your presidency
and contribute to the search for peace and stability in
our country.

Allow me, on behalf of my Government, to thank
the Secretary-General for his report on the situation in
Guinea-Bissau (S/2010/335). We note with particular
attention the observations contained in the report.

We would like to express our gratitude to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ambassador Joseph Mutaboba, for his tireless
dedication and contribution to peace and stability in
Guinea-Bissau. His presentation illustrates the
complexity of the situation and the seriousness of the
pressing problems facing Guinea-Bissau. The current
situation clearly results from various factors that have
contributed negatively to the persistent cyclical crises,
which we regret. Such recurrent crises have placed
Guinea-Bissau on the agenda of the Security Council
for many years. Time is of the essence and we
Guineans must assume our responsibilities, turn the
page once and for all and set our country on the path to
sustainable peace and stability.

We express our gratitude to Ambassador Viotti
for her presentation of the work of the Guinea-Bissau
country-specific configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, which she has led with great dedication
and skill. We highly appreciate the efforts of the
Peacebuilding Commission, which have greatly
contributed to creating better conditions for dialogue
among Guineans aimed at restoring political stability in
my country.

My presence at this meeting of the Security
Council is a testimony to the importance my
Government accords to the Council's deliberations and
reflects its determination to work tirelessly to achieve
peace and stability in Guinea-Bissau. The challenges
are enormous and the means to tackle them scarce.
Alone, Guinea-Bissau will not be able to overcome the
current situation. We are at a crucial turning point. The
aspirations and legitimate expectations of our people
must not continue to be compromised, and we are fully
aware of that.

The progress in consolidating democracy and the
rule of law must not be permanently stalled. The recent
tragic developments in our country, in particular the
assassinations of the President of the Republic, the
Army Chief of General Staff and other high-ranking
officials have profoundly affected Guinean society and
are contrary to our cultural values of dialogue and
brotherly coexistence. As recently stated by President
of the Republic Malam Bacai Sanha at a meeting of the
defence corps, the events of 1 April are unacceptable
and must not be repeated.

The authorities of my country are of the View that
the reform of the defence and security sectors is
fundamental and must not be postponed. We are fully
conscious of the fact that Guinea-Bissau needs a
republican and modern army dedicated to the important
role of consolidating the rule of law. The recent
conference on the reform of the defence and security
sectors, held in June in Bissau, took place in an
environment of candour and cordiality and
demonstrated the resolve of the military to undertake
these reforms. I take this opportunity to thank the
members of the international community - in
particular our brothers from ECOWAS, the European
Union, Portugal and Brazil - for their tireless support
for our country in this process.

Significant steps have already been taken and we
must now persevere in the same spirit of cooperation
and determination. If these security and defence
reforms are to take place, the Government of Guinea-
Bissau must enjoy the support of the international
community in the establishment of a pension fund. In
10-45202
this regard, the convening of a high-level meeting on
security sector reform and a round table with our
development partners is essential to the future of our
country.

We reaffirm the determination of our Government
to fight resolutely against drug trafficking in our
country and the subregion, of course with the technical
and legal assistance of our partners.

In spite of the persistent crises that have shaken
our country in recent times, Guinea-Bissau should not
be considered a lost cause. We understand the
legitimate concerns and questions of the international
community, but on behalf of my country I can assure
the Council that the authorities of my country are
firmly committed to consolidating democracy and the
rule of law, fighting impunity and creating an
environment conducive to stability and the well-being
of our people. We count on the international
community's solidarity and support.

