Mr. Quinlan (Australia): Australia welcomes the
opportunity to participate in today's important debate
and thanks the United Kingdom and you,
Mr. President, for its initiative, including through the
London conference, in which Australia participated.

Many today have already spoken of a window of
opportunity in 2012, and Australia shares that guarded
optimism. But as we all know, if Somalia is to truly
turn a corner towards peace and stability, rapid,
sustained and coordinated action from all stakeholders
will be required.

Progress will first and foremost depend on the
Somali political leadership and on the Somali people
themselves. Developing governance structures that are
broad-based and representative is clearly a fundamental
first step. The Somali National Consultative
Constitutional Conferences in Garowe have made
important progress. We welcome in particular measures
to ensure women's participation in the political
process. It is vital that the process be inclusive and that
the way be left open for Somalis to lay down their arms
and join in the process. With a significant Somali
community in Australia, we welcome efforts to ensure
inclusion of the diaspora.
Expectations are clear; substantial progress must
be made before August. Further obfuscation or delay
simply cannot be tolerated. The international
community has a crucial role to play in facilitating the
process through the good offices of the United Nations
and the African Union. Special Representative Mahiga
clearly outlined the path ahead this morning, and we
thank him for his clarity. We anticipate continued
progress at the next National Consultative
Constitutional Conference to be held this month, and
welcome its proposed focus on fundamental rights.

In order to ensure the space for political progress,
effort clearly must be made to consolidate and build on
security gains, create a functioning justice system and
to uphold the rule of law. International support for the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) in that
context and for Somalia's emerging security forces is
therefore fundamental.

We welcome resolution 2036 (2012) expanding
AMISOM. and providing more sustainable, flexible and
predictable funding. We welcome the excellent
cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union, including in the development of the
new strategic concept, as well as the enhanced
cooperation with the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development. We particularly commend the
Governments of Uganda, Burundi, Djibouti and Kenya
for their contributions to AMISOM, and hope that the
Mission can quickly reach its new authorized troop
strength. Australia is pleased to have made some
practical contributions, including of information
technology, technical support and a further $2 million
last month. We will be making an additional
contribution shortly.

Piracy, like terrorism, is not only a symptom but
also a cause of Somalia's instability. Australian forces
will continue their active participation in the anti-
piracy coalition. Later in 2012, in just a few months,
we will host a counter-piracy conference in Perth, an
Indian Ocean city, which will consider ways to assist
affected countries in addressing underlying drivers and
root causes. The conference will draw on lessons
learned from counter-piracy efforts in South-East Asia
and also focus on the emerging piracy challenges in the
Gulf of Guinea.
Clearly, A vital element in the fight against piracy
is ending impunity. We welcome the initiative to

establish a regional anti-piracy prosecutions
intelligence coordination centre in Seychelles, with
which we will be cooperating closely, as well as the
commitment of Mauritius, Seychelles and Tanzania to
accepting suspected pirates for prosecution.

Addressing piracy requires a focus on both sea
and land. We all know that sustainable development in
coastal communities is critical to diminishing the lure
of piracy. We must find ways for fisheries management
to be effective, which needs to be a particular focus for
us in the Istanbul conference.

Australia has committed over $60 million to
Somalia since March 2011 as part of a broader
response of $150 million to the Horn of Africa. That
assistance is not just to meet basic needs, but is
increasingly being directed to building long-term
resilience, which is the key to the future. As the focus
shifts from humanitarian support to longer-term
development assistance, we welcome the establishment
of a local stability fund. The London conference rightly
identified Somalia's ability to manage revenues and aid
flows as vital to securing sustainable international
assistance. The joint financial management board will
quickly need to focus quickly on strengthening Somali
public financial management institutions.

In conclusion, as we were reminded by the
Permanent Representative of Somalia just a few
minutes ago, there have been many conferences on
Somalia over the past 20 years, and the consequences
of the failures of those conferences are clear. The
international community must not let the tentative
progress of recent months dissipate. We look forward
to the forthcoming Istanbul conference in June, and
especially its focus on longer-term economic prospects.
Much work remains to be done, but we really must
ensure that 2012 becomes what we all say it should
be - not just a window of opportunity, but an actual
turning point in Somalia's history. Australia remains
committed to working with all partners towards that
end.

