Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to thank the Togolese presidency for convening this
debate on piracy in the Gulf of Guinea. I would also like
to express our gratitude to Mr. Pascoe, Mr. Musah, and
Mrs. Ukonga for their briefings.

We are grateful to the Secretary-General for
dispatching a United Nations assessment mission to the
Gulf of Guinea to assess the scope of the threat of
piracy in the region, as well as for the comprehensive
report (S/2012/45) that the mission has submitted. The
findings and recommendations of the mission require
careful consideration.

Incidents of piracy and armed robbery in the Gulf
of Guinea have risen significantly in recent times,
giving the area the second most acute piracy problem
on the African continent. The increasing number of
piracy attacks, in addition to transnational organized
crime, including illicit weapons and drug trafficking,
constitutes a serious threat to the peace, security and
economic development of coastal and hinterland States
in the region.
We note political will at the highest level in the
individual States of the region and their determination

to combat the threat and cooperate to that end.
Measures and initiatives undertaken at the national and
regional levels to mobilize international attention to
this problem and to enhance maritime safety and
security in the Gulf of Guinea should be commended.

However, as the assessment mission concluded,
most countries in the Gulf of Guinea cannot alone
prevent or manage effectively the threat to maritime
security in their coastal waters. Indeed, one of the
characteristics applying to piracy proceeds from a
concept of collective responsibility to fight against this
form of criminality, which affects all States. It is
therefore important that the States and organizations of
the region be provided with substantial assistance from
the international community.

Azerbaijan stresses the importance of affirming
respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the States of the Gulf of Guinea and their neighbours.
With reference to the report of the assessment mission,
we note that many States of the region are cautious as
to the possibility of an international naval response in
the Gulf of Guinea to prevent potential pirate attacks.

The United Nations plays an important
coordinating role and should continue and intensify its
engagement and work to help the States and
organizations of the region to act and mobilize
international support, including the convening of the
joint summit of Gulf of Guinea States to develop a
regional anti-piracy strategy. We agree with the
mission's view that any viable or lasting regional
strategy may need to take into account the root causes
of the problems in the regional countries. In addition, if
any comprehensive strategy is to take effect, it is
essential that the countries of the region further
strengthen their interaction, cooperation and
coordination, as well as develop a legal framework for
the prevention and repression of piracy and armed
robbery at sea.

