Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): First, we would like to express our gratitude to Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo, Ms. Fatima Kyari Mohammed and Mr. Abdoulaye Mar Dieye for their insightful briefings. Terrorism is a global threat and the international community is united in the fight against it. Much has been done in terms of legal instruments, cooperation framework and concrete actions at all levels - national, regional and global. In addition, considerable resources have been mobilized for the fight. Yet, terrorism remains a serious threat in many corners of the world, including Africa where, for decades, people have longed for and badly needed peace and stability. For that reason, we would also like to thank the Chinese presidency for organizing today's timely and very important debate. We are deeply concerned about the growing number of attacks by Islamic State and Al-Qaida affiliates in the Sahel, especially on the borders of Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger. As stated in the most recent report of the Secretary-General, those countries suffer heavily from attacks against their Governments' security and defence forces, humanitarian actors andeven the Blue Helmets. The number of people killed by terrorists every year in those countries is estimated to have increased fivefold since 2016. In other parts of Africa, including North Africa, the Lake Chad basin and the Horn of Africa, terrorist groups, including foreign terrorist fighters, are actively operating and recruiting. Terrorism denies African countries and people their rights to peace, stability and development. With the existence and larger operation of terrorist groups, the presence of State authorities will continue to face serious limitations, making the fight even harder Against that backdrop, my delegation would like to stress the following points. First, it is vital to address the root causes of terrorism and the drivers of violent extremism conducive to terrorism. Without that, terrorism will persist and have a fertile breeding ground. We therefore support the holistic approach to preventing terrorism by strengthening governance, settling unresolved conflicts, addressing exclusion, poverty and inequality, enhancing sustainable socioeconomic development and so on. Secondly, to fight the spread of terrorism and violent extremism, we need to step up our efforts to reject their ideologies, narratives, hatred, division and violent incitement, while promoting a culture of peace and tolerance. The roles of world leaders, eminent persons, the media, community leaders and so on in that regard cannot be overemphasized. Thirdly, terrorism cannot survive without finance. It is therefore of the utmost importance to tear down terrorist financing networks and further strengthen our legal and institutional capacity to effectively prevent, detect, stop and punish illegal acts. We urge all parties to fully implement resolution 2462 (2019) on combating terrorism financing, as well as other relevant documents. Fourthly, we must effectively implement international instruments and Security Council resolutions on combating terrorism. At the same time, we need to strengthen international cooperation, assistance and solidarity for affected countries, especially in terms of capacity-building and providing resources. Cooperation among countries of the region is vital, particularly in terms of a coordinated response, strengthening data, intelligence and experience-sharing, border security and management, and cross-border coordination. We commend the regional and subregional efforts of the African Union (AU) in that regard, including the Organization of African Unity Convention on the Prevention and Combating of Terrorism and the AU Plan of Action on the Prevention and Combating of Terrorism in Africa, the establishment of the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel and the Multinational Joint Task Force in the Lake Chad basin, and the Silencing the Guns in Africa by 2020 initiative. In conclusion, we would like to reaffirm our strong condemnation of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. We would also like to reiterate our solidarity and readiness to cooperate with and support our African brothers and sisters in their fight against terrorism for peace, stability and development for all.
