Ms. Rodriguez Pineda (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome this timely debate, held as
we mark the seventieth anniversary of the United
Nations and aimed at promoting efforts to achieve an
accountable, more transparent and effective Security
Council, adapted to the world of today. We would also
like to thank the briefers for their presentations, all
of which help to give us an up-to-date picture of their
work and of the interaction between the various organs
of the United Nations.

Today I would like to discuss three issues of
particular relevance to the working methods of the
Security Council.

First, the use of the veto by those who have that right
has frequently prevented this body from complying
fully with its responsibilities under the Charter of the
United Nations. It does not foster unity or encourage
us to seek a common understanding, and far from
helping to defend the collective interest, it obstructs
and undermines it.

We also believe firmly that we must take specific
action if we are to enable the Security Council to
prevent and stop mass atrocities. As a first step, we
could limit the use of the veto in cases of atrocities,
and we therefore support France and Mexico's proposal
for restraint in its use, and for a code of conduct for
Security Council actions against genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes. However, we must
not stop there. We should keep in mind that the area in
which the Security Council has had the greatest failure
has been in implementing and genuinely following up
on its own decisions. It is in everyone's interest to ensure
that those decisions are complied with effectively.

Secondly, Guatemala is concerned about the
increase in the number of letters sent to the presidency
of the Council with the aim ofjustifying military action
taken in accordance with Article 51 of the Charter of the
United Nations. In our View, while we are aware of the
underlying problems related to the Article, when we are
discussing the Council's working methods we should
question whether such communications genuinely
comply with the obligation under the Charter to report
immediately any action taken under that provision. It
is clear that most of the time such letters are sent ex

post facto simply in order to justify actions that have
already been taken. Also questionable is the legality
of their open format, which assumes the argument
that once a communication has been sent any future
military action can be justified. From our point of
view, such communications do not exempt the Council
from its responsibility to maintain international peace
and security in each of these situations individually,
and it is one of the reasons it is vital to ensure proper
compliance and control of the use of this format.

Thirdly, I would like to briefly discuss the
selection and election process for the next Secretary-
General. The adoption of General Assembly resolution
69/321 showed that it is possible to achieve changes in
anachronistic processes in the Organization that do not
respond to the times we live in. Despite the fact that
some progress has been made, Guatemala regrets the
fact that no agreement was reached on issues such as
requiring the Security Council to recommend several
candidates to the General Assembly and the Secretary-
General's term of office and re-election. The Council
will be discussing them, but we should recall that the
Secretary- General is appointed by the entire membership
and the decision must therefore be made jointly. At this
time, when we are conducting serious reviews of many
key points of the United Nations system, a critical
analysis of the selection and appointment process of the
Secretary-General should be a priority. It is time that
we began to act and revitalize the process in ajudicious
manner, acknowledging the realities of the present and
anticipating future challenges.

