Mr. von der Schulenburg: Let me first thank all
of the members of the Security Council for the kind
words of support for the work of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone
(UNIPSIL), our United Nations country team and to
myself. The support is very encouraging to me and will
be of assistance when I go back to Sierra Leone and to
the work being done there.

Let me try to answer a few of the questions. Of
course members have asked me the most difficult
questions - about benchmarks. But before answering,
let me put that in context. I think that a peacebuilding
mission is a new type of mission. Not everyone may be
aware that a peacebuilding mission raises a lot of
conceptual issues. We have tried in the first three
months to respond to most of them. The first one is to
what degree is an executive representative to the
Secretary-General required, rather than a resident
coordinator? I think we must all be frank about that
question. Does it add value or simply an extra layer? If
an extra layer, then what is that extra layer? We have
had extensive discussions with our United Nations
agency colleagues and I think we may be on the right
track in one area in that we receive so much support
from United Nations agencies that could potentially see
us as an additional layer blocking some of the sunshine.

The other issue is - what actually makes an
executive representative credible, since we no longer
have armed forces on the ground and we usually do not
have funding, as do other agencies. In that situation,
what makes one credible? I think that is a question that
we must all answer very clearly. I have given some of
our responses to that question to the Peacebuilding
Commission, as well as what I think must be done.

The third issue is the relationship between a
peacebuilding mission on the ground and the
Peacebuilding Commission here in New York. Since
we are probably the first one - at least in a fully
integrated sense - I think that this is a necessary
discussion, and I hope to continue my discussion with
Ambassador Majoor on how I see that relationship. I
personally think that the Peacebuilding Commission is
of extreme importance to us because, although all of
the United Nations agencies have executive boards to
report back to and they get feedback from the Member
States that support the agencies, the integrated
peacebuilding mission actually has no one to play that
role, unless the Peacebuilding Commission takes over
the function of endorsing our efforts, so we can
negotiate with Member States.

The final issue here is: how do we integrate a
political mandate with a development mandate,
assuming that in a post-conflict situation politics
actually is largely development - creating jobs,
providing services and so forth. That is exactly why we
did not choose the traditional format of the United
Nations Development Assistance Framework, but
instead chose the Joint Vision document, in order to be
able to combine those two areas into one Joint Vision,
which is now supported by 15 United Nations agencies
that have signed on. That is very encouraging. Having
said that, the seven pages of the Joint Vision only
describe the directions.

We have what we call one plus four objectives, or
priority areas. One is mainly a political area, in which I
invite United Nations agencies to participate. The
others are more development priority areas. We are
now in the process of detailing the steps to be taken
under the five objectives. I think the process will be
completed by March 2009.

There has been considerable progress made on
those, especially on some tricky issues like youth
employment. We have recently agreed not only among
the United Nations agencies but with all major donors
to provide the President with a five-page advisory note
on what could be done in the area of youth
employment - one of the major risk areas of the
country. When I go back that is a discussion that will
have to be continued and it must be followed up by the
creation of a youth commission.

We have also given to the President, also in
agreement with the others, an advisory note on the
issue of illicit drug trafficking, in particular on coastal
security and finding different approaches to resolving
that issue. One of our roles is to try to get not only the
United Nations community behind us, but also our
main development partners. We have a similar concept
now on health care, and we will do this also for the
other issues.

What I had hoped in particular - and this is the
reason for having a special session of the
Peacebuilding Commission as discussed with
Ambassador Majoor with the support of the
Government of Sierra Leone - was to be able to move
from the stage of defining general directions, to
establishing programmatic areas where we could think
of establishing concrete benchmarks. I think I would
also ask for patience in this instance. This is the first
time, and I think it will be very well consolidated.

In that context, I would also like to respond to the
question from the representative of Uganda about the
multi-donor trust fund. One of the things we have
agreed on among our United Nations colleagues is that
we would learn from the experience of the
Peacebuilding Fund, when we got the money and then
tried to find projects on which to spend it. This time,
we would like to have the development framework and
present to the Peacebuilding Commission not only the
general policies, but, for each of the objectives, the
programmes which we want to support. It is a long
consultative process; only when it is complete would
we open the multi-donor trust fund, because the
funding should actually follow from concrete things.
We do not want to have an open-ended fund because
that has created some of the problems we have
experienced with the implementation of the
Peacebuilding Fund.

Let me also respond briefly to the question of
Guinea. Guinea is a concern, and we have heard from
the representative of Sierra Leone that his Government
is very concerned. I can confirm that, too, from my
discussions with the President. Guinea is a country that
has a very long border with Sierra Leone. As I
09-23183
mentioned, certain parts of the border - such as at
Yenga - are still in dispute. There are a lot of cultural
and ethnic relationships on both sides. According to the
Government, the largest expatriate community of
Guineans lives in Sierra Leone, so whatever happens
there will have an impact on Guinea.

From our side, there are two more immediate
things we are trying to monitor. With the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, we
have agreed to monitor the border, together with the
newly established refugee office, to see if there is any
unusual movement and to predict if there will be any
movement from Guinea into Sierra Leone. For the time
being, there are no movements which we can detect,
but we will keep on monitoring.

The other aspect is, of course, international
criminal activity. One of the worries we have -
although I make no accusations in this regard - is, of
course, that neighbouring countries that experience a
crisis very easily become the point of flight for
criminals in Sierra Leone, as we saw with the seizure
of the plane and the new problem of piracy, which
many believe comes from areas in the neighbourhood
that are less stable than Sierra Leone.

