Mr. Metscher (Germany): Allow me first to endorse
fully the statement made by the Permanent Representative
of Ireland on behalf of the European Union.

Significant progress has been made in Bosnia and
Herzegovina since the Peace Agreement was signed in
Paris, and since this Council authorized the
Implementation Force a year ago. The fighting has
stopped; peace is taking root.

This is, above all, a cause for relief and satisfaction
after the four years of bloody fighting. And it is a reason
to pay tribute to all those men and women in the
multinational force, as well as those in the other
international organizations, who have helped to make that
progress possible. We commend the dedication, courage
and professionalism with which these men and women
have carried out their tasks and continue working for a
lasting settlement of the conflict.

However, we all agree that this peace is still a
fragile one. There is a compelling need to safeguard the
progress achieved so far and to stabilize peace in the
region by a further and substantial commitment on the
part of Member States. This commitment includes a
continued military presence in the field, which we will
authorize today, which is tasked to secure the
environment for consolidation, stabilization and, in the
end, for political reconciliation and economic
reconstruction.

Allow me to stress two important aspects of the
stabilization period ahead of us. The main and primary
responsibility for implementing the Peace Agreement rests
with the authorities and the citizens of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Furthermore, the willingness of the
international community to devote human and financial
resources to the peace process is dependent on the
commitment of all authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina
to fulfil their obligations under the Dayton Accords. This
includes full cooperation with all the institutions set up to
support the peace process.

Among these institutions, the International Tribunal
for the former Yugoslavia figures prominently. My
Government attaches particular importance to the
requirement that all authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and all States in the region, execute arrest
warrants against indicted persons and surrender them to
the Tribunal without further delay.

Of equal importance to my Government is the
obligation of the Entities to create and maintain
conditions which encourage refugees and displaced
persons to return to their homes of origin or to other
places of their choice. The return of refugees is an

 

essential condition, perhaps the most important condition
for the reconciliation and rehabilitation of the country.

Together with our partners in the European Union and
in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO),
Germany has devoted substantial means to supporting the
implementation of the Peace Accords, in both their military
and civilian requirements. We will continue to do so.

Yesterday, the German Government decided to provide
3,000 troops to the new Stabilization Force (SFOR). Our
German contingent will be stationed in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and will include infantry and armoured
reconnaissance units. We will also continue to provide one
of the largest contingents of police officers for the
International Police Task Force.

Although we will agree today on a mandate for the
legal successor to the Implementation Force, it is evident
that the emphasis is now on the civilian aspects of the
Peace Agreement. The building of common institutions,
respect for human rights, adherence to the principles of
democratic policing, social rehabilitation, the return of
refugees and displaced persons and the reconstruction of the
economy have become the focus of our efforts.

Allow me, therefore, to conclude by paraphrasing
Martin Luther King: Our aim is not only a negative peace,
which is the absence of tension, but also a positive peace
which is the presence of justice.

