Mr. A] Musharakh (United Arab Emirates): The
United Arab Emirates is grateful for Spain's leadership
on this critically important security issue. The United
Arab Emirates thanks the briefers for their insight on
the evolving challenges in and the opportunities for
strengthening global non-proliferation efforts.

Previous speakers have highlighted the alarming
links between terrorism, weapons of mass destruction
(WMD) and cybersecurity. As a member of the
Group of Friends of resolution 1540 (2004) and a
sponsor of resolution 2325 (2016), we welcome all
efforts to improve implementation, such as increasing
cooperation, assistance and transparency, as well as
outreach mechanisms. We affirm our full commitment
to that core international security instrument and
welcome Spain's efforts in organizing this open debate.

At the national level, the United Arab Emirates
has enacted robust legislation to curb the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction and the illicit use of
related materials, in implementation of resolution 1540
(2004). Ultimately, however, as we all know the only
conclusive strategy for preventing the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction by non-State actors,
including terrorists, is to eliminate these weapons
entirely. The next priority must be to strengthen the
compliance of States with their existing disarmament
and non-proliferation obligations. When those
international norms to halt the development and
testing of nuclear and ballistic capacities, for example,
are violated, they threaten the integrity of the entire
system. This is extremely dangerous, and a world
without weapons of mass destruction controls is too
terrifying to contemplate. This is why we must work
collectively to defend and secure the entire disarmament
and non-proliferation architecture. We call on States,
such as North Korea, to fulfil their international legal
obligations in this regard.

In our own region, the United Arab Emirates
reiterates the primary importance of declaring the
Middle East a zone free of nuclear weapons and other
weapons of mass distraction. It regrets the failure to
convene a conference in 2012 on this issue. Additionally,
the United Arab Emirates renews its call on Israel to
join the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons. It is the only State in the region that has not
done so. That would contribute greatly to increased
stability and security in the Middle East.

Despite the efforts of the international community
in Syria, there is substantial evidence that chemical
weapons have been used against innocent civilians with
horrifying consequences. Those responsible for the use
of these WMDs must be held accountable. Furthermore,
despite the agreement on its nuclear programme 18
months ago, Iran's international posture has provided
cause for great concern. Although we had hoped for a
new chapter, the United Arab Emirates must continue to
express its concerns regarding Iranian nuclear activity
and the development of its ballistic missile programme.
We remain deeply alarmed by Iran's aggressive rhetoric
and blatant interference in our region. We call on
Iran to ensure its full compliance with international
obligations and responsibilities as a matter of urgency.

Additionally, when a country directly contributes to
the proliferation of conventional weapons to sanctions
entities and individuals, including non-State actors, it
also provides a potential pathway for the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction to non-State actors.
This is important to note in the case of Iran, a State
sponsor of terrorism in our region. From Hizbullah in
Lebanon and Syria, to Houthis in Yemen and terrorist
groups in Iraq, this is unacceptable and has critically to
destabilized our region. Concerted action must be taken
to shut down the provision of support and weapons to
these terrorist entities immediately.

These urgent priorities compel the United Arab
Emirates to conclude its participation in this debate by
offering three concrete recommendations. The United
Arab Emirates welcomes the existing efforts by the
Security Council and calls for, first, greater pursuit
of violations of and the enforcement of sanctions on
the proliferation of all banned weapons, including
conventional ones. These channels are a gateway for
the transport of weapons of mass destruction and
must be eliminated. Secondly, there must be effective
verification and increased accountability for any party
that deploys WMDs. Thirdly, there must be stricter
compliance by all States with their responsibilities
under international law, as well as consequences when
these obligations are violated.

