Mr. Al-Noaimi (United Arab Emirates) (interpretation from Arabic): Allow me to extend the congratulations of the
United Arab Emirates, Sir, on your presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I would like to thank the
member States of the Security Council for holding this
emergency meeting in order to consider the latest grave
developments to take place in Al-Quds as well as in the
other occupied Palestinian territories.

These bloody events have erupted as a result of
Israel's intransigence in resumption of excavations in Al-
Quds al-Sharif and in opening an entrance to the tunnel
under the Western Wall of Al-Aqsa Mosque and other
Islamic buildings. These are all serious and explicit
indications of the constant Israeli endeavours to judaize Al-
Quds and to distort and destroy its demographic
composition. This is a provocation for the Palestinian
people and for all the Muslims and Arabs in the world. The
serious, regrettable events that took place in recent days
included Israeli army forces firing repeatedly at unarmed
Palestinian civilians who were protesting the Israeli
measures, resulting in scores of dead and wounded. This
came as no surprise. It was part of a premeditated,
irresponsible Israeli plan aimed at continuing its policy of
fait accompli and at consecrating its occupation by force
through resort to the practices of oppression, pressure,
siege, closure, confiscation, demolition and imprisonment
of the Palestinian people, in violation of the Fourth
Geneva Convention, the relevant Security Council
resolutions and the agreements between the Palestine
Liberation Organization and the Israeli Government.

The United Arab Emirates expresses its deepest
concern regarding the developments in the occupied
Palestinian territories and its regret and disappointment
regarding the Israeli Government's policy of reneging on
its commitments under the peace agreements between
Israel and Palestine - in particular, Israel's commitment
to put into effect the principle of land for peace, renounce
the policy of settlement, full withdrawal from Hebron and
the release of thousands of Palestinian detainees who are
still in prison.

We call upon the international community,
particularly the sponsors of the peace process, to put
pressure on Israel to renounce its aggressive policy and
comply with all its commitments, as stipulated in the
resolutions of international legality and in conventions.
We call upon the Security Council, which is responsible
for the maintenance of international peace and security, to
take the appropriate measures to contain this crisis by
obliging Israel to permanently - not temporarily - close
the tunnel, to put an end to its excavations in the Islamic
and Arab sanctuaries, and to return in earnest to the
negotiating table with the Palestine Liberation
Organization, which is the one and only option for a just
and peaceful settlement to the question of Palestine and
for the realization of the aspirations of the Palestinian
people to establish an independent State just like any
other country in the world.

