Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
The Iraqi people must take control of its own future,
both at home, where a representative and sovereign
Government must be established as speedily as
possible by the Iraqis themselves, and within the
international community, to which Iraq must soon
return.

There are many challenges. The situation in the
country remains unstable. Security has not yet been
fully restored. The humanitarian situation of the people
remains precarious. Economic and social
reconstruction will take time and require the energetic,
ongoing mobilization of the international community.
A political process leading to the establishment of
representative institutions that respect the rights of
each Iraqi has yet to be launched.

The resolution that we have just adopted is not
perfect. Significant improvements, however, were
introduced at each stage of the negotiations. We believe
that it now provides a credible framework within which
the international community will be able to lend
support to the Iraqi people. That is why we supported
it. Now, all of its potential must be fully exploited in
order, without further ado, to undertake the effort of
rebuilding Iraq in all areas.

Security must be restored as soon as possible
throughout the territory of Iraq. The resolution affirms
the obligations of the occupying Powers in this area, in
conformity with their obligations under international
humanitarian law. It also recalls that the verified
disarmament of Iraq remains our shared objective and
in this regard preserves the role of the United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
and of the International Atomic Energy Agency. Only
the international inspectors can, in due course, reassure
the international community that this objective has
been attained.

With the lifting of civilian sanctions and the
forthcoming resumption of petroleum exports, Iraq
should have the resources necessary to rebuild its
economy and improve the humanitarian and social
situations of its people. The resolution recalls that
these resources, which belong to the Iraqi people,
should be used exclusively for their benefit and in the
greatest possible transparency. The International
Advisory and Monitoring Board of the Development
Fund for Iraq, established under the resolution, will
serve as guarantor in that respect.

The resolution also provides for a gradual
winding down of the oil for food programme. We must
ensure that this transfer of responsibilities takes place
in an orderly manner in practice - that is, in a manner
compatible with the improvement of the humanitarian
situation of the Iraqis, the credibility of the United
Nations and respect for Iraq's commitments.

In the area of humanitarian affairs and
reconstruction, and in particular in the political sphere,
the resolution substantiates the essential role of the
United Nations, which France, alongside many others,
has tirelessly defended. More than ever before, the
strong and independent involvement of the United
Nations in defining and leading the political process
will condition the success of this exercise - in other
words, its ownership by the Iraqi people and its
acceptance by countries of the region and by the
international community. The stability of Iraq, and
hence of the entire region, is at stake. We also believe
that the process of political transition in Iraq would
gain in effectiveness and credibility if a precise
procedure and timetable for establishing a
representative and internationally recognized Iraqi
Government were defined.

We have every faith that the Secretary-General
wilI nominate the best possible Special Representative.
We assure him in advance of our full support.

The resolution that we have just adopted
attributes to the occupying Powers broad authorities in
the area of international humanitarian law and the
necessary means to exercise those authorities. By
voting in favour of the resolution, France sought to
express its support for this difficult endeavour, which
now involves the entire international community. These
broad authorities entail responsibilities vis-a-vis, first,
the Iraqi people, which must take its own destiny into
its own hands as soon as possible; and secondly, the
international community, because it has recognized the
existence of the rights and obligations of the Authority
and addressed specific requests to it.

The Security Council must therefore continue to
be closely involved in the situation in Iraq, in particular
through the information which the Special
Representative, the United States and the United
Kingdom will regularly provide it, pursuant to the
resolution. It will reassess all the provisions of the
resolution within 12 months' time, at the latest.

