Ms. Kalala (spoke in French): Fate often has
surprises in store for us. Almost 11 years ago, I was here
in this Chamber to discuss the problem of child soldiers
in the Democratic Republic of Congo and how to end
it (see S/PV.5494). I remember that we were pleased to
see that there had been progress on the problem, but
we noted that it had yet to be eliminated among the
armed groups that were still active in the eastern part
of the country. At the time I was Minister for Human
Rights on behalf of civil society in the transitional
Government. To be exact, it was July 2006, on the eve
of our country's first free, credible and transparent
elections, which we were all eagerly looking forward
to. And here I am again today, against all expectations,
with another opportunity to address the Security
Council on the subject of the sociopolitical situation
in my beloved country, for which I am honoured and
very grateful.

While at that time the future looked bright, today
we are compelled to admit that our efforts to achieve
national cohesion have been crushed and that the issue
of child soldiers is once again on the agenda. Since
the presidential election of 2011, and in the wake of
the failure to hold the elections that were supposed
to bring the transfer of power in 2016, we are in the
grip of a profound crisis, linked to the legitimacy of
our institutions. Since that time we have had to deal
with the outbreak of new insurgent movements such
as the Kamwina Nsapu militia in Kasai Central and
Bundu dia Kongo in Kongo Central and the fighting
between Twa and Bantu communities in Tanganyika.
We are also witnessing the Mouvement du 23 mars (M- 23) reconstituted; a resurgence of petty criminality;
a stagnant economic sector and its corollary,
unemployment; galloping depreciation of the currency,
which brings with it reduced purchasing power and
makes life more precarious; corruption, human rights
violations and restrictions on fundamental freedoms
such as the right to peaceful protest - for example,
young people being confronted as they demand a
healthier environment - obstacles to people's access
to basic social needs; the deterioration of infrastructure
and so on and so forth. We can sum it up by saying that
we have a failed State. Our citizens can no longer trust
their institutions.

Need I remind the Council that it is a well-known
fact that it is women, the elderly and children who are
the first victims in such situations? How many times
in this Chamber have we talked about the sexual
violence that has been done to women in my country
or their and their children's dreadful living conditions
on the streets or accused of witchcraft? I am not going
to revisit that. But I must point to the weakness of a
judicial system that, despite some efforts, has been
unable to provide a genuine response to the demands
of justice. What is there to say about women's low rate
of participation in decision-making? We should recall
that of 32 participants in the meetings of the National
Episcopal Conference of Congo (CENCO) only three
were women - less than 10 per cent, the average in
most of the country's institutions, when male-female
parity is enshrined in our Constitution.

In order to respond to this dysfunctional State,
political dialogue has emerged as the only way out of
the crisis, as Monseigneur Utembi, President of the
National Episcopal Conference of Congo, so eloquently
said just now. In the firm belief of the reality of this,
and aware that our long-suffering peoples are no longer
willing to accept the path of arms, civil society has
engaged in political negotiations under the auspices
of both the African Union and CENCO, whose
comprehensive and inclusive political agreement was
signed on 31 December 2016.

Unfortunately, three months later, the process
seems to have stalled. The signing of the specific
arrangements to define the manner of implementing
the agreement is overdue. The political actors are
unable to honour the commitments they made freely.
Unfortunately, every delay takes us further away from
the possibility of holding of presidential, legislative
and provincial elections, set for December 2017. No
electoral calendar has been published thus far, and the
people are increasingly tense.

That is why we believe it is urgent to collaborate
with the African Union to further support CENCO'S
mediation efforts to swiftly set up a Government
and, above all, a national council to follow up the
implementation of the agreement, an institution charged
with ensuring proper preparations for the elections and
compliance with the road map. It should be borne in
mind that such actions would contribute to the rapid
implementation of a purely Congolese solution to
the crisis.

I now turn to the renewal of the mandate of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).
Civil society welcomes the Mission's actions both in its
social and peacekeeping efforts and in its support for the
electoral process. The people remember the successful
operations it carried out jointly with the Forces armees
de la Republique democratique du Congo to fight
various armed groups, including the M-23. However,
people cannot explain the increase in killings in the east
of the country, particularly in Beni, where not a week
goes by without unimaginably cruel murders reported.
The online circulation of those images have been met
with total indifference on the part of the international
community. "I am Beni" does not seem to garner as
much attention as "I am Paris" or "I am Munich".

The Congolese people are still traumatized by the
memories ofattacks on villages located near MONUSCO
camps, while the Mission did nothing to protect them.
We are told that MONUSCO is a peacekeeping force
that cannot impose peace. Go explain that to the poor
citizens who see that the Mission has weapons and
expect only its protection. I will perhaps be tactless in
saying that this stance revolts both civil society and the
population, which likens MONUSCO to a force that
counts the dead. That is why, even as we welcome the
renewal of MONUSCO's mandate, civil society calls
upon the United Nations to reinforce it so as to enable
the soldiers to play a more proactive and deterrent role.
They must prevent incidents, not give in to them.

Since opportunity makes the thief, I would like to
raise the painful issue of children fathered by members
of United Nations contingents and abandoned after they
are conceived. How can those innocent children be
compensated for that injustice? Many grow up penniless
in Goma, Kisangani, Mbandaka or elsewhere? Many
have joined the ranks of street children, which we call
"schegues" or "kulunas". I think that it would not be too
much to ask for the Council to consider that issue and

to respond in a way that acknowledges the situation and
provides care for those children - because those who
ought to bring hope cannot instead bring despair. We
wish to keep hope alive.

