Mr. Christian (Ghana): I wish to join others in
congratulating the delegation of the United Kingdom
on its assumption of the Presidency for the month of
May and commend its initiative in organizing this open
debate on post-conflict peacebuilding. The objectives
of this debate, as stated in the concept paper, are to
identify and address some of the critical gaps in
international efforts to help post-conflict countries to
stabilize and build sustainable peace as they emerge
from conflict.

The letter and spirit of the founding resolutions,
adopted by the General Assembly (resolution 60/180)
and the Security Council (resolution 1645 (2005)),
charge the Peacebuilding Commission, a subsidiary
body of these two principal organs of the United
Nations, with the responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. The founding
resolutions also mandate the Commission's pivotal and
unique role in mobilizing sustained international
attention and engagement to help countries recently
emerging from conflict to face the formidable
challenges in achieving durable stability and
sustainable peace. It has long been recognized that
sustained international engagement and a strong
national commitment are vital ingredients for success
in any post-conflict peacebuilding endeavour.

The critical gaps already alluded to in the concept
paper are very germane to our discussion. These
include the gaps in leadership on the ground, defined
as the lack of effective coordination among the various
stakeholders in post-conflict countries, be they
governments and other institutions of national
governance; the United Nations agencies; civil
societies; the international financial institutions;
bilateral donors or the private sector. Also the need for
skilled and rapidly deployable civilian capacity,
coupled with rapidly deployable military contingents,
cannot be overemphasized. Of course, the absence of
adequate funding and of the mechanisms for swift
disbursement and allocation of the limited but available
financial and other material resources remains a
formidable challenge to post-conflicting stabilization
and peacebuilding.

Often, the gaps in the implementation of
peacebuilding strategies or framework are inherent in
the terms of the peace agreements negotiated as a basis
for the peace process. A hastily negotiated agreement,
perceived to have been imposed on the parties to a
08-34772
conflict lacks the desired long-term commitment
needed to make it durable.

Equally important, and not to be overlooked, are
the conceptual and operational questions regarding the
appropriate relationship between the Peacebuilding
Commission and other United Nations organs, as well
as between the Commission and the Peacebuilding
Fund, which, together with the Peacebuilding Support
Office, constitute the peacebuilding architecture of the
United Nations.

As clearly articulated in its founding resolutions,
the Peacebuilding Commission serves as an
international advisory body designed to play advocacy,
mobilizing and coordinating roles for the benefit of the
international community by offering assistance to
countries emerging from violent conflicts. We must
accept that the Commission has been uniquely and
carefully crafted to ensure a holistic approach to
peacebuilding, in a manner that recognizes the
interdependence of political rehabilitation, socio-
economic revival and sustainable peace.

To promote the legitimacy and effectiveness of
the Peacebuilding Commission in carrying out all
aspects of its mandate and mission, such conceptual,
knowledge or informational gaps, which usually are
not openly articulated, should be addressed.

While the founding resolutions may have rightly
emphasized the principle of national ownership, the
fact remains that these founding resolutions also
acknowledge the need for the Peacebuilding
Commission to work closely with regional
organizations, as many conflicts have triggered
instability in neighbouring States and regions.

Surely, when it comes to regional organizations,
the Commission can learn from the experiences and
lessons of the Security Council, which has, of late,
given priority to forging closer partnerships and
cooperation with regional organizations, in particular
the African Union, when dealing with countries on the
Council's agenda. Growing efforts are being made by
the Commission to bridge the critical gap in regional
engagement or regional ownership, as reflected in the
recent interactions between the Peacebuilding Support
Office and Commission on the one hand, and the
African Union (AU) Peace and Security Council on the
other in Addis Ababa and New York to exchange views
on ways to forge closer cooperation and partnerships in
dealing with countries currently on the Commission's
agenda, all of which currently happen to be African
countries.

But such regional engagement should be reflected
at the working level in the field by ensuring a more
active involvement of regional and subregional
organizations in integrated peacebuilding strategies and
in steering committees set up to address post-conflict
recovery. In this context, peacebuilding efforts in post-
conflict countries in Africa should pay due attention to
the AU Framework for Post-Conflict Reconstruction
and Development, which places emphasis on tackling
the root causes of the conflict to ensure sustainable
peace. The international community should more
actively support regional and subregional initiatives
aimed at expediting the reaction time to crises when
they occur.

The need to address the financial resource gap
cannot be overemphasized. The establishment of the
Peacebuilding Fund as a form of trust fund available
for speedy disbursement and quick impact projects,
especially in the immediate post-conflict phase, is
essential for ensuring sustainable peace. That is why
the Peacebuilding Commission should continue to
contribute to the Secretary-General's efforts to
mobilize resources to increase the level of funds in the
Fund.

The capacity gap is a critical gap that has
received increased attention. The shortage of national
human resources to help rebuild post-conflict countries
may be addressed through the promotion of the return
of the critical mass of skilled and unskilled citizens,
who flee the conflict zone when civil war breaks out.
Psychological damage can take much longer to
overcome than material damage.

Affected and victimized populations are reluctant
to return to their homeland for fear of a relapse to
violent conflict and have limited confidence in the
peace processes. Some may seek vengeance or
revenge. More attention should therefore be given to
integrating the diaspora as indispensable stakeholders
in post-conflict peacebuilding processes. Addressing
such obstacles to the consolidation of peace in post-
conflict countries should also include a commitment to
mechanisms for transitional and criminal justice and
national reconciliation.

In closing, the truth is that too often political will
or goodwill are lacking. Where there is political will
underpinned by good faith and good will there is a
way. Political will should underpin our collective will
to bridge the implementation gaps when decisions are
taken.

Conflicts often assume very complex and
complicated dimensions once they occur and may not
necessarily fall into any neat categories of critical gaps
identified by various speakers today. Thus, the
Peacebuilding Commission, the other United Nations
organs, including the Council, national authorities and
regional organizations involved in issues of peace and
security, should understand the value of preventive
diplomacy on the basis of article 1 of the United
Nations Charter, both in countries experiencing
conflicts and in those witnessing peace, in order to
save succeeding generations, including our generation,
from the ravages of war.

