Mr. Al Bayati (Iraq): At the outset, I would like
to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Ashraf Qazi, for his presentation and
Ambassador Bolton for his report on behalf of the
Multinational Force. I thank also the members of the
Council for their statements regarding the situation in
Iraq.

At the outset, allow me to express the
appreciation of the Iraqi Government and the Iraqi
people for the efforts of the United Nations, through
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ashraf Qazi, and the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) in providing humanitarian
assistance in the field of development and
reconstruction. We value the important role of UNAMI
and its assistance in promoting the success of the
political and constitutional process in Iraq, which
ended with the election of a constitutional Government
that is to lead Iraq for the next four years.

Based on the important role of UNAMI, the Iraqi
Government had requested the extension of its
mandate, and on 10 August 2006 the Security Council
adopted resolution 1700 (2006), which extended the
mandate of UNAMI for another year. The Iraqi
Government and the Iraqi people still need the efforts
of the Mission, and we look forward to seeing a vital
role for UNAMI during the next constitutional review
in enhancing the dialogue and national reconciliation
and in developing the Iraqi election institutions. That
would require an effective presence of the United
Nations and an increase in its working staff in Iraq. We
continue to believe that the number of United Nations
staff members working in Iraq is too low, despite our
understanding of the reasons underlying the hesitation
of the United Nations.

With the full formation of the elected Iraqi
Government on 8 June 2006, Iraq has entered a new
phase, having achieved a milestone in the political and
constitutional process, pursuant to the time frame
determined by resolution 1546 (2004). The Iraqi
Government has determined that its priority is to
confront the enormous challenges in the political,
economic and security fields. Due to the fact that those
fields are strongly interrelated, it is not possible to
focus on one field while overlooking the others. The
Iraqi Government therefore decided without any
hesitation to address those fields on equal footing.

In the political field, the Iraqi Government
believes that the political process should be
comprehensive and should include all components of
Iraqi society. The Government announced on 25 June
2006 a National Reconciliation Plan aimed at
addressing the most important issues that are
preventing the achievement of internal peace. It will
secure the integration of the entire Iraqi people and all
its entities into the core of the political process. The
Government has established the High Committee for
National Reconciliation to meet that responsibility and
to provide all the requirements necessary for its
success.

In the security field, and parallel to the process of
national reconciliation, the Iraqi Government has
adopted a security plan which aims at securing the
capital, Baghdad. Iraqi forces, with the support of the
Multinational Force, are responsible for implementing
the plan. The past 30 days have witnessed a decrease in
the level of violence and crime in comparison to the
two months of June and July 2006.

As for development and reconstruction, it is
necessary to give more importance to the International
Compact with Iraq. The Iraqi Government has
requested the support of the United Nations in that
regard, because the International Compact is based on
a sustainable partnership between the Iraqi
Government and the international community in
overcoming the challenges that emerged during the
political and economic transitional phase.

Iraq expects a commitment from the international
community to provide the resources required to address
the main priorities. Iraq also requires the support of the
international community to rebuild its economy and
link it to the regional and international economy. That
would assist Iraq in achieving its national perspective
during the next five years. According to the Compact,
Iraq is committed to combat corruption, to establish an
effective and transparent oil sector and to enhance its
national institutions. Towards that end, a preparatory
group has been established, co-chaired by Iraq and the
United Nations, to prepare for a high-level
international conference to endorse the partnership and
secure its fulfilment. The preparatory group met on
10 September in Abu Dhabi.

The Secretary-General will hold a meeting for the
ministers of foreign affairs of the concerned countries
on 18 September to review progress in the
implementation of resolution 1546 (2004), and to
review the development of the International Compact
with Iraq. During that meeting, Iraq will present its
national perspective within the framework of the
International Compact. The Compact will add
additional obligations for UNAMI and the agencies
operating in Iraq. There is no doubt that the
International Reconstruction Fund Facility for Iraq and
the donors will play a fundamental role in assisting the
Government of Iraq to achieve its national perspective.

My Government believes that the International
Compact with Iraq provides an opportunity for donor
countries to fulfil the commitments which they have
taken upon themselves at the Madrid and other
conferences. We urge the friendly and brotherly
countries that have not yet supported the reconstruction
of Iraq to do so through initiatives to support the
International Compact with Iraq.

Much has been said lately of Iraq sliding into a
civil war. We must admit that Iraq witnessed an
increase in violent activities and sectarian tension
during the period prior to the launching of the security
plan that was adopted by the Iraqi Government. Those
criminal acts might have caused a kind of internal
displacement, which, in fact, is the objective of the
terrorists and the remnants of the previous regime who
seek the failure of the building of a new democratic
Iraqi State based on good governance and respect for
human rights.

The aim of the terrorists is to return to the
dictatorship period and to confiscate the freedom of the
Iraqi people. However, the Government and the people
of Iraq are determined to defeat the terrorists. Those
who are familiar with the heritage, social solidarity and
interrelated familial ties among the components of
Iraqi society will realize that the terrorist objective is
not achievable. The Iraqi people have succeeded in
recent years in completing the political and
constitutional process, despite the difficult
circumstances. They will also succeed in their battle
for dialogue, national reconciliation and the defeat of
the terrorists, and in maintaining their unity.

The report of the Secretary-General before the
Council (S/2006/706) refers to the critical crisis in
human rights in Iraq, which has also been referred to
by several human rights organizations and the media.
The reports have received careful attention from my
Government, as well as from the political and religious
leadership in Iraq.

Yes, there have been several incidents that prove
the violation of human rights in Iraq, but we believe
that we should look at them within the context of the
security situation as a whole. Those incidents do not
indicate, by any means, a systematic violation; rather,
they are individual, separate incidents that take place
due to the sectarian tension in the country. The
Government of Iraq is attempting to put an end to those
incidents, investigate the causes and bring the
perpetrators to justice. Finally, we have to take into
consideration the fact that the political leaders and the
Iraqi people in all sectors were victims of grave
systematic violations of human rights during the
previous regime. That fact would certainly compel the
Government to put the issue of the promotion and
protection of human rights in Iraq at the top of its
priorities.

Let me conclude by saying that, while we
commend the role of the United Nations in Iraq
through UNAMI and have requested the extension of
the Mission's mandate, Iraq is still bound by other
mandates, the justification of which no longer exists
due to changes in the circumstances that led to their
establishment. Here, I refer to the United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
(UNMOVIC). Thus, we believe, along with many
others, including all the members of the Security
Council, that the time has come to revisit or review the
mandate of UNMOVIC with the objective of ending it
fully.

