Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
My delegation is also pleased that this meeting has
been held, which has enabled us to listen directly to
President Ahmed Yusuf, the President of the Republic
of Somalia, as well as authorities from the region.
It seems to me that this meeting demonstrates that
there is growing interest on the part of the international
community in Somalia, surely, because despite the
great difficulties that we have been hearing about
today, there still is a sense that one can perceive light
at the end of the tunnel. So we view with great interest
efforts that have been undertaken by the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD),
with full awareness of the dangers inherent in Somali
instability for the region and for the Horn of Africa.
Efforts by IGAD have made it possible to move into a
crucial stage. We would like to congratulate the
countries of the region, Kenya in particular, which
through IGAD have shown an outstanding commitment
and have played a major role in this process, which has
been painstakingly conducted and has required
patience and determination.

France is gratified to note the crucial stage that
has been passed with the election by the Parliament of
the President of Somalia and the appointment of a
Prime Minister. To be sure, we, like others, are
impatient to see the establishment of a broad-based
Government, and we would be happy to hear that its
composition will soon be announced.

We appreciate the security concerns that have
been expressed by President Ahmed Yusuf and the
Chair of the African Union. We are aware of the
problem, which should be given careful attention and
discussed together with the international community. It
could be addressed in various ways. That will be one of
the first tasks of the Government.

Let me add that, together with the European
Union, France stands ready to participate in rebuilding
Somalia, something that is crucial to stability in the
region. In conclusion, I would like to say that my
delegation would like to thank Ambassador Wang for
having led our discussions on this draft presidential
statement on Somalia, and I wish to convey to him that
my delegation gives its full support to the draft
presidential statement.

