Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation understands the position of Iran with respect
to the resolution that the Security Council has just
adopted, but we deeply regret the adjectives that were
used by its Permanent Representative. We cannot
accept that, on this case, he accuses the Security
Council of being a mere tool of some countries and
says that the action that it is taking is illegal or
illegitimate.

While we acknowledge and value the progress
that has been made with respect to confidence-
building, in our opinion, there are still areas of non-
compliance on the part of Iran with respect to the
Council's resolutions. Costa Rica is convinced that the
present resolution is a necessary consequence of
non-compliance with previous resolutions of this
Council.

For Costa Rica, a Council meeting on
non-proliferation is an opportunity to offer some
comments on issues of disarmament. The strategic
approach to preventing proliferation is based on two
fundamental commitments: the willingness of
non-nuclear-weapon States not to acquire such
weapons; and the decision of the nuclear-weapon
States to gradually reduce their arsenals.

A greater number of States would probably
possess nuclear weapons if a system intended to
prevent proliferation did not exist. But that system has
been unable to completely halt such proliferation.
Some countries that are not parties to the Nuclear
Non-Proliferation Treaty are developing nuclear
weapons programmes with total impunity, and true
criminal networks have become involved in the black
market for nuclear designs, technology and material
with the same impunity, and even with the indulgence
of some States.

In the area of disarmament, what we have is a
history of missed opportunities for the reduction of
nuclear threats. The window of opportunity that opened
up with the end of the cold war was only partially
exploited. Some studies estimate that more than one
third of the nuclear destructive power that existed at
the end of the cold war will remain in 2012.
Furthermore, very little has been done to limit future
arms races and the concept of deterrent force still holds
all of its strategic value for the nuclear-weapon States.

If we want real progress in the area of
disarmament tomorrow, it is imperative to begin today
to create effective conditions for the prevention of
proliferation. We are not referring only to stopping
horizontal proliferation, meaning the rise of new
nuclear-weapon States. It is also necessary to prevent
and stop vertical proliferation, meaning the continuous
development of new technologies that only encourage
competition, mistrust and fear among States.

For that reason, we also cannot endorse the
behaviour of some States that demand that others
comply with their obligations stemming from the
Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty and the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, while
disregarding some of their own responsibilities. Both
treaties form part of an intricate architecture of mutual
trust that does not admit differential obligations. It is
necessary to prevent both horizontal and vertical
proliferation, to encourage the fulfilment of all
obligations pursuant to those treaties, and to condemn
any attempt to breach this mutual trust.

We believe it is necessary also to make progress
on disarmament in order to create an environment
conducive to non-proliferation, because there is very
little incentive for non-proliferation in an international
environment in which there is little progress in
disarmament and weak guarantees that existing nuclear
weapons will not be used.

In this sense, we share the belief that there is a
need for a transparent, sustainable and credible plan for
multilateral nuclear disarmament, as was suggested by
British Secretary of State for Defence Desmond
Browne when he addressed the Conference on
Disarmament last month. We agree with him on the
need to create a virtuous cycle where progress in
disarmament and in non-proliferation can mutually
reinforce each other.

Perhaps in this way it will be possible to stop the
logic of recent decades, in which despite so many
efforts, there has been vertical and horizontal
proliferation but little progress in nuclear disarmament.

In this situation, the international community has
an obligation to demand advances in disarmament, to
improve norms and verification systems, and to take
drastic action in the face of any threat of proliferation
in the future. In the area of nuclear weapons, it is better
to err on the side of caution; otherwise, we could be
witnesses to an unprecedented holocaust.

Today, as in the past, Costa Rica respects the
right of every State to use nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes. But we consider this right to be contingent
on the fulfilment of all international obligations in this
matter. In this respect, the right to enrich uranium is a
legitimate activity if its scope and objectives are
subject to complete international supervision through
absolutely transparent processes. We believe that that is
still not the case of the Iranian nuclear programme and
for this reason we are obligated to support the
resolution that we have voted on today. Despite this
context which is we hardly find pleasant, we are very
pleased with Iran's stated intentions to continue
working with the International Atomic Energy Agency
and to meet its requirements. We hope that we will
soon see the day in which we can verify that Iran has
met all of its obligations, and in which the international
community can cooperate with Iran to promote the
well-being of its people.

I would like to conclude by regretting the fact
that they were invoking the delicate situation in Gaza
and in southern Israel as a spearhead in a completely
unrelated subject. Costa Rica spoke out in this Council
to express its concern over the terrible humanitarian
situation in the region and has also condemned attacks
on territories in the south of Israel. Costa Rica has
criticized the Council's silence on that matter, and we
reject anew today's invocation of that situation with the
intention of attacking the Council.

