Mr. Ajumogobia (Nigeria): Mr. President, let me,
too, begin by commending your initiative in convening
this important and timely debate. Our conversation this
morning no doubt builds on the meeting of 17 June
2010 held in Istanbul, which your Government also
convened. I welcome the presence of the Secretary-
General at this meeting and thank him for his
illuminating statement.

We welcome the significant progress that has
been made in the global fight against terrorism since
the adoption of resolution 1373 (2001), and we note in
particular the commendable efforts of the Council's
three counter-terrorism committees established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and
1540 (2004) in ensuring the full implementation of the
relevant resolutions and improving their working
methods and interactions with Member States.

The most recent terrorist bombings in
Mogadishu, in Vladikavkaz in Russia, in Zahedan in
Iran and Kampala in Uganda, not to mention the scores
of attacks in Iraq and Afghanistan, are stark reminders
of the currency and enormity of the challenges of
terrorism. We know now that the absence of effective
counter-terrorism measures, compounded by weak
legislative and financial controls and inadequate
policing of lengthy maritime and porous land borders,
provide a platform for terrorist activities. Indeed,
countries with weak institutional capacity are the most
vulnerable to infiltration by terrorism networks.

In West Africa, the illicit but extensive trade in
small arms and light weapons imported into the region
by non-State actors, in collaboration with unscrupulous
foreign arms producers and suppliers, facilitates
terrorist activities. We therefore wish to reiterate our
9

call for an effective international response, including
the elaboration of an arms trade treaty to complement
the Convention on Small Arms and Light Weapons of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), as well as the activities of the ECOWAS
Small Arms Unit.

To support the implementation of international
counter-terrorism resolutions, States would need to
develop national legislative and institutional measures
anchored in human rights, due process and the rule of
law. Pursuant to this goal, the Nigerian Parliament is
considering a bill on the prevention of terrorism that
addresses these issues. We have also established a
national focal point that comprises four counter-
terrorism centres to strengthen our efforts to combat
terrorism. We welcome in this context the efforts of the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force, through
the Integrated Assistance for Countering Terrorism
initiative, to support counter-terrorism activities in
Nigeria. We commend the efforts of the Counter-
Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED) in facilitating
the trilateral contacts among donors, international
technical assistance providers and countries requiring
such assistance.

We support the continued collaboration and
coordination of CTED with other United Nations
agencies, within the framework of the Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force. CTED should
explore additional means through which States and
regional organizations could be assisted to deliver
more on border controls, information exchanges and
intelligence-led policing. We also commend the
efforts of technical assistance providers that have
collaborated with the countries of the West Africa
subregion to combat terrorism.

The fight against terrorism cannot be left to one
country or region. It requires collective, concerted and
coordinated global action for maximum effectiveness.
Such an approach will require the Council to take into
account measures to enhance the implementation of
several counter-terrorism resolutions. Greater regional
and international cooperation, as well as better
coordination among relevant actors, should be
promoted. The establishment of country-specific
regional hubs as centres of focus is also a necessity.
Needless to emphasize is the importance of cross-
cutting institutions and self-sustaining transfers of
knowledge aimed at bridging existing knowledge gaps.
10

Of crucial importance is the need to address the
capacity challenges of States and their institutions in an
integrated manner, including measures to address the
economic, social and political conditions conducive to
the existence and spread of terrorism. The adoption of
the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy by the General
Assembly was a positive development in that regard.
We urge the Council not only to consider a similar
approach, but also to support the elaboration of a
comprehensive international convention on terrorism.

The strong support provided by African
Governments to global anti-terror campaigns needs to
be strengthened by enhanced collaboration at both the
bilateral and multilateral levels, in particular in the
extradition and apprehension of African terrorists.

I would like to conclude by reiterating our
condemnation of terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations. I urge the international community to
muster the necessary political will to confront the
challenge, as nothing can justify the murder of
innocents. We support the draft presidential statement
that will be adopted at the end of this debate.

