Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): I once again would like to welcome the Foreign Minister of the Niger. In addition, we would like to thank Ms. Sori-Coulibaly and Ambassador Ronaldo Costa Filho for their briefings. We would like to begin by congratulating the Government of Guinea-Bissau on having successfully carried out its legislative and presidential elections in 2019. The results have been described by international and civil society observers as transparent, fair and credible. The recent political developments have a direct positive impact on the long-term stability of the country. We therefore welcome the relatively secure and stable environment maintained during this period. We are awaiting a ruling of the Supreme Court of Justice on the request for a nationwide vote recount. For the credibility of the electoral process, the investigation must conclude and its results must be implemented without delay. Weurge the Government to maintain the impartiality it has shown so far, and congratulate the military forces on their commendable work in maintaining peace by instructing the security forces to refrain from any act that violates the constitutional order. However, we are concerned about the reported increase in provocative rhetoric, which contributes to elevated tensions and fragmentation throughout the territory, including ethnic and religious divisions. In that regard, we urge the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) to continue initiatives such as supporting the National Council for Social Communication in its development of the code of conduct for media coverage during elections. We also urge the Government to redouble efforts to address past human rights violations and establish a national human rights institution that is aligned with the Paris Principles. The use of force by security agencies against demonstrators is unacceptable. Their rights to free expression and association must be protected. We recognize the training work carried out by UNIOGBIS to promote the integration of women and young people, who are crucial to building a fairer, more inclusive society. We highlight in particular the inclusion of the new gender policy, which will be integrated into all the work of the National Electoral Commission. We note that, after the conclusion of the electoral processes, it is vital to refocus the country's priorities on the economic situation. The deterioration of public finances and the increase in public spending have heightened State fragility, directly affecting the most vulnerable populations. In that regard, food security and chronic malnutrition remain one of the greatest challenges for the people of Guinea-Bissau. As a member of the Peacebuilding Commission, the Dominican Republic welcomes the Commission's commendable work on the ground, especially with regard to mobilizing funds, prioritizing peacebuilding objectives, bolstering the participation and inclusion of women and young people in the political process and promoting the internal reforms that the country needs to achieve lasting stability. We applaud the Government's progress in countering drug trafficking and organized crime - both criminal activities that threaten efforts to stabilize and develop robust political and social institutions. Collaboration among the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, UNIOGBIS and INTERPOL has resulted in increased technical training, improved detection equipment and the seizure of the largest amount of cocaine in history. In conclusion, we commend the efforts and good offices of Guinea-Bissau's regional and international partners, especially the Economic Community of West African States for its crucial support and mediation during the electoral processes held in 2019.
