Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Feltman,
Ambassador Cardi and Ms. Anderson for their briefings
and to express its appreciation for their work.

Since the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA) on Iran's nuclear programme came into
effect, nearly two years ago, its overall implementation
has been making steady progress with expanding and
increasingly visible positive results. The International
Atomic Energy Agency has reported nine times that the
Islamic Republic of Iran is implementing its nuclear-
related commitments under the JCPOA. Thanks to
the efforts of all parties, the coordination between
the Security Council and the Procurement Channel is
working as planned. The JCPOA is a success story in
addressing international and regional hotspot issues
through political and diplomatic means and has played
an important role in consolidating the international
nuclear non-proliferation regime and maintaining
peace and stability in the Middle East.

At the tenth meeting of the Joint Commission of
the JCPOA, held on 13 December, all participants noted
their continued adherence to the JCPOA commitments
and stressed the need to ensure the effective
implementation of all its aspects in good faith and in
a constructive atmosphere. The JCPOA was achieved
through arduous efforts and difficulties, and challenges
will inevitably be encountered in its implementation.
The parties should remain steadfast in their political
will, enhance mutual trust and have greater confidence
in the future of the implementation of the J CPOA. China
commends the efforts by all the parties concerned,
including Iran, in implementing the JCPOA and calls
on them to continue to follow the JCPOA guidelines,
fulfil their respective commitments and promote the
steady and sustained implementation of the J CPOA.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/1030)
is an important component of the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015) and the JCPOA. As such, it
should be considered in connection with the overall
implementation of the resolution and the JCPOA. In the
current situation, the report of the Secretary-General
should reflect the implementation efforts by all parties,
including Iran, in an objective and balanced manner.

China noted that the Secretary-General's report
stressed the great importance ofthe JCPOA, objectively
noted the relevant conclusions of the report of the
International Atomic Energy Agency, encouraged
all Member States and regional and international
organizations to act in accordance with the historic
JCPOA agreement and support its implementation, and
signalled the need to continue to actively advance the
implementation of the resolution of the JCPOA, which
China welcomes.

With regard to issues related to Iran's ballistic
missile launches, the parties should accurately interpret
the relevant resolution and take a prudent approach
to addressing such questions in order to avoid any
negative effect on the implementation of the JCPOA.
China hopes that the legitimate concerns of Iran with
regard to the content of the report can be addressed.

China appreciates the work done by Ambassador
Cardi and his team as Facilitator for the implementation
mechanism of resolution 2231 (2015). China has taken
note ofthe report submitted by the Joint Commission on
the work of the Procurement Working Group and will
continue to take an active part in the work of the Joint
Commission and the Procurement Working Group.
China hopes that the various working mechanisms
will act in accordance with their mandates and
generate synergy in their joint efforts to advance the
implementation of the resolution on the JCPOA.

China consistently advocates for the settlement of
the Iranian nuclear issue via political and diplomatic
means and is committed to the strengthening of the
international nuclear non-proliferation regime and the
maintenance of international and regional peace and
stability. China firmly supports and defends the historic
JCPOA. We will continue to actively participate in
the implementation of the resolution and the JCPOA,
promote the sustained release of JCPOA dividends to
benefit all parties, and contribute to the comprehensive,
long-term and appropriate settlement of the Iranian
nuclear issue.

