Mr. Fowler (Canada) (spoke in French): I would first
like to express my appreciation, Sir, to your Government,
the Government of the Netherlands, for holding this debate.
In our eight months on the Council, we have repeatedly
witnessed how human rights abuses, attacks on
humanitarian workers, forced displacement and other
civilian suffering can have a devastating impact on
international peace and security, whether in Angola,
Afghanistan, Sierra Leone, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Kosovo or now in East Timor. We, the members of
the Security Council, have expressed our outrage at such
attacks against civilians, but we have often come up short
in ameliorating the plight of those whose lives are being
ruined mercilessly.

I would like to congratulate the Secretary-General and
his colleagues in the Secretariat and on the Inter-Agency
Standing Committee for producing this important report. In
particular I would like to thank the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights for their
tremendous contributions. The report clearly reveals the
realities faced by ordinary people caught up in armed
conflict. It builds effectively on previous analyses and
reports presented to the Council and provides concrete,
practical recommendations for enhancing civilian
protection before, at the onset of and during armed
conflict. These recommendations do not put the onus
solely on combatants but rather highlight the
responsibilities of the international community to improve
the plight of war-affected populations. We believe these
ideas must be vigorously pursued both within the Council
and elsewhere.

We are pleased that the report highlights the
discriminatory nature of armed conflict, focusing on how
men and women suffer differently. This aspect has too
often been absent from analyses presented to the Council.
The report also identifies several forms of gender-based
violence, in particular the dramatic increase in female-
headed households in war-torn societies. It also
underscores the fact that women and children comprise
the vast majority of refugees and internally displaced
persons. The Canadian Government would also like to
take this opportunity to applaud the Secretary-General's
personal commitment to this issue, a commitment evident
in the many actions identified within the report for
follow-up by his office.

Canada raised the protection of civilians in armed
conflict as a subject for discussion during our presidency
last February because of its all-too-clear salience for the
Security Council. Civilians are disproportionately affected
by contemporary armed conflicts. It is often a deliberate
strategy of the combatants to injure and kill civilians and
to force them to flee. Access to humanitarian relief for
civilians is frequently denied, and humanitarian and
peacekeeping personnel seeking to come to their aid and
to mitigate their suffering increasingly find themselves at
risk. The presence of combatants in camps for
internationally and internally displaced persons only adds
to the vulnerability of civilians and often destabilizes
entire regions. The widespread availability of small arms,
light weapons and landmines significantly heightens the
risks to civilians and has devastating implications for
reconstruction.

These concerns are at the heart of our efforts to
enhance human security, and the role of the Security
Council in this regard is paramount. The protection of
civilians must be one of the primary imperatives for
collective international action. The Council has been
increasingly attentive to such concerns - I would note
the recent resolutions on war-affected children and on

 

Sierra Leone as examples. This evolution is critically
important and most welcome, as it clearly shows that the
Council recognizes that the future will not lack for
situations in which civilians are put appallingly at risk. The
Council must meet these challenges directly and creatively.
More vigorous efforts will be required to ensure that the
Security Council has both the tools and the will to grapple
effectively with these threats that afflict people and their
communities, in addition to maintaining its traditional focus
on the security of States.

We believe that the recommendations emerging from
the excellent report before us will help to achieve the goal
of keeping the protection of the most vulnerable at the
forefront of the Council's agenda and, as the Secretary-
General has suggested, of helping to achieve a "climate of
compliance".

(spoke in English)

Canada strongly supports the Secretary-General's
emphasis on prevention. Concerted and comprehensive
efforts aimed at addressing the root causes of instability and
conflict truly are the best way to enhance the protection of
civilians while guaranteeing that they have reasonable
development prospects. Effective prevention, of course,
requires vision, commitment and the willingness to engage.

Above all, this means instilling a culture of timely and
rapid response to developing crises. We support the
Secretary- General's suggestion that the Council make
greater use of Articles 34, 35 and 36 of the Charter, which,
respectively, allow the Council to investigate any situation,
allow any Member State to bring any dispute to the
Council's attention, and allow the Council to recommend
procedures for the peaceful settlement of disputes at any
stage. We also welcome the recommendation to strengthen
the relevance of Article 99, which allows the Secretary-
General to bring to the attention of the Security Council
any matter which in his opinion may threaten the
maintenance of international peace and security.

The Council should also contrive to see that it is
provided with accurate information on deteriorating human
rights situations and should become more comfortable with
the concept of preventive peacekeeping operations and/or
monitoring which, regrettably, are ideas that remain elusive
and all too theoretical.

We welcome, as we have many times before, the call
to enhance the United Nations stand-by arrangements,
including the kind of rapidly deployable mission-
headquarters capacity we have been advocating for five
years, and which would have served us so well over the
past few days as we sought to come to grips with the
deteriorating situation in East Timor. Such proactive
efforts by the Council could make a real difference.

We know, of course, that our world is not likely to
become significantly less perilous. We must therefore be
prepared to draw on a wide range of instruments and
initiatives designed to enhance both legal and physical
protection for civilians in situations of armed conflict.

A considerable body of international law exists to
regulate the conduct of conflicts. The challenge
confronting States and citizens is to promote knowledge
of and respect for international humanitarian, human
rights and refugee law and standards and to hold
accountable those who violate them. In this regard, I
welcome the Secretary-General's emphasis on the
importance of training and of the dissemination of
relevant information at the national, regional and
international levels.

We must also bring an end to what have clearly
been cultures of impunity. To do this, Member States
need to adopt and implement national legislation which
would make possible the prosecution of individuals who
commit war crimes or grave breaches of humanitarian
law, and which would provide for the handing over of
such persons for trial by another State with jurisdiction,
or by a duly constituted international tribunal. The
Security Council should make every effort to ensure
compliance with the two existing ad hoc tribunals, and,
pending what we hope will soon be the establishment of
a functioning International Criminal Court, the Council
must stand ready to endorse the creation of further interim
international arrangements to make it possible those
responsible for war crimes, crimes against humanity and
genocide to be held accountable.

Canada is pleased that the Secretary-General's report
highlights several gaps in existing international law that
have serious ramifications for war-affected civilians and
humanitarian personnel. In particular, Canada welcomes
the emphasis on raising the age of recruitment and
participation in hostilities, and supports the early adoption
of an optional protocol to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child on the situation of children in armed conflict.
Canada is also fully supportive of the Secretary-General's
focus on addressing the rights and needs of internally
displaced persons in situations of armed conflict, and on
further strengthening the requirements for the safety and

 

security of humanitarian personnel, including locally
engaged staff.

The consistent denouncement by the Council of the
use of child soldiers and of the targeting of relief workers
carries significant weight and can precipitate the
development of new norms. We urge our colleagues on the
Council to focus attention on these matters and to declare
our collective intention to pursue them vigorously both here
and in other forums.

Given the types of contemporary conflicts with which
the Security Council must grapple, there is one matter
which is especially vexing and which requires particular
attention. I am referring to the behaviour of non-State
military entities. Increasingly, civilian casualties and forced
displacements take place within the context of intra-State
armed conflict, where the principal protagonists include
irregular armies with ambiguous chains of command, and
where outside economic interests often try to curry favour
with belligerents out of immediate self-interest and with
little regard for the humanitarian implications of their
actions. How can we induce non-State actors to comply
with international humanitarian and human rights law and
hold them accountable for such violations? How do we
compel their compliance with Security Council decisions?
The non-State military include not only irregular armies and
rebel groups, but also private-sector organizations and
ubiquitous "security firms" whose activities can often
exacerbate civilian suffering during war, as has clearly been
the case for example in Liberia and Sierra Leone. We
would welcome an opportunity to further explore this
question, including the intriguing proposal of the Secretary-
General that means be found to hold combatants financially
liable in instances where civilians have been targeted
deliberately.

While the international community has invested
considerable attention and energy in enhancing legal
protection, the means for strengthening the physical
protection of civilians are less well defined and well
developed. The need for the Security Council to develop
the political, diplomatic, peacekeeping and enforcement
measures required to tackle this aspect of civilian protection
has become increasingly evident. This is true both because
of the increased demand that we "do something" when
gross and systematic violations of human rights and
humanitarian law occur, and also because the new
international security environment makes it more feasible to
do so.

Clearly, we have only just begun to adapt our
international management tools to these new realities, and,
indeed, our mind-sets to the task of strengthening our
capacity to protect masses of vulnerable people
effectively. If we are serious about the need to provide
better protection to civilians in situations of armed
conflict, the Council, and the United Nations more
generally, will have to tackle these components of the
Secretary-General's report very directly, which will by no
means be easy or always politically popular.

We believe that several important initiatives have
been advanced in this report which merit further analysis.
These include: assessing how and when peacekeeping and
enforcement operations might better address civilian
protection, and ensuring that their mandates are designed
from the outset to facilitate this task; appointing an
ombudsman for peacekeeping operations; ensuring that
gender-specific and child-focused protection and
assistance requirements are addressed in peacekeeping and
peace-building operations; making greater use of targeted
sanctions, including in situations in which humanitarian
access is denied or obstructed, and establishing a
permanent technical review mechanism of United Nations
and regional sanctions regimes; imposing, monitoring and
enforcing effective arms embargoes that will serve to
interdict those categories of weapons which target and
terrorize civilians and protected persons, particularly small
arms and light weapons and their ammunition; examining
the applicability and desirability of establishing
humanitarian zones and safe corridors; and identifying the
means for separating combatants and armed elements
from refugee populations.
These recommendations will benefit greatly from
further consultation among Security Council members,
troop contributing countries, the Secretariat, United
Nations operational programmes and agencies, the Red
Cross and a variety of regional and subregional
organizations.

We strongly support a process of detailed and
thorough follow-up to the key recommendations contained
in the Secretary-General's report. This is necessary if we
are to flesh out some of the more challenging initiatives,
in particular those which relate to physical protection.

As my delegation noted in February, the plight of
civilians in situations of armed conflict is urgent, growing
and global. We thank the Secretary-General for this
report. It is timely, and it offers a valuable opportunity to
enhance the Council's role and capacity. These issues

 

must sustain our attention, as we have both the authority
and the mandate to address them within the Security
Council. And while the Council must play the lead role,
other forums and many other experts both within and
outside the United Nations system will also be vital to the
success of this endeavour.

