I thank Deputy Special Envoy Khawla Matar and Acting Assistant Secretary- General and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator Ramesh Rajasingham for their briefings on the political and humanitarian situations in Syria. South Africa would also like to welcome our colleagues the Permanent Representatives of the Islamic Republic of Iran, the Syrian Arab Republic and Turkey to today's meeting. I will be addressing three elements in my statement today, namely, the political, security and humanitarian in Syria. First, on the political situation, South Africa welcomes the recent package of agreements agreed to by the Co-Chairs of the Constitutional Committee on the agenda and dates for upcoming meetings. The progress made in agreeing on an agenda of national principles during the fourth round of talks, starting on 30 November, and on constitutional issues in the fifth round of negotiations is commended. We hope that this spirit of cooperation continues during these important discussions. South Africa calls on the parties to build on this momentum and engage in a constructive manner to further the political process. Real and tangible progress in the Constitutional Committee, as well as with regard to a cessation in hostilities, requires the withdrawal of all external interference, including in terms of support provided to armed groups. The sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of Syria must be respected. The second element that I would like to address is the security situation in Syria. Let me start by expressing my deep concern at the continuing violence, which has seen an increase in ceasefire violations and hostilities in the north-west of Syria. This has led to the death and injury of a number of civilians, including humanitarian workers. Reports of the deaths of eight civilians, including two aid workers, on 4 November in southern Idlib due to a number of airstrikes are truly alarming. I would like to take this opportunity to commend the dedication and strength of all humanitarian workers, who continue to deliver essential services in the face of these challenges. The use of improvised explosive devices, landmines and unexploded ordinance, in addition to the increasing reports of airstrikes and shelling, all contribute to the growing number of civilian deaths and injuries. When will enough be enough? South Africa urges the parties to fully adhere to the Idlib ceasefire agreement and to refrain from any actions that may escalate tensions even further. In this regard, South Africa fully supports Special Envoy Pedersen's call for a complete and immediate ceasefire nationwide, in line with the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire in the face on the ongoing global pandemic. In this regard, we appreciate the cooperation between Russia and Turkey in ensuring relative calm in the north-east. The third, and last element, that I would like address is the humanitarian situation in Syria. The severe economic difficulties, compounded by the continuing hostilities, the increasing spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and the onset of harsh winter conditions, have created a unique set of circumstances that have contributed to the humanitarian situation in Syria. It is of great concern that the number of positive COVID-19 cases have more than doubled in the last month. South Africa reiterates its position that all those who require humanitarian assistance should be provided with it, no matter who or where they are. And, as we have heard here today and in previous briefings, millions of Syrians are in need. In this regard, the safe, unimpeded and impartial delivery of humanitarian aid and support, in line with international humanitarian law, is more important than ever. That includes using all available methods of aid delivery, including cross-border and cross-line assistance. We call on the Government of Syria to continue to strengthen its cooperation with the United Nations and its partners towards the improvement and enhancement of cross-line humanitarian deliveries, particularly in areas where cross-border assistance is limited. Without this crucial assistance, the Syrian people will continue to face growing food insecurity and the long-term effects of malnutrition, particularly with the harsh conditions of winter setting in. South Africa once again requests the Secretary-General and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs to include in their reports to the Council the effects and impact of both direct and indirect unilateral sanctions on the humanitarian situation in Syria. Many Council members have previously stated that it is Syrian civilians who are bearing the heaviest impact of the humanitarian situation. Surely, this should not be worsened by the additional weight of unilateral economic measures. An important aspect in making progress on the political process is the need for confidence-building measures, including the release of civilians, particularly women, children, the elderly and those with disabilities, from detention. These steps can assist in building trust and encourage the compromises that are necessary in any negotiation process. As we have said many times before, the situation in Syria can be resolved only through dialogue and negotiations and the full implementation of resolution 2254 (2015). I would like to take this opportunity to welcome the combined briefings on the political and humanitarian situations in Syria. Discussing these two important aspects of the Syrian conflict together provides a comprehensive view of the situation on the ground in Syria and offers Council members an opportunity to be briefed on and discuss holistic options to make progress towards a peaceful, stable and prosperous Syria.
