Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): Today we have
reached the end of the road for the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint
Investigative Mechanism (JIM). It was a road that all
members of the Security Council set out on together
two years ago. We did so in the hope that those using
chemical weapons in Syria would be identified and
held to account. Thanks to today's veto, that hope has
suffered a serious blow.

Under the current and previous leadership panels,
the staff of the Mechanism worked patiently and
diligently to uncover the truth. I pay tribute to them
today. Thanks to their efforts, the world now knows
what happened in Talmenes, Sarmin, Marea, Qamenas,
Khan Shaykhun and Umm Hawsh.

Let us make no mistake - the JIM. has succeeded.
It is Russia that has failed. It has failed in its duties as a
permanent member of the Security Council. It has failed
as a State party to the Chemical Weapons Convention.
It has failed as a supposed supporter of peace in Syria.

We have been here before. This is not the first
time this year that we have attempted to renew the
JIM's mandate. Less than a month ago, we all sat in
this very Chamber and watched as Russia vetoed
a simple technical rollover of the mandate (see S/PV.8073) - a rollover that did not judge any party or
add any conditions. We have worked tirelessly through
extensive consultations between Council members to
try to understand Russia's concerns and find a renewal
on which we could all agree. The United States draft,
in favour of which we are proud to have voted, was
balanced and reasonable.

Russia, on the other hand, has refused to engage
constructively. Last month, it quoted fantasy and fiction
in the Chamber to justify its veto. But in negotiations,

its experts made abundantly clear why they would not
support the JIM's renewal. Put simply, they cannot,
or rather they will not accept any investigation that
attributes blame to their Syrian allies, no matter how
robust the investigation, no matter how clear and solid
the evidence. Russia will say that it engaged, that it
put forward an alternative text, yet its text sought only
to undermine and discredit what has already been
painstakingly demonstrated - that the Syrian regime
is responsible for the blatant repeated use of chemical
weapons against its own people.

The seventh report of the JIM. (S/2017/904, annex), as we heard last week from the Head of the
Leadership Panel (see S/PV.8090), details the thorough
methodology of the investigation. Its consideration of
alternative hypotheses, the careful corroboration of
sources and the use of independent, internationally
recognized forensic experts for analysis of data. Faced
with this clear, careful consideration and conclusion,
Russia made a string of entirely destructive demands in
its text and attempted to weaken significantly the remit
of the JIM. It demanded that the JIM. take samples from
a Syrian airbase, when the JIM. has made crystal clear
why doing so would not advance the investigation. It
demanded that the JIM. visit Khan Shaykhun, where it
would face unacceptable risks of attack. It maligned
the impartiality, experience and expertise of the JIM's
staff, ignoring the thorough professional report they
had produced and Russia's own original support for
the group. Russia demands that the JIM. listen only
to Syrian-approved witnesses and Syrian accounts
of events. Why should evidence from a party to the
conflict accused of war crimes carry more weight than
the corroborated testimony of victims and observers
and the cold laboratory analysis of physical evidence?

Thanks to Russia's veto today, Da'esh fighters will
be joining A1-Assad in celebration. The Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons is currently
investigating other cases. This vote means that the
JIM. will not investigate who is responsible for these
atrocious crimes. Russia's transparent use ofits Security
Council status to block this investigation again shows
that, as a party to the conflict, it cannot credibly play a
leading role in the political process, such as convening
the Syrian parties in Sochi.

Most of us here are totally committed to upholding
the norm against the use of chemical weapons. We will
not be stopped by what has happened today. We will
keep working to identify and bring to account those
who have used these vile weapons and to deter those
who might think of doing so in the future. Russia once
played a responsible role in securing the destruction of
much of Syria's chemical arsenal and in creating the
JIM. Regrettably, today the world can see that Russian
policy now is to protect the Syrian State - whatever
the cost to Russia's reputation.

