Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): I would like to thank
Assistant Secretary-General Kalomoh for his
comprehensive briefing today.

Greece fully associates itself with the statement
to be delivered shortly by the representative of Austria on
behalf of the European Union, and thus I shall be brief.

It is clear that recent developments in the region,
most notably the January elections for the Palestinian
Legislative Council and Tuesday's elections in Israel,
may mark the dawning of a new political era in the
Middle East. All stakeholders are well aware of the
challenges and also of the opportunities that this new
era holds.

Greece remains committed to striving for the
achievement of a comprehensive, just and lasting peace
in the Middle East, based on all relevant Security
Council resolutions, including resolutions 242 (1967),
338 (1973), 1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003), as well as
on the Madrid terms of reference and the principle of
land for peace. We remain committed to the realization
of a two-State solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict.

It is evident that in order for there to be a
negotiated peace, both sides need credible interlocutors
who are willing to approach talks in good faith and on
the basis of mutual respect and recognition.

In this regard, we would like to emphasize that all
democratically elected Governments should adhere to
certain fundamental, universal principles, which
include, above all, adherence to the rule of law.

The international community expects the new
Hamas-led Government to renounce violence and to
disarm, to recognize Israel's right to exist and to
respect all previous agreements and understandings,
including the road map. The Palestinian Government
will be held accountable against these standards, not
only by the international community, but also by the
Palestinian people themselves.

At the same time, we call upon the new Israeli
Government that will be formed in the coming days to
adhere to Israel's obligations under the road map and to
refrain from any unilateral actions that may prejudice
the outcome of final status negotiations and render the
two-State solution physically impossible to implement.

We expect ail concerned to demonstrate political
maturity and wisdom, to refrain from provocative
actions and rhetoric and to seize the opportunity so that
the fate and future of their respective peoples may
finally be one of peace, optimism and prosperity.
