Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): Let me start with
words of gratitude to the Bangladesh presidency and to
Ambassador Chowdhury personally for the fruitful
efforts in leading the Security Council mission to
Kosovo and Belgrade. I am also grateful to Under-
Secretary-General Jean-Marie Guehenno for his
comprehensive and very informative briefing.

Both reports - that of the Secretary-General and
that of the Council mission i give us a clear picture of
the situation on the ground. Thus I will briefly
highlight our major comments.

Ukraine welcomes the progress made by the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) in implementing Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999) in the two years since its
establishment. We believe that the recent UNMIK
efforts in pursuit of the goals of holding Kosovo-wide
elections, implementing a constitutional framework and
setting the stage for self-government and economic
viability will lead to a more stable and secure Kosovo.

But the alley of trees planted by UNMIK will be
a blind alley unless a security environment for the
elections and the participation of all Kosovo
communities, refugees and displaced persons, is
ensured. The engagement and political presence of the
Serb community is of utmost importance, and my
delegation fully supports the recent statements of
Yugoslav authorities encouraging Kosovo Serbs to
register for elections.

As for interim institutions, we pay special tribute
to the activities of the Interim Administrative Council
and the Kosovo Transitional Council. The involvement
of all communities in these structures is yet another
vital element to further the democratic processes in the
region, and we call upon UNMIK to redouble its efforts
to promote this goal.

Without a doubt, the establishment of a new
police and justice pillar of UNMIK, aimed at
strengthening the fight against ethnic violence and
crime, is commendable. The general criminality in
Kosovo is one of the most dangerous security
challenges, and we are encouraged by the robust
measures UNMIK is taking to combat it and to bolster
a legislative basis for prosecuting terrorism and
organized crime.

My delegation is satisfied with the important
work done by UNMIK in the area of media regulation
and development. The establishment of an independent
Radio Television Kosovo, and promising results in the
field of media development in the minority
communities do strengthen our positive impressions.
At the same time, let me express our deep concerns
about the reported expressions of support for
extremism and terrorism by some Kosovo local press.
We are confident that any public manifestations of
inter-ethnic hatred and support for violence should not
be tolerated.

May I quote the words of an important
personality who said that

"Men stumble over the truth from time to time,
but most pick themselves up and hurry off as if
nothing happened."

Upon the return of the Security Council mission from
Kosovo, I quote these famous words by Sir Winston
Churchill in order to pay particular attention to, in our
view, a highly important question - whether or not the
Council belongs to those who hurry off.

In fact, the truth is very difficult. After the
two years that have passed since the adoption of
resolution 1244 (1999), the security, inter-ethnic and
humanitarian situation in Kosovo remains tense. We
share the view that the level of violence and crime in
the region, especially against ethnic communities, is
unacceptably high. Moreover, a general increase in
tensions in Mitrovica, anilane and Pristina, as well as
brutal attacks on individuals, vividly prove that the
philosophy and practice of violence are still very much
alive.

It is our strong conviction that the only way to
change the psychology of war lies in the more
intensified and concerted efforts of the Security
Council, European Union, the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO), the Yugoslav authorities and
those Kosovo political leaders who really believe in a
democratic, multi-ethnic Kosovo. We hope that the
principal findings of the mission will encourage the
Council to hurry in, in order to improve the situation in
Kosovo.

We agree that there is need for a further
coordinated approach, particularly provided by
UNMIK, to overcome the dangerous challenges,
including inadequate physical, social and economic
security for the ethnic communities in Kosovo,
alongside a lack of freedom of movement and equal
access to public services.

My delegation is in favour of the mission's
recommendation that a formal request should be sent to
the Kosovo Force (KFOR) to regularly provide detailed
information on the origin, type and quantity of
weapons seized in the region. The work of the Security
Council committee established by resolution 1160
(1998), should also be intensified. Let me also share
our strong belief that UNMIK must continue and
enhance its dialogue with the authorities of Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, ensuring the full
implementation of 1244 (1999).

Concluding my remarks in a broader context, I
would like to welcome the unilateral demobilization by
ethnic Albanian armed groups in south-east Serbia and
the peaceful completion of the return of Yugoslavia
security forces to the ground safety zone. Ukraine
highly appreciates this achievement, which was made
possible by the European Union, the North Atlantic
Alliance and the Yugoslav leadership.

We would also like to align ourselves with a
position of the European Union declared at a recent
summit in Goteborg, on recent developments in the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, and to
reaffirm our commitment to the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of that country.

