Mr. Mukerji (India): Allow me first to congratulate
Your Royal Highness on Jordan's assumption of both its
membership of the Council and the presidency of the
Council for this month.

Let me begin by expressing our appreciation to
the Council for convening this quarterly open debate,
which will allow the Council to take stock of recent
developments in the Middle East, including the State of
Palestine. I should like to thank the Secretary-General
for his comprehensive briefing earlier today.

The situation in the Middle East region remains
fragile and unpredictable, with unprecedented changes
in several countries in the region and the ongoing
conflict in Syria. We look forward to the success of
the efforts of the international community this week to
resolve the situation in Syria.

We firmly support a negotiated solution to the
Israeli-Palestinian issue resulting in a sovereign,
independent, viable and united State of Palestine, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, living within secure and
recognized borders side by side and at peace with
Israel. We also continue to support Palestine's bid for
full and equal membership of the United Nations. We
look forward to a meaningful 2014 as the International
Year of Solidarity with the Palestinian People, which
was launched on 16 January by the Secretary-General.

We welcome the continuation of the negotiation
rounds between Israel and Palestine that began in late
July last year with the aim of reaching a deal within
nine months. It is unfortunate that so far there has been
little visible progress, but we hope that both sides will
seize the opportunity presented by direct negotiations
and strike a peace deal in the critical months ahead.

The recent announcement by Israel of new
settlement construction is regrettable. The settlement
activities are not only illegal but also pose a threat to
the two-State solution. We join others in urging Israel
to stop these settlement activities.

The humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip,
meanwhile, remains a cause for serious concern. The
blockade on Gaza is not only adversely affecting the
population but also driving militant elements to vent
their frustration through violence, thereby further
complicating the situation on the ground and increasing
Israel's vulnerability and security concerns.

India has always supported the nation-building
efforts of Palestine through technical and economic
assistance, including budgetary support. In 2012, India
pledged $10 million as budgetary support to Palestine
and signed three memorandums of understanding for
development projects in the fields of information and
communication technology, vocational training and
the construction of schools. In September 2013, India
contributed $1 million as a part of its annual contribution
to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA),
primarily for the provision of food and medicines to the
displaced people in refugee camps under the various
UNRWA programmes.

We are also implementing a series of development
projects in Palestine, funded by the India-Brazil-
South Africa Dialogue Forum. We have thus far been
able to assist in the rehabilitation of a cultural and
hospital centre in Gaza, the construction and equipping
of a centre for person with physical disabilities in
Nablus, and support for recreational activities through
infrastructure support for a football stadium in
Ramallah.

India welcomes the efforts made by the Joint
Mission of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and the United Nations
towards the removal and elimination of the Syrian
chemical weapons programme, and hopes that the
Joint Mission will be able to meet the final deadline of
30 June for the complete elimination of Syria's chemical
weapons programme. In December 2013, India offered a
financial contribution of $1 million to the trust fund set
up at the OPCW at The Hague for use in the destruction
of Syria's chemical weapons and related facilities. India
has also offered the services of its experts to be used
by the OPCW in destruction verification activities and
training slots for personnel participating in the United
Nations-OPCW Joint Mission for the destruction of
Syria's chemical weapons.

In conclusion, let me express our full support for
the second Geneva Conference on Syria. We hope that it
will launch a Syrian-led inclusive political dialogue that
will resolve the current crisis and meet the legitimate
aspirations of all sections of Syrian society.

