Mr. Oshima (Japan): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today's open debate on this important
subject, and I thank Mr. Jan Egeland, Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, as well as Mr. Jacques Forster,
Vice-President of the International Committee of the
Red Cross (ICRC), for their briefings to update us on
key issues involved in the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. As a former Emergency Relief
Coordinator, I wish, also on behalf of the Permanent
Representative of Japan, to take this opportunity to
express our high respect and appreciation to Under-
Secretary-General Egeland and his staff in the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs for their
tireless work in advancing this agenda, as well as to the
ICRC, the United Nations agencies concerned and the
non-governmental organization community, for their
valuable work and dedication to humanitarian relief,
assistance and protection activities.

We welcome the Secretary-General's report
(S/2005/740), which outlines the progress that has been
made to date and the many challenges that remain, and
which offers several specific recommendations. All of
this is very valuable indeed and provides the Council
with fresh material for thought and action. In fact,
since the adoption of the first resolution on the subject
in 1999, resolution 1265 (1999), efforts to mainstream
this agenda in the work of the Council have produced
important concrete results. We see, for instance, the
protection of civilians increasingly being incorporated
into peacekeeping mission mandates - in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and elsewhere. In
that regard, the aide-memoire (S/PRST/2002/6, annex)
has proved a practical, useful tool, as have the timely
briefings and inputs from the Department of Political
Affairs, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA), various United Nations funds,
programmes and agencies and the non-governmental
organizations, for all of which we express thanks.

The outcome document endorsed by world
leaders in September (General Assembly resolution 60/1) also contains significant agreements and
concepts to advance the humanitarian agenda. We
regard as especially important the reference to women
and children in armed conflict, the
acknowledgement - for the first time at the head-of-
State level - of the Guiding Principles on Internal
Displacement and the clear enunciation of the
responsibility to protect populations from genocide,
war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity. We should anchor our discussion in the
Council on those milestone agreements. The proposal
to review and expand the Central Emergency
Revolving Fund also requires careful consideration.

Despite those achievements, we still have much
to do. The stark reality before our eyes is that of
millions of innocent civilians being attacked and killed
and subjected to damage, injury, humiliation and loss
in numerous armed conflicts around the world.
Particular pain is inflicted on women and children in
the form of sexual violence and the forced recruitment
of child soldiers. The Council needs to redouble its
efforts to ensure that its measures make a difference on
the ground. From that viewpoint, I would like to briefly
touch upon four points.

The first point concerns the need for accurate
information in considering appropriate measures in the
Council. Regrettably, in that regard, little reliable
statistical data is available to enable us to assess with
reasonable certainty the field-level impact of the
Council's work on protecting civilians caught in armed
conflict. For example, there is a great discrepancy in
the statistical data available on the number of war
deaths in the past year. The largest figure, given by one
source, is 10 times the smallest one, given by another
source.

Admittedly, work on collating such figures in the
given circumstances sometimes entails enormous
difficulties. Nevertheless, it is important for the
Council to have more solid and more reliable
information when considering the nature and scope of
the tasks and duties that a peacekeeping mission can
realistically be expected to perform. To that end, the
Council must have accurate information concerning
specific situations in which civilians are caught in
armed conflicts. Therefore, we support the
establishment of a reporting system that would allow
United Nations agencies to improve work in that
regard, building upon existing mechanisms with the
aim of presenting a more complete and coherent
picture.

Secondly, it is essential to ensure the access of
humanitarian workers to people in dire need of help,
assistance and protection. We cannot assume that
peacekeeping missions alone, now at a record high in
terms of their number and size, can cover all the
protection needs of civilians in armed conflict. Nor is it
realistic to expect that peacekeeping missions will
grow in size or that many more new missions will be
established, given the fact that troop-contributing
countries are already stretched thin in terms of the
personnel they have committed to the many recent and
ongoing operations.

In those circumstances, it is clear that
humanitarian workers will continue to play, as they
have in the past, a very important role in protecting
civilians, as their presence also often deters violence
against civilian populations. The reality that more
civilian deaths are caused by malnutrition and
infectious diseases than by physical violence makes the
work of humanitarian organizations all the more
important. We pay high tribute to humanitarian
workers and their organizations for the dedication and
the noble spirit with which they carry out their mission
in many difficult situations around the world.

In that context, Japan welcomes the strong and
straightforward language on the subject of
humanitarian access in the September outcome
document, and we call on all parties to armed conflicts
to honour the international community's requests for
access. In that connection, common services, especially
logistical assets including transportation, have a very
important role to play in ensuring access to vulnerable
populations. We welcome the increased attention that is
being given to common services and wish to stress the
importance of sufficient coordination and resources in
that regard.

Thirdly, the United Nations must strengthen its
partnership with regional organizations. Regional
experience and skills should be more fully utilized for
the effective protection of civilians. We welcome, in
particular, the African Union's efforts to play an
increasingly important role in this area. We also
commend the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) for its initiative
formulated in response to the call of the Council that it
draft a workplan to engage systematically with regional
organizations in the protection of civilians. Japan, for
its part, will provide all possible assistance to the
important work done by and through regional
organizations.

Finally, from a mid- and long-term perspective,
the establishment of the rule of law and security sector
reform are both indispensable and hold the key to
achieving the effective protection of civilians. We have
high expectations that the Peacebuilding
Commission - whose establishment we hope will be
agreed soon - will make a valuable contribution to the
effort to address those issues.

For example, we understand that the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has no other option but to allow
the expediency of putting criminals into its own
facilities, because national authorities simply cannot
provide the prison facilities necessary to confine them.
Under those circumstances, we cannot realistically
expect that impunity will end. Clearly, building the
capacity of national authorities should therefore be
given much higher priority. The education of
children- especially those who have had painful
experiences as child soldiers - needs to be given
greater emphasis in the international community's
efforts to put an end to the vicious circle of violence.

In conclusion, Mr. President, I would like to
express our appreciation for the initiative you have
taken with regard to the Council's draft resolution on
this issue. We believe that the Council should now
consolidate its past achievements and lay out the
directions for future action in clear and bold terms. We
strongly support the draft resolution and look forward
to its early adoption, with some possible new inputs
from the deliberations during this present debate.

