Mr. Nl'lfiez Mosquera (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank the Chairmen of the Committees established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and
1540 (2004), for the information they provided.

On numerous occasions, our country has
submitted to the Security Council detailed information
on terrorist acts against Cuba perpetrated by various
individuals and organizations, as well as on the
conspiratorial protection they are given by the United
States Government. So far, our complaints remain
unanswered.

Last 21 October, the notorious terrorist Santiago
Alvarez Fernandez-Magrifia was set free in the United
States. That terrorist had been sentenced for having an
illegal cache of hundreds of arms and ammunition in
south Florida, and for obstruction of justice, having
refused to testify before a federal grand jury on the
illegal entry into the United States of his accomplice,
the well-known international terrorist Luis Posada
Carriles. The truth is that Santiago Alvarez was himself
responsible for smuggling Posada Carriles into the
United States aboard his vessel Santrina, in early 2005,
an act that the Cuban Government denounced at that
time.

That terrorist was found to be in possession of,
among other weapons, an illegal cache of 30 automatic
and semiautomatic machine guns, a rocket launcher,
numerous grenades, over 200 pounds of dynamite, 14
pounds of C-4 plastic explosive and 4,000 feet of
detonating cord - a quantity of illegal arms
unprecedented in south Florida - all to perpetrate
terrorist acts against Cuba. However, the United States
District Attorney's Office decided not to press charges
of terrorism against him and sentenced him to only
four years of imprisonment, a sentence that was then
reduced to just 11 months.

Santiago Alvarez has a record of terrorist acts
against the Cuban people. To cite only a few examples,
he was a founding member of the south Florida-based
paramilitary terrorist organization Alpha 66; he
enlisted as a mercenary in Brigade 2506, which
invaded Cuba at the Bay of Pigs in 1961; and he was a
key accomplice of Posada Carriles in planning the
failed assassination attempt on the leader of the Cuban
revolution, Fidel Castro, in Panama, in 2000. Alvarez's
participation in various pirate attacks against Cuba
from United States territory is widely known. On
12 October 1971, he participated in a terrorist attack
against the population of Boca de Sama, in the north of
Holguin Province, during which the perpetrators
murdered two people and seriously wounded a girl.

He tried to insert a terrorist cell into the area of
Isabela de Sagua, in Villa Clara Province, Cuba, in
April 2001, with the purpose of perpetrating acts of
vandalism in the country. Among the missions Alvarez
ordered for that terrorist cell was the bombing of the
Tropicana cabaret in Havana. There is irrefutable
documentary proof of his participation in this act.

The international terrorist Luis Posada Carriles,
who has been rightly rated the most notorious terrorist
of the western hemisphere, is still free in the United
States without being prosecuted for his terrorist acts
against Cuba, despite the fact that the United States
Government has all the evidence necessary to do so,
including what Cuba has provided it since 1998. The
United States Government has limited its action to a
single trial for petty immigration offenses.

The Government of the Republic of Cuba insists
once again the United States authorities fulfil their
international obligation to prosecute Posada Carriles as
a terrorist or to extradite him to the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, in response to the request made
by that Government on 15 June 2005, some four years
ago.

This terrorist is responsible for the in-flight
bombing of a Cubana de Aviacion airliner, claiming the
lives of 73 innocent civilians. Precisely, last 6 October
marked another anniversary of that abominable crime.
Posada Carriles is also responsible for attacks on
tourist facilities in Havana in 1997 and for dozens of
plans financed by the United States Government to
assassinate the Commander of the Cuban revolution,
Fidel Castro Ruz. I should stress that these are only
some of the acts confessed by their perpetrator.

In stark contrast to that case is that of the five
Cuban heroes who, on 12 September 2008, marked
11 years of incarceration in United States prisons for
the sole reason that they fought to against Miami-based
terrorism against Cuba - to prevent terrorists like
Posada Carriles and Santiago Alvarez from committing
terrorist acts against our country.

Cuba supports the position of the 118 States
members of the Non-Aligned Movement against the
unilateral preparation of lists accusing States of
supposedly supporting terrorism, a practice that is not
in accordance with international law or United Nations
resolutions. On 30 April, for the twenty-eighth
consecutive year, the United States Government
included Cuba on a list of States that supposedly
sponsor international terrorism. Cuba vigorously
rejects the inclusion of our country on this unilateral
and spurious list, which is politically manipulated and
motivated, of unsound origin and drawn up by the

09-606 12
United States Department of State. With the
unjustifiable inclusion of Cuba on this list, the new
United States Government is denying the political
rationality it publicly proclaims and following the
mistaken path of its predecessors as it resorts to
political manipulations and flagrant lies against Cuba,
with the aim of justifying at all costs its discredited,
isolated and unsustainable policy against our country.
Those who draw up such lists lack the even the
slightest moral authority to set themselves up as
international arbiters on terrorism or to certify the
conduct of others as good or bad.

The impeccable policy of the Cuban revolution
with regard to terrorism leaves no room for questions
or doubts, least of all from Washington. Cuba
condemns all acts, methods and practices of terrorism,
in all its forms and manifestations, wherever, by
whoever and against whomsoever committed, whatever
their motivations. What is more, the Cuban territory
has never been used nor will it be used to organize,
finance or carry out terrorist acts against any country.

The United States Government cannot say the
same. Over the past 50 years, the United States
Government has been involved in repeated terrorist
acts which have resulted in 3,478 deaths among the
Cuban people and the maiming of 2,099, as well as
material losses amounting to trillions of dollars.

Cuba has worked tirelessly in the search for
bilateral and multilateral forms of cooperation to fight
international terrorism, based on mutual respect,
non-interference in the internal affairs of States and the
sovereign equality of States. In that context, on
29 November 2001, Cuba proposed signing a bilateral
counter-terrorism programme with the United States
Government, without any conditions and in accordance
with Security Council resolution 1373 (2001). That
proposal, subsequently reiterated on various occasions,
was rejected by the Bush Administration on the basis
of empty and irrational arguments. If the new United
States Administration genuinely wishes to prove its
commitment to the fight against terrorism, it now has
the opportunity to take firm action, without double
standards, against the various terrorist organizations
that have attacked Cuba for so many years from within
the territory of the United States. It has the opportunity
to let justice be done by releasing, without further
delay, the five Cuban anti-terrorist fighters that it has
kept as political prisoners for over 10 years in high-
security prisons. The President of the United States has
the constitutional prerogative to set them free as an act
of justice and to show the commitment of his
Government to fighting terrorism.

The United States Government has the floor. It is
in its hands to stop using the topic of terrorism for
political purposes and to put an end the unfair and
groundless inclusion of Cuba on the list of countries
that supposedly sponsor terrorism.

Cuba reiterates its willingness to make a more
detailed presentation on these questions before the
Counter-Terrorism Committee or submit to it any
additional information or clarification considered
necessary. Double standards cannot prevail. It will be
impossible to eliminate terrorism so long as some
terrorist acts are condemned and others are covered up,
tolerated or justified. As in the past, Cuba will continue
to strictly abide by the provisions of Security Council
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004)
and to cooperate with the subsidiary bodies established
pursuant to them.

