Mr. Laher (South Africa): Allow me to congratulate
you and your delegation, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of December. Please be assured of our
full support. We also commend the Indian delegation
for its excellent stewardship of the Council during a
very busy November.

South Africa thanks the Special Adviser of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Jamal Benomar, for his briefing
to the Council today. We once again applaud his efforts
and encourage him to continue to work with the parties
in their attempts to fully implement the Transition
Agreement. We particularly welcome the progress
made towards the preparations for the National
Dialogue Conference, which was scheduled to resume
in mid-November. Mr. Benomar and his team's efforts
to support the Yemeni stakeholders in their preparations
for the National Dialogue are commendable. We also
appreciate the attempts to ensure that the National
Dialogue is as inclusive as possible so as to prevent
potential dissent from those who may be disgruntled if
left out of the process.

Last month marked the first anniversary of the
historic Transition Agreement signed by the Yemeni
parties in November 2011. The signing of that
Agreement paved the way for a constructive path for
the people of Yemen through a peaceful transfer of
power, elections, national dialogue and constitutional
reforms. We are disappointed that the National
Dialogue Conference could not resume in November as
originally scheduled, owing to secessionist tendencies
in the South, which have continued to derail progress
in the country's transitional process. However, we
welcome the agreement by the parties on the allocation
of seats for the forthcoming Conference. That important
Conference should be convened as soon as possible so
as to pave the way for a new political order in Yemen.

We also welcome the promulgation of the presidential
decree establishing the Supreme Commission on
Elections and Referendums, which will play a
significant role in the preparations for the presidential
and parliamentary elections to be held in 2014.

The continuing tensions among political parties
have the potential to derail the transitional process. We
urge all Yemeni stakeholders to forego narrow political
positions and to focus on the bigger picture regarding
the unity and stability of the country. We encourage
the Yemeni authorities to intensify their efforts towards
the reunification and reconciliation of the population
in order to heal all wounds and create a new future
devoid of grudges and factionalism. All stakeholders,
in particular young people, should be included in that
process.

The Secretary-General's recent visit to Yemen
was a significant moment indicating the support of the
United Nations for the people of Yemen in their time
of need. We echo his words, which I quote: "This is a
process which must be irreversible: there is no turning
back".

President Saleh and his allies should be condemned
for the destructive role that they continue to play in
Yemeni politics. Counterproductive activities must
be discouraged, and those responsible for acts of
aggression must be cautioned. The growing number of
terrorist activities in the country is deeply worrying. In
particular, we are deeply concerned about the presence
and expansion ofAl-Qaida, especially in the South. It is
important that the international community support the
Yemeni authorities in dealing with that threat, which
is likely to spill over to the rest of the region if left
unchecked.

The deteriorating socioeconomic and humanitarian
situation in Yemen is still a cause of concern. We call on

the international community to provide urgent support
to alleviate that situation. In that regard, we welcome
the meetings of the Friends of Yemen, which continue
to provide an opportunity to pledge significant support
to the transitional process.
Yemen is very different today from what it was a
year ago. Significant progress has been made in moving
the country towards democracy and stability. It is worth
noting that the success of the mediation in Yemen
was, to a great extent, a result of positive cooperation
between the United Nations in general and the Security
Council in particular, regional organizations and other
international stakeholders. Specifically, the Security
Council, which is divided on many critical issues,
spoke with one voice and cooperated with regional
organizations, principal among which was the Gulf
Cooperation Council. That shows that working together
we can accomplish more.

Finally, we support the idea of a Council Visit, and
we would encourage the Council to visit Yemen at an
appropriate time. We believe that a visit to Yemen would
bolster the efforts of President Mansour and unblock
some of the bottlenecks in the transitional process. A
visit would also indicate to the people of Yemen that
the Council is accompanying them in their transition
towards a new phase in their country's history.

