Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express our sincere gratitude
to you, Mr. President, for convening this important
meeting on a vital and essential topic. I also appreciate
the invaluable briefings by the Secretary-General and
all of today's briefers.

The resolution of conflicts through mediation is
one of the means and manifestations of civilization
for resolving international disputes by conducting
constructive and meaningful dialogue among the
various parties involved. The Charter of the United
Nations contains many tools that promote the settlement
of disputes through peaceful means, especially under
the provisions of Chapter VI, which sets out steps for
resolving disputes between parties to a conflict by, as
Article 33 puts it,

"negotiations, enquiry, mediation, conciliation,
arbitration, judicial settlement, resort to regional
agencies or arrangements, or other peaceful means
of their own choice."

That was clearly demonstrated in the role that Ethiopia
and the African Union (AU) played in assisting the
parties concerned in the Sudan to reach an agreement
concerning the transitional period between the
Transitional Military Council and the Forces ofFreedom
and Change. Chapter VI emphasizes the importance
of the preventive role played by the Security Council
and emphasizes its ability to call on the parties to a
conflict to settle their disputes by such peaceful means.
It may investigate any dispute or position that might
lead to international friction that could endanger the
maintenance of international peace and security.

Chapter VIII of the Charter promotes the peaceful
resolution of local disputes through arrangements with
regional and subregional organizations, because of
their geographical proximity and historical knowledge
of such disputes. In that context, we should pay tribute
to the Charter-based cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union, which is steadily and
commendably developing. Reviewing the aspects
and patterns of that cooperation, we find significant
progress in every aspect, especially between their two
councils, the Security Council and the AU Peace and
Security Council, which hold annual joint meetings.
We look forward to the thirteenth of those meetings, to
be held in Addis Ababa in the second half of October.
We are also seeing continued cooperation between the
Peacebuilding Commission and every African Union
entity. We call for maintaining those gains and building
on them, especially the Action for Peacekeeping
initiative, with a view to ensuring that peacekeeping
missions are better equipped and more efficient, secure
and robust. That requires strong Security Council
mandates with predictable and sustainable financing.
In that regard, we commend the African Union's
commitment to continuing to cover 25 per cent of
the costs of its peace operations and look forward to
the adoption of a resolution enabling the financing of
peacekeeping operations under African leadership.

Based on Article 19 of the Charter, the Secretary-
General plays a fundamental role that grants him the
right to responsibility for preventing conflicts through
his good offices or through his envoys and special
representatives in conflict zones. As a demonstration
of the priority that the Secretary-General gives the
issue of mediation, since assuming his post he has
established a High-level Advisory Board on Mediation
as a tool for using mediation and preventive diplomacy
in conflict prevention.

The Secretary-General's special envoys and
representatives and their teams also play a major and
commendable role in conflict resolution. In View of
the significance that Kuwait attaches to preventive
diplomacy, and in recognition of its noble importance, a
high-level debate on conflict prevention and mediation
(see S/PV.8546) was organized in June during the
Kuwait presidency of the Council, under the agenda item
on the maintenance of international peace and security.
We reiterate the importance of promoting the role of
prevention and mediation in conflict prevention and
resolution, as well as of cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations in
the maintenance of international peace and security. We
remain fully convinced that the Security Council can
make use of many of the preventive measures offered
in the Charter, including, for example, sending small
missions of a few members of the Council, a measure
that it has used in the past.

In conclusion, the Security Council, with all its
accumulated experience, lessons learned and decades-
1ong institutional memory, is undoubtedly capable of
taking innovative and preventive measures and steps
in the area of conflict prevention and mediation,
which will inevitably contribute to the maintenance
of international peace and security, through both its
field visits and its sanctions regimes on individuals and
entities. The success and effectiveness of the Council's
role in preventive diplomacy depend on the timing of its
interventions and its use of those tools. The earlier an
intervention is made to ensure an appropriate response,
the better the eventual outcome in terms of material
losses and human casualties.

