Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
We would like to thank Mr. Abou Moussa for the
informative briefing that he has given us concerning
the work of his office and for his report on the areas
affected by the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA). We also
thank Ambassador Francisco Caetano Jose Madeira for
the very useful information he has given us.

We welcome the measures adopted by the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA)
to facilitate regional initiatives and coordinate the
activities undertaken by the entities of the United
Nations to prevent conflicts and help build peace in the
Central African region. UNOCA has an important role
to play. We commend the determination of UNOCA to
work closely with the United Nations Office for West
Africa (UNOWA) in order to tackle the serious security
problems that face those two subregions. The joint
efforts of UNOCA and UNOWA will be indispensable
in dealing with the negative repercussions of the
conflict in Libya for Western and Central Africa and for
insecurity in the Sahel region. We call upon UNOCA
to continue its efforts in order to enhance coordination
of the United Nations missions that are working in
the region, and to promote cooperation with regional
organizations such as the Economic Community of
Central African States and the African Union.

As for the Lord's Resistance Army, my delegation
remains concerned, of course, by the devastating
effects that this armed group and its current activities
continue to have in the areas within which it operates.
The brutality of its activities continues to threaten
thousands of innocent civilians, including women and
children.

We therefore support the regional strategy presented
by UNOCA in cooperation with the African Union to
combat the initiatives of the Lord's Resistance Army,
improve efforts to promote the protection of civilians by
establishing mechanisms for humanitarian assistance
and for the protection of children in all of the affected
areas, and provide assistance to the Governments that
are affected by this rebel group. We encourage the
authorities of each of the affected countries to lend
their support and cooperation to this strategy for the
benefit of their peoples, who for decades now have had
to suffer under the scourge of this armed group.
Once again, we vigorously condemn the violations
that have been committed and that unfortunately
continue to be committed by the Lord's Resistance
Army and we express our solidarity with the victims.
Guatemala has also been a direct victim of the attacks
perpetrated by that armed group. In January 2006,
eight Guatemalan peacekeeping officers who had been
deployed in the Democratic Republic of the Congo lost
their lives in Garamba National Park when they were
ambushed by members of the Lord's Resistance Army.
We still hope that one day the perpetrators of those acts
will be brought to justice. For that reason, we urge for
the execution of the arrest warrants that were issued by
the International Criminal Court for the three leaders
of the Lord's Resistance Army who have been charged
with, among others things, war crimes and crimes
against humanity. We encourage all States to cooperate
with the Court in order to execute those warrants and
to bring the perpetrators of those atrocities to justice.

Finally, we would like to express our support for
the draft presidential statement to be adopted today.

