We appreciate the information provided today. The year 2020 has proved challenging. As we commemorate the sixtieth anniversary and highlight the achievements of United Nations police (UNPOL), we recognize the need to identify good practices and strengthen those areas that require critical improvements in order to fulfil the tasks entrusted to us and to effectively support Member States in new operational environments. The protection of civilians is a fundamental aspect of UNPOL. We must remember that this is and must always be its priority, thereby reaffirming the importance of the rule of law, justice and human security. We would like to highlight the courageous and tireless work of UNPOL during the coronavirus disease pandemic. United Nations police have continued their surveillance functions and immediately adopted guidelines to prevent the spread of the virus by identifying criminal threats that were likely to increase, such as domestic and intercommunal violence, the trafficking and smuggling of persons, the counterfeiting of medicines and medical products, as well as civil unrest in medical facilities, food outlets and other critical infrastructure. With respect to Haiti, we appreciate the efforts of the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH) and its police unit to professionalize the Haitian National Police (HNP), and we note the increase in women recruited. However, we remain concerned about civil unrest, gang violence and impunity. We understand that the limited budget of the HNP presents serious difficulties in maintaining its work force, covering operational costs and acquiring adequate equipment. We are also aware that in order to control the formation of gangs and gang violence, it is essential that Haiti continue to expand its police force to comprise at least 25,000 officers, in order to meet the internationally accepted ratio of 2.2 police per 1,000 inhabitants. In this regard, we call on the international community to support the mandate of BINUH to strengthen the operational capacity of the HNP by increasing funds available to assist it. These efforts must be accompanied by renewed commitments from the Haitian Government to effectively implementing the HNP strategic development plan 2017-2021. Only with a collective commitment will Haiti make progress in developing the capacity of its national police. When examining its impact in terms of protection, it is clear that the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) plays an important role in that country by working with communities to reduce tensions and developing activities that help with the reporting and investigation of crimes, including cases of gender- based violence and human rights violations. For this reason, we congratulate Chief Inspector Doreen Malambo, UNPOL Gender Adviser at UNMISS, on being awarded the 2020 United Nations Woman Police Officer of the Year Award, in recognition of the support she has provided to vulnerable groups. With regard to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic, we welcome the continuation of the comprehensive performance assessment system, the development of the results framework and the use of technological tools to monitor the impact it is having and improve data collection. We also welcome the fact that the police component will be re-evaluated on a quarterly basis and that plans will be made to improve the performance of its units, reducing shortfalls and improving operational capacity. Finally, Mali, which is of key importance to the stability of the entire Sahel region, continues to face enormous challenges, exacerbated by the recent coup d'etat, persistent violence between communities, terrorism, violent extremism and asymmetric attacks, in addition to the humanitarian and human rights dimension, particularly in the centre and north of the country and mainly affecting women and children. In this respect, UNPOL plays an essential role in filling the gap in the official Government presence, protecting civilians and strengthening national capacities to address these scourges. In conclusion, the Dominican Republic wishes to express its support for UNPOL, and for all men and women who selflessly put their lives at risk in peace operations and in post-conflict or other crisis situations.
