Ms. Bassols (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): Spain
aligns itself with the statements made on behalf of the
European Union and the Group of Friends of Children
and Armed Conflict.

Children and armed conflict is much more than
a mere item on the Security Council agenda. It is
a collective responsibility that, as States Members
of the United Nations and as human beings, we all
have the ethical imperative to address. In the face of
the recruitment of minors, the bombing of schools,
abductions, rapes and murders of children, we have
to be unyielding and demand strict compliance with
international humanitarian law and the resolutions of
the Security Council.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2017/821) and the French presidency for
organizing this open debate today. I also welcome
the adoption today of presidential statement
S/PRST/2017/21.

I will focus my statement on an essential topic - the
credibility of the list of those responsible for attacks
against children and armed conflict. I will then briefly
touch upon three issues: the commitment of Spain to
this agenda, the attacks on doctors and hospitals, and
the measures that we are proposing with respect to
United Nations capabilities - thanks to which it can
publish the robust reports it publishes - in terms of
accountability of non-State actors.

With respect to list annexed to the report of the

Secretary-General, I would like to underscore that it is
a very useful tool only to the extent that it is credible. It
therefore requires a scrupulous respect for the process
of information-gathering by the United Nations, which
must continue to be a transparent and neutral process.
Spain expresses its support for the Secretary-General
and for the work of his Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict in order to ensure that
the list continues to play its role of denunciation and
as an offer of assistance to the parties of a conflict
contained in it, with a view to their eventual delisting.
That list must be accompanied by accurate information
regarding the progress made by the parties included
therein and the signing and implementation of action
plans with specific commitments.

Spain's commitment to the protection of children
in armed conflicts is serious, firm and long-term. In
2000 Spain signed and, in 2002, ratified the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on
the Involvement of Children in Armed Conflict shortly
following its adoption. In February, we participated in
the ministerial-level conference "Protecting Children
From War", held in Paris, dedicated to the protection
of children in armed conflict and celebrated the tenth
anniversary of the Paris Commitments to protect
children from unlawful recruitment or use by armed
forces or armed groups. In addition, the following
month we participated in the international Conference
on Safe Schools held in Buenos Aires. Spain endorsed
the Safe Schools Declaration in 2015. I take this
opportunity today to announce that we will endorse
the peacekeeping principles aimed at preventing the
recruitment and use of child soldiers, which Canada
has proposed and will be offered for adoption at the
upcoming summit in Vancouver.

I reaffirm our commitment to following up on
resolution 2286 (2016), on attacks directed against
medical personnel and hospitals, the effective
implementation of which remains a challenge. Spain
had the honour of participating in drafting the text
of that resolution, which was adopted in 2016. We
will continue working to implement and adapt the
resolution in the coming weeks and months. Today,
we align ourselves with the policy statement delivered
by the French Minister for Foreign Affairs, thereby
reaffirming our national responsibility to prevent those
types of attacks, which have serious consequences
for children.

In order to continue making progress in the
protection of children in armed conflicts, Spain
prioritizes, first, incorporating the protection of
children in a cross-cutting manner in the mandates
of the United Nations missions; secondly, adequately
equipping the components that involve the protection
of minors, and ensuring sufficient financing for their
protection mandates and necessary dialogue with
the missions' leadership; and, thirdly, strengthening
capacities intended to shore up the legal and judicial
system of the affected countries. Accountability is key
to combating impunity.

We must increase our focus on victims. Many
attacks are perpetrated by non-State actors, regardless
of where they occur. Children used by terrorist groups
or those affiliated with armed groups, as well as girls
recruited for the purpose of sexual exploitation, must
be considered victims and must be provided with
rehabilitation programmes. There is an urgent need
for demobilization, disarmament, reintegration and
resettlement programmes aimed at systematically
integrating the specific needs of children.
With regard to the protection of Children, given the
scale of the challenge, any single effort is inadequate.
The international community and the Council can
count on Spain to combat it.

