Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): This is our first public
meeting on terrorism after the tragic events in London
reminded us once again of that scourge, as well as of
the urgency and necessity of redoubling efforts to
combat it.

Within the framework of the reform of the United
Nations, we now have the opportunity to reach an
agreement on a definition of terrorism and to foster a
coordinated, comprehensive and integrated
international response to that threat. We welcome the
suggestions presented by the Secretary-General and
consider them to be a good basis for a larger discussion
about that issue.

A comprehensive anti-terrorism strategy should
also tackle, in a proper manner, the root causes of
terrorism as a most appropriate way of reducing the
temptations to resort to that form of violence. Among
possible techniques, such a strategy might involve
preventive diplomacy, crisis management and the
promotion of social and economic development. It is
well known that situations linked to political, cultural
and social oppression foster an environment that
facilitates the development of extremism.

I should like to add our voice to the Secretary-
General's call in inviting United Nations Member
States to make a special effort to try to conclude the
needed convention on terrorism as soon as possible.
That convention should take into account the
observance of international law, the rule of law and due
process. We consider that the ideas put forward by the
High-Level Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change
are a useful starting point for that process. Brazil
believes that such an umbrella convention should be
based on a clear and agreed definition of terrorism.

We thank Ambassador Ellen Loj for her
substantive briefing and for her effective and dynamic
conduct of the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC). I would also like to take this
opportunity to thank the Executive Director of the
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED), Mr.
Javier Ruperez, and his team. We also recognize that
Ambassador Ruperez's office is now understaffed, but
we hope that the problem will be remedied in the near
future.
Brazil supports the current reform of the CTED
and expects that it will become fully operational as
soon as possible in order to carry out its ambitious
work programme under the policy guidance of the
plenary of the CTC. I take this opportunity to reiterate
the need to allow equitable representation of all regions
and legal traditions within its secretariat. It is
necessary that the CTED strengthen its capacity in
order to better facilitate the provision of technical
assistance to all interested States. Brazil strongly
encourages States that might benefit from such
cooperation to request assistance. The CTC should be a
policy-guidance organ - and effectively it is - and a
competent facilitator of assistance to Member States,
which is to be obtained through an increasing dialogue
with States and interested international partners within
existing international law.

As mandated by resolution 1535 (2004), Brazil
hopes that the visits to States, with their consent, will
provide the CTC with a more thorough understanding
of the situation in those countries, including further
insight into the difficulties States may face in
implementing the resolution, as was mentioned by
Ambassador Lszsj this morning. It is essential that a
proper follow-up mechanism to those visits be put into
place so as to ensure that technical assistance and other
needs identified during the visits are duly taken into
account.

My delegation thanks Ambassador Cesar Mayoral
for his briefing on the activities of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999). We
share his perceptions on the recent episodes of
terrorism and on their probable impact on the work of
the 1267 Committee. We are pleased by the good
results of his first Visit to selected States, as mandated
by resolution 1526 (2004). The views expressed by the
States on the quality of the Committee's list of
individuals and entities associated with Al-Qaida
and/or the Taliban, as well as on the need to improve
listing and delisting procedures, can help the future
work of the Committee. Work on improving listing,
delisting and exemption procedures must be
undertaken, as proposed by Ambassador Mayoral. The
enhancement of such procedures will encourage
reluctant States to submit names for the lists.

The ongoing negotiations on a new resolution,
pursuant to paragraph 3 of resolution 1526 (2004),
offer a privileged opportunity to improve the work of
the Committee and to focus on some of its most
important tasks. The establishment of a definition of
the term "associated with Osama bin Laden, Al-Qaida
and the Taliban" will certainly help to refine the
existing list of individuals and entities. In tailoring that
definition, we should be able to balance the need to
make it inclusive with the need to respect individual
rights and prevent errors. When dealing with the issue
of reporting to the Committee by States, we have to
guarantee that the format and periodicity adopted will
not make the procedure excessively burdensome for
Members that lack resources.

I also thank Ambassador Mihnea Motoc for his
briefing on the activities of the 1540 Committee. Based
on Member States' positive responses, the 1540
Committee has been able to make steadfast progress in
the examination of the relevant national reports. We are
pleased to see that the consideration of the whole first
round of national reports is likely to be concluded
shortly and that the Committee will be in a position to
provide a comprehensive report to the Council in 2006.

My delegation joins the Chairman's calls to
encourage Member States that have not yet submitted
their reports to do so. I trust that the Committee is
willing to consider in full all requests for technical
assistance in the preparation of the reports or in
implementing the provisions of the resolution.
Measures to strengthen the Committee's capacity to
react to those requests and to facilitate assistance are, I
believe, under way.

For Brazil, the very existence of weapons of mass
destruction in the hands either of non-State actors or of
States themselves is a matter of grave concern. As we
continue to call for complete, verifiable and
irreversible disarmament of States that possess such
arms, we believe that the threat posed by terrorists
having access to them is also important and requires
appropriate action. These issues seem to be
inextricably linked.

Brazil believes that the General Assembly could
benefit from the work accomplished by the 1540
Committee if there is need to identify common
standards and best practices. My delegation was
pleased to join the consensus in the Assembly in April
when it adopted the International Convention for the
Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism, which
addresses the unlawful possession or use of nuclear
devices or materials by non-State actors. That clearly
showed the resolve of the United Nations to act on
those matters and demonstrates that space for debate
and compromise is available. My delegation would be
ready to support consideration by the General
Assembly of common lines of action aimed at
preventing terrorists from gaining access to weapons of
mass destruction. That would no doubt add
unquestionable efficacy to our approach to the threats
in the same spirit that the 12 conventions have
equipped us to respond to international terrorism in all
its aspects.

