Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Farid Zarif for
his briefing. We also thank Prime Minister Ivica Dacic'
of Serbia and Prime Minister Hashim Thaci of Kosovo
for their statements. We commend their determined
efforts to move the two sides closer to a negotiated
solution and achieve sustainable peace in the region.

The violence during the local elections in northern
Kosovo held on 3 November was worrisome. We
welcome the decision of the Government of Kosovo
to annul its results. While the re-run on 17 November
was not marked by violence, low voter turnout was
cause for concern. We call on those who boycotted the
elections to join the political process. Participating in
the elections would have been a better way for them to
secure their rights.

Despite challenges, the two sides have maintained
the political momentum and made tangible progress
towards the implementation of the framework agreement
of 19 April and the implementation plan of 22 May. The
continued engagement of the two Prime Ministers, who
met four times during the current reporting period,
played a key role in facilitating the process. The two
sides have reached agreements on telecommunications
and energy. They have also agreed on handling long-
term cooperation in the energy sector at a later stage.

We note that progress has been made in other key
areas, including the police and the judiciary, as agreed
in the framework agreement. It is expected that two
further draft laws foreseen in the agreement - a law
on local self-government and a law on the rights of
communities - which are under consideration in the
Assembly of Kosovo, will be enacted before the end of
the year.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/631)
notes that the overall security situation in Kosovo
remained generally calm, with occasional incidents
reported in ethnically mixed areas. That is encouraging.
The number of reported incidents against minority
communities has declined. To us, all sides seem to be
demonstrating an increased commitment to preventing
tensions in order to enable the high-level dialogue and
implementation process to move forward.
Those are all encouraging signs that prove that,
when the leadership is determined, they can overcome
even serious obstacles. As the two Prime Ministers
indicated in their detailed statements today, there are
many problems that need to be resolved. What is most
important is that they continue to build and sustain
mutual trust so that their engagement does not falter.

We acknowledge the vital role of High
Representative Catherine Ashton and the European
Union in this process. Both remain indispensable to the
dialogue. The United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo, under the leadership of Special
Representative Farid Zarif, continues to play a critical
role in the stabilization of Kosovo.

Finally, I would like to wish both Prime Ministers
success on the difficult road ahead. They have broken
fresh diplomatic ground. They must take it to its logical
conclusion. We are confident that, with commitment
and dedication, conditions of peace, stability and
prosperity will be created in Kosovo in the near future.

