Mr. Jurica (Croatia): I should like to begin by
thanking Mr. Staffan de Mistura, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Iraq, for
his informative and comprehensive briefing and
express our appreciation for the ongoing effort and
commitment that he and his team are investing in
fulfilling the mandate of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). I would also like to thank
Ambassador Hamid Al Bayati for his statement.

Iraq is becoming a free and fully democratic
country. Croatia expresses its congratulations to the
Government and the people of Iraq on the successful
holding of provincial elections, the first Iraqi-led and
Iraqi-owned electoral process with the participation of
citizens from all its communities. I would also like to
pay tribute to UNAMI and its contribution to preparing
and carrying out the elections, including with regard to
the important issue of minority representation. In
addition, we salute the serious, extensive and
indispensable work done by Iraq's Independent High
Electoral Commission.

The peaceful provincial elections marked a
crucial moment in the consolidation of Iraqi
democracy. We hope that they will help to create new

political momentum, which should be channelled into
the national reconciliation process and economic
development. Together with the major security gains
that Iraq experienced last year, the results should now
be collectively translated into lasting stability and
tangible improvements that will be felt in the daily
lives of ordinary Iraqis and will respond to the
expectations and confidence expressed when the Iraqi
people cast their votes. The atmosphere largely free of
violence during the election period can be seen as the
best testimony to the significant improvements in the
security situation achieved over the past year. The Iraqi
Government and the Iraqi Security Forces have
demonstrated increasing capabilities and the ability to
address security challenges.

The conclusion of the bilateral security
agreement that led to the ending of the mandate of the
multinational forces was another landmark
achievement. We understand that the coming months
will be testing and demanding for Iraqi forces. It is
imperative that extremists not be allowed to undermine
these gains or the public confidence hitherto achieved
by continuing with sporadic and indiscriminate
violence.

In the context of UNAMI's operations, it is
important to ensure that the transfer of responsibilities
results in no security gap for its facilities and
personnel. As the Secretary-General's recent visit has
unmistakably demonstrated, Iraq can count on the
continuous support of the United Nations and the
international community in this next crucial phase of
locking in the democratic, security and economic
progress made so far. We are glad to note that Iraq
remains high on the United Nations list of priorities.

Croatia shares the conviction that the expansion
and the increased activity of UNAMI have proved to be
fully justified in view of the political and security gains
witnessed compared to the previous year. It has proved
to be a positive force in advancing national
reconciliation, facilitating political consensus,
engaging on the issues of minority representation and
disputed internal boundaries, promoting regional
dialogue, offering substantial electoral assistance,
promoting human rights and supporting reconstruction
and development. The recent establishment of the
Independent High Commission for Human Rights, to
name one example, is a tangible measure of its
achievements.

As Iraq focuses on advancing the political
process and socio-economic recovery, UNAMI has
rightly identified federalism and hydrocarbon
regulation as the priority issues to be addressed within
the constitutional review process as requirements for
long-term stability. Another priority challenge will be
the issue of disputed internal boundaries and the status
of Kirkuk.

On the recovery and development front, the
International Compact for Iraq remains the blueprint
for coherent international engagement. We are pleased
to note a deepening United Nations engagement on
humanitarian and development issues. Croatia
continues to believe that dialogue and constructive
engagement with Iraq's neighbours remains a critical
component in the long-term stabilization of Iraq. We
are encouraged by the trend of the reopening of
embassies of regional countries in Baghdad and salute
UNAMI's continued support for regional dialogue.

In closing, as the engagement of the United
Nations is expanding and deepening, let me reiterate
Croatia's full and continued support for the
professional and committed efforts of Special
Representative De Mistura and his team in their
fulfilment of the mandate of UNAMI.

