Mr. Dahlgren (Sweden): We welcome this briefing as
part of a regular exchange of views between the Security
Council and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). My delegation also
welcomes the format of this briefing and I want to thank
you, Sir, for arranging it. We hope that this can also be a
regular feature of the future work of the Council.

Let me at the outset not only thank Mrs. Ogata for her
comprehensive briefing, but also, on behalf of my
Government, extend a strong tribute to her and to all those
who work in the organization that she leads, not only for
their immense efforts in the field all over the world, but
also for the forward-looking ideas and suggestions that she
has put forward here today to us.

The Security Council lately has devoted increasing
attention to refugee protection in a thematic manner. Two
examples of that are the follow-up to the Secretary-
General's report on Africa and his report on protection for
humanitarian assistance, with largely, I would say,
overlapping recommendations and conclusions. My
delegation particularly appreciated Mrs. Ogata's comments
on the work to develop a range of options to create secure
environments for civilians endangered by conflict, as well
as what she said on the role of the Security Council,
UNHCR and other actors in the most serious situations
when security problems escalate.

The members of the Security Council are right now
negotiating a draft resolution on the security of refugee
camps and settlements as part of our follow-up to the
Secretary-General's report on Africa. We would hope that
the outcome of these and other discussions that we are
having on the follow-up to the report would be to make the
Council and other parts of the United Nations system better
prepared to deal with difficult security issues in crisis
situations. I hope that the High Commissioner will continue
to keep the Security Council informed on refugee issues
raising security concerns.

One question that I would like to address to
Mrs. Ogata is how she feels that one could bridge the gap,
as it were, between the traditional UNHCR mandate and the
Council's responsibility for international peace and security,
in order to make the lateral options reality. Is there a need
for new mechanisms for cooperation or for a better use of
existing ones? It will be interesting to hear her comments
on that.

If we have time, it will also be interesting to hear
the High Commissioner elaborate somewhat further on
how she assesses prospects for minority repatriation in
Bosnia and Croatia in 1999. The question we ask is, of
course, whether the major UNHCR effort in Kosovo will
affect engagement in Bosnia and Herzegovina financially
and otherwise.

