Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): My
country, Egypt, feels a great deal of anger today over
the arbitrary behaviour of the Israeli Government. That
behaviour, if it reflects anything of any meaning,
reflects the inability to perceive reality and that that
Government's continuation of practices that have been
rejected by the international community can only lead
to further confrontation and violence and further loss of
innocent lives on both the Palestinian and the Israeli
sides. Today's military operations by the Israeli army
against the Palestinian territories, and its occupation of
the headquarters of the Palestinian President in
Ramallah - which is the temporary Palestinian capital
until its move to East Jerusalem - are acts that reflect
the narrow vision of the Israeli leadership and its
inability to understand a situation that its own actions
and behaviour have created.

The real problem which Israel is trying to avoid
dealing with is that the situation it now faces with the
Palestinian people and its legitimate leadership is one
in which a people is rejecting the continued occupation
of its territory, cities and villages by armed force, and
the Israeli Government perception that it can break the
back of the national popular resistance of a heroic
people against armed occupation through the blind use
of brute armed force. That occupation by Israel and its
settlers has been taking place since 5 June 1967.
Israel's attacks and its blind use of armed force to
terrorize and humiliate the Palestinian people and its
leadership will be defeated by that heroic resistance
and the steadfast, firm stand of the Palestinian people
against foreign occupation.

The problem is one of occupation, and only
occupation. That occupation is the cause of all the
suffering of the Palestinian and the Israeli peoples. As I
have previously made clear, Egypt condemns all acts of
violence that lead to loss of life and civilian victims in
Israeli cities. But we also condemn most firmly all
these reckless operations, the blind use of force and the
arrogance of using force against the Palestinian people
and its legitimate leadership.

Egypt demands that the Security Council assume
its responsibility under the Charter and that it send a
clear message and vision that includes the following
elements.

First, the Council should call on Israel to refrain
from any attacks on the legitimate Palestinian
leadership represented by President Arafat and his
aides and assistants in any way. Secondly, the Council
should demand that Israel immediately withdraw from
all cities and territories it has entered and end all its
recent measures.

Thirdly, the Council should call upon both parties
to commit themselves to urgent implementation of the
Tenet plan and the Mitchell recommendations, and to
respond to all the efforts made by the parties
concerned- foremost among which are those of the
Secretary-General, the European Union, the Russian
Federation, the United States and others - with a View
to bringing acts of violence under control, ending
armed confrontations and moving towards a
negotiating process that will lead to a settlement. In
this regard, we cannot allow for a repetition of what
has taken place before, namely, wasting time and
manoeuvring in the same way as during the 10 years
since the Madrid Conference.

Only yesterday the Arab nation presented an
integrated and comprehensive vision of a just and final
settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict that included the
Palestinian question, which is the essence and cause of
that conflict. Regrettably, Israel's answer was that of an
arrogant Power. I would like to reiterate once again my
country's conviction that the current armed action will
not achieve for Israel and its people the security they
seek. This attack will only complicate matters further
and open the way for more reciprocal violence and loss
of security for both parties.

The objective all parties must work to achieve
must be to end Israeli occupation and to establish a
Palestinian State with its capital in East Jerusalem,
with equal security for both sides. Finally, there must
be good-neighbourly relations between the two
countries within secure and recognized borders. This is
exactly what resolution 1397 (2002) called for, and we
support all of its elements.

In spite of this, we reaffirm that as long as
occupation remains, as long as there is a desire to
continue the settlement activity and to rely on the
policies of force and violence, this sad situation will
continue to represent a sword of Damocles hanging
over the region. This will continue until Israel reaches
the same outcome as that recognized by all occupation
forces throughout history: domination and occupation
will not achieve security for the occupier, for its
citizens or for the sons of the defenceless Palestinian
people.

