Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria): 1 would like to
congratulate Lithuania on its presidency of the Council
for this month. I am also grateful for the concept note
that has been circulated (S/2015/306, annex), which
we believe will guide our deliberations to a successful
conclusion. I would like to thank the Secretary-General
and the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights for their insightful presentations. My delegation
also takes note of the recommendations included in the
Secretary-General's report (S/2015/289).

The illicit trade in small arms and light weapons
continues to threaten peace, security and stability
in many countries and regions around the world,
particularly North Africa and the Sahel region. In every
aspect, the illicit trade in weapons and their misuse
constitute a real threat to peace and security at all
levels, national, regional and international. That trade
is also a source of supply and financing for terrorist
groups and organized crime and therefore an ongoing
concern for my country.

Algeria, which is directly affected by such criminal
activities, has continued to deploy every possible effort
all along its frontiers to curb the arms trafficking
by illegal cross-border networks that fuels terrorist
activities in the region. In addition to adapting its
existing national legislation and regulations, Algeria
has taken numerous steps to strengthen its operational
readiness to counteract the actions of criminal and
terrorist groups. In our proven commitment to regional
peace and security, we have made every effort to
contribute to peace processes in our immediate
environment, as well as within the regional groups we
belong to. At the Euro-Mediterranean level, between
the two rims of the Mediterranean Sea, Algeria is
working to foster a common understanding of security
issues and multi-dimensional cooperation, including
in combating illicit trading in small arms and light
weaponry.

Based on its national experience, Algeria reaffirms
that the United Nations Programme of Action to
Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small
Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, along with
the International Tracing Instrument, are more relevant
than ever. We continue to emphasize the importance of
their full, balanced and effective implementation. We
would also like to stress that international cooperation
and assistance are essential to implementing those two
instruments. Algeria has ratified several international
instruments relating to conventional weapons, as well
as to transnational organized crime and combating
terrorism. We would also like to stress the importance
of the Protocol against the Illicit Manufacturing and
Trafficking in Firearms, Their Parts and Components
and Ammunition, supplementing the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime. We
take this opportunity to announce that Algeria recently
ratified the Convention on Certain Conventional
Weapons, as well as its Protocols I, III and IV.

Any form of violence against civilians, women
and children that results from the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons is unacceptable. Unfortunately,
statistics show that such violence continues to be
pervasive all over the world. It is therefore essential
that we intensify our efforts at all levels, particularly in
terms of prevention and awareness. Since the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000), the United Nations has
adopted specific policy directives aimed at achieving
gender equality in peacekeeping operations. If we
are to further those policies, we should ensure that
the United Nations can advance the deployment of
women protection advisers and gender advisers in both
its peacekeeping and political missions, as well as in
humanitarian operations.

In our view, effectively combating the illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons requires a
comprehensive and integrated approach based on
a combination of political, economic, military and
security factors. Algeria is in favour of a unified
strategy designed to deal with problems that are
prevalent in the Sahel, such as terrorism, transnational
organized crime, hostage-taking and drug trafficking.
We would like to emphasize that in pursuit of the goal
of contributing to international peace and security, all
measures aimed at combating the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons should be undertaken in full
conformity the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, including the right to self-determination of all
peoples, and taking into account the particular situation
of peoples under colonialism or other forms of alien
domination or foreign occupation.

