Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): The situation in Ukraine,
in particular the Crimea, is alarming and may pose a
threat to international peace and security. We stress the
need for all international actors to respect the Charter
of the United Nations and resolve their disputes in
conformity with existing bilateral and multilateral
agreements. We therefore strongly urge all parties and
stakeholders in the Ukrainian crisis to exercise extreme
restraint in order to de-escalate the tensions. We further
call for an inclusive political dialogue acknowledging
the diversity of Ukrainian society and ensuring the
protection of ethnic minorities, including the Russian
community.

Given the current situation, we believe more than
ever that the United Nations has a critical role to play.
We welcome the visit of Deputy Secretary-General
Jan Eliasson to Kyiv in an effort to find a diplomatic
and political solution to the Ukrainian crisis. We also
welcome initiatives of several capitals, including the
visits today by both the United States Secretary of
State and the United Kingdom Foreign Secretary to
Kyiv, as well as the efforts of the President of the Swiss
Confederation, in his capacity as Chairperson-in-
Office of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe, to convene a meeting of the international
contact group on Ukraine.

However, given the complexity and fragility of the
situation on the ground, we believe that it is important
to harmonize all of these international efforts. We
therefore reiterate the proposal we made in closed
consultations on Saturday to establish a quartet for
Ukraine, to be convened by the Secretary-General and

composed of the United Nations, the European Union,
the OSCE and the Russian Federation. We believe that
only the concerted and harmonized efforts of the main
stakeholders, aimed at ensuring the respect of the unity,
territorial integrity and sovereignty of Ukraine, while
considering the interests of the Russian Federation in
Ukraine, would provide a lasting solution to this crisis.

As the world is commemorating the centenary
of the Great War, let me conclude by hoping that all
international actors have learned the lessons of that
War and its consequences for the European continent.
Although Rwanda is geographically remote from
Ukraine, we fear that the current tension, if not well
handled, could bring the entire planet back to the
darkness of history, aggravated by the increased
military and nuclear capabilities of the world's Powers.

