The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.

We would like to express our appreciation for their
excellent briefings to Ambassador Macharia Kamau,
Permanent Representative of Kenya and Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission; Ambassador Olof Skoog,
former Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission; and
Ambassador Gert Rosenthal, Chair of the Advisory
Group of Experts on the Review of the Peacebuilding
Architecture. We also thank Ambassador De Aguiar
Patriota, Permanent Representative of Brazil, for his
invaluable support during his time as Chair of the
Commission. We would like to thank everyone for their
participation in today's open debate on peacebuilding,
which is being held concurrently with a major
intergovernmental negotiation process in the General
Assembly, facilitated by Ambassadors Gillian Bird
and Gaspar Martins, the Permanent Representatives of
Australia and Angola.

Peacebuilding involves a range of long-term
political, institutional and development activities that
seek to address the root causes of conflicts, prevent
them from recurring and achieve sustainable and lasting
peace. The visionary 1992 report of Secretary-General
Boutros Boutros-Ghali "An Agenda for Peace" (S/24111)
laid the foundation for the United Nations system to
establish what came to be known as the peacebuilding
architecture, made up ofthe Peacebuilding Commission,
the Peacebuilding Fund and the Peacebuilding Support
Office. Last year, on occasion of the tenth anniversary
of the establishment of that architecture, the report (see S/2015/490) of the Advisory Group of Experts on the
Review of the Peacebuilding Architecture examined
the activities of that architecture over recent years. The
conclusions of the report prompt us to reflect deeply on
how the United Nations addresses peacebuilding.

Peacebuilding processes are non-linear and are
much more lengthy and costly than anticipated in 2005,
when the peacebuilding architecture was established.
We are talking about structural changes that could
take up to a generation to bear fruit. That requires
the Organization to update and adapt its projections
and its models to achieve lasting peace in countries
in post-conflict situations. We must leave behind
templates that call for mechanical and unnecessarily
rigid and overly accelerated peacebuilding processes.
Mediation processes, peace agreements, the drafting of
constitutions and the holding of elections need to be
much more representative and inclusive of local aspects,
as well as more cognizant of the political context of the
countries in question.

In addition, peacebuilding processes must be
accompanied by the ongoing political presence and
attention of the United Nations. Although capacity-
and institution-building in countries in post-conflict
situations indeed require technical expertise,
peacebuilding is first and foremost an inherently
political process. As some case studies have revealed,
once peacekeeping operations or special political
missions withdraw from the field, we see a substantive
political divestment on the part of the United Nations
system. That approach cannot continue. In order to be
effective and durable, peacebuilding processes require
sustained funding and political attention for prolonged
periods. That reality ought to be a priority for the States
Members of the Organization, which should take the
necessary steps to address it.

The United Nations currently devotes little political
attention and few resources to peacebuilding. That is
directly related to the budgetary allocation of resources
and represents one of the causes of the relapses into
conflict in many countries. The United Nations tends
to be reactive when addressing conflicts, favouring the
use of short-term security and humanitarian measures
to the detriment of long-term actions that could address
the root causes of conflict. That is clearly reflected
in the distribution of resources: while the budget for
humanitarian assistance has reached $24.5 billion and
the budget for peacekeeping operations is $8 billion, the
budget of the Peacebuilding Fund is a mere $100 million
per year, to distributed among 22 countries.

On the topic ofpeacebuilding, the Security Council
has a great deal to do with regard to the manner in
which it deals with conflicts. It seems the Security
Council has a predilection for implementing Chapter
VII of the Charter of the United Nations, instead of
Chapters devoted to the prevention of conflict, which
further exacerbates the situation in post-conflict
countries. Few cases illustrate that pattern as clearly
as does the case of Libya. Following the adoption of
resolution 1973 (2011) and the establishment a no-fly
zone, an international military coalition authorized
by the Security Council spent billions of dollars to
overthrow the Libyan Government. After the military
intervention in Libya, as had occurred earlier in Iraq,
the country entered into a prolonged, ongoing state of
political instability - without institutions, without
infrastructure, without public services, without
security, without means of survival and without a stable
economy - but with the most sophisticated weapons
on the market, the presence of non-State armed groups,
the division of the country and the ensuing political
and economic instability. The need for peacebuilding
in those brotherly Arab countries is one of the main
challenges and responsibilities of the United Nations,
and in particular of the Security Council.

The crisis of migrants crossing the Mediterranean
Sea from North Africa - who risk their lives and those
of their children - is a harrowing indicator of the
need to strengthen the peacebuilding architecture. The
majority of those migrants come from African countries
that have emerged from conflict but are unable to build
peace, re-establish the minimal conditions necessary
for a decent life for people or to rebuild their societies
or their economies.

Peacebuilding will be possible only to the extent
that the root causes ofconflict are addressed; otherwise,
we will face increasing and recurring conflicts rooted
primarily in the weakness of State institutions in post-
coanict countries. We should place greater emphasis on
reactivating sustainable socioeconomic development in
countries in post-conflict situations. We cannot expect
to build peace if at the same time we ignore the need
of the people to meet their most basic socioeconomic
needs, secure the means to earn a living and provide
the basis for inclusive development with social justice.
Therefore, giving people the means to join the economy
and integrate into society and creating the foundation
for inclusive, sustainable and equitable growth should
be part of any peacebuilding process. However, little
or no attention at all is directed towards meeting
those needs. There is not even clarity in studies or
in institutional practice on how to re-energize the
economies and institutions of countries emerging
from conflict. For Venezuela, that is one of the central
issues of peacebuilding, which should be given the
requisite attention.

On the other hand, the recovery of countries
emerging from conflicts must not include coercive
measures on the part of international institutions that
place onerous and unfair conditions on those countries,
particularly if those measures violate the country's
sovereignty. There is a need for more resources to the
socioeconomic development of countries emerging
from conflict that include differentiated and beneficial
conditions. Preferential and differentiated conditions
should be established in the international financial
system in order to provide direct support to countries
that have brought war to an end and do not want to go
back to the path of conflict. In particular, we have been
very concerned that countries emerging from conflict
should have the necessary capacities to manage their
own economies and natural resources - a necessity for
all our countries.

As Latin Americans, we find two cases to be
emblematic cases, namely, those of Haiti and Colombia.
The case of Haiti serves to illustrate the need to
maintain both respect for a country's sovereignty and
ongoing support to help it overcome terrible economic
conditions left after so many years of conflict. And the
case of Colombia gives us hope that the international
community will help the Colombian people to navigate
peace and create the necessary social and economic
conditions so that such a heartbreaking conflict never
again reoccurs.

I would like once again to acknowledge the vision
of the late former Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-
Ghali, whom we pay tribute to. We sincerely hope
that today's open debate will lead us to think further
about how the international community and the United
Nations can address peacebuilding and contribute to
the consultation and negotiation processes to take place
in other United Nations organs.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I would like to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to a maximum of four minutes, so that
the Council can carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to distribute their texts in writing and deliver
a condensed version when speaking in the Chamber. I
would also like to appeal to speakers to deliver their
statements at a reasonable speed, so that the interpreters
can perform theirjob as precisely as possible. I wish to
inform all concerned that we will be continuing this
open debate right through the lunch hour, as we have a
very large number of speakers.

I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Igor
Luksic, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs and European Integration of Montenegro.

