Mr. Solana (spoke in Spanish): It is a great
honour for me to be able to participate, on behalf of the
European Union, at this important meeting that has
been rightly convened 4 in an open manner 4 by the
President of the Security Council. I should like to
thank you, Mr. President, as well as each and every
member of the Security Council.

Before embarking on the subject on which I
would like to share my views, I should like to express
my deepest sympathy and condolences to the victims
and the families of the victims of the disasters that
recently occurred in Goma and Lagos.

Europe cares about Africa. Europe has a
commitment to Africa. For reasons of geography,
history and shared values, Europe has a genuine
concern for Africa's future. Consequently, Europe has
an active policy towards Africa that is built around
three essential pillars. I would like very briefly to talk
about these three pillars, which are the essence of our
policy towards Africa.

The first of the pillars is our commitment to
dialogue with Africa. The European Union maintains a
deep and rich commitment towards the countries of
Africa, both directly and through the United Nations.
The clearest example of this may be our contractual
commitment to the countries of sub-Saharan African
through the Cotonou Agreement. The European Union
has already earmarked €12 billion for the coming five
years, together with 61.7 billion in loans that the
European Investment Bank has committed to make.
The Agreement will allow us to focus on poverty
alleviation, strengthening the political dimension of our
partnership and increasing the role of civil society.

We welcome the establishment of the African
Union, and I would like to note with satisfaction that
the European Union, and the mechanism through which
it was built, may have served as an inspiration and a
model. We stand ready to provide concrete support and
to share all our experience in regional integration. We
will continue to help and support the Organization of
African Unity (OAU) Mechanism for Conflict
Prevention, Management and Resolution. We are now
considering a European Union contribution to the OAU
Peace Fund, which would complement the already
substantial contributions being made by some
European Union member States.

I should like to take this opportunity to highlight
the presence here today of my good friend Mr. Amara
Essy, Secretary-General of the OAU, and to commend
him for the important role that his organization plays,
most notably at present in the conflict between
Ethiopia and Eritrea and also in connection with the
Democratic Republic of Congo. We wish to build on
the OAU's achievements by securing a firm
commitment of the parties in conflict to implement
their international obligations. Such implementation,
unfortunately, is now well overdue. In more general
terms, we could all benefit from closer cooperation
between the United Nations and the OAU. But this
must work both ways: in other words, there is a need
for more United Nations support for the OAU, and, for
its part, the OAU must also reach out more to the
Security Council.

We also attach great importance to our dialogue
and cooperation with subregional organizations on the
continent. We would highlight, in particular, the
Southern African Development Community, the
Economic Community of West African States and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development. They
are clear evidence that Africans today are assuming
their share of the responsibility for securing peace and
stability on their continent. The sense of African
ownership can function effectively only when other
countries and the United Nations also help to enhance
African institutional capacities and closely cooperate
with Africa.

In crisis management and post-conflict peace-
building, it is very important that all parts of the United
Nations system work together. Among other things,
this means that the Security Council must cooperate
fruitfully 4 as it already does 4 with the parties and
the economic and social parts of the United Nations
system itself.

The European Union is fully committed to
working as closely and intensively as possible and at
all levels with the United Nations system. This
collaboration has been especially intensive with regard
to the critical situations in the Great Lakes region, the
Horn of Africa and the West Africa region.
Furthermore, as many have said throughout this
meeting, we need strong international action on the
illicit trade in arms, the ruthless exploitation of
Africa's resources, the use and abuse of child soldiers
and the continued use of anti-personnel mines.
Starting with the Africa-Europe Summit, held in
Cairo in April 2000, we have established a strategic
partnership between the European Union and the entire
community of African States. This has come to be
called the "Cairo process", and it has become a useful
forum for discussing matters of mutual interest and for
giving the broadest possible support for future close
relations.

The second pillar of our policy is to effectively
combat poverty, disease and conflict, to do everything
possible to alleviate these problems. Throughout
today's meeting, enormous figures have been cited. I
do not want to repeat them all. I would only say that
340 million Africans live on less than €2 a day. That
figure gives us all not only food for thought, but also
grounds for action. We are also aware that poverty is
also undoubtedly a cause of conflict. It must therefore
be recognized that combating poverty and frustration
also means fighting against the causes of conflict.

The European Union is not just talking about
these issues. We are working actively to address them.
We are the world's leading source of development and
humanitarian assistance in Africa, providing more than
two thirds of total official development flows to sub-
Saharan Africa. Out of a total contribution of €1.8
billion to the Global AIDS and Health Fund, more than
€l billion has been contributed by the European Union
and its member States. The European Union attaches
great importance to this year's Monterrey Conference
and to the Johannesburg Summit, and we are actively
participating in their preparation and working towards
their success.

Integrating Africa into the world economy is an
essential part of the fight against poverty. It requires
continued, persistent and tenacious action at all levels.
The European Union's "Everything but arms" initiative
on duty- and quota-free access for imports from the
least developed countries is, we believe, an important
step. It is my fervent hope that other countries will
follow with similar concrete measures in the same
direction.

The European Union has identified poverty as a
fundamental cause of conflict in Africa. That is why
we place such emphasis on poverty alleviation. But we
are well aware that our strategy cannot be based on one
element alone. Rather, it must be a mix of various
policy options that vary from one country to another.
Therefore, cooperation with all mechanisms, in
particular, the Organization of African Unity and
subregional organizations, seems to us to be an
absolutely fundamental element in combating poverty
and its consequences by means of conflict prevention.

However hard we work in attacking the roots of
conflict, we must also be realistic. Sometimes
prevention will fail. We must be prepared to manage
crises. We must therefore be ready to do so in an
integrated and coherent manner, capable of deploying
humanitarian aid and the full range of political,
economic, financial and, where necessary, military
means. The European Union is making significant
efforts to equip itself with all the capabilities required
to effectively manage crises. In doing so, we are
working closely with the Secretary-General of the
United Nations and with the Security Council to ensure
that our efforts are as coherent as possible in all of
these areas.

The third pillar of our policy is our attachment to
certain fundamental values: democracy, the rule of law,
human rights and good governance. We consider it
fundamental to have the essential commitment to
democracy, good governance and human rights. This
commitment is not optional. It cannot be undertaken at
times and not at others. It must be permanently applied
because we believe that these values are essential for
development.

These are not values imposed from outside, but
values that Africa herself has embraced. Two years
ago, the OAU adopted the principle that governments
that came to power through military coups could no
longer expect to be welcome in its forums. This change
in policy was welcomed as a sincere change in attitude
towards all those values that we are all defending. The
international community also needs to be tough on
those who openly violate democratic principles and the
rule of law. Because of this, our common commitment
and interest in defending and promoting these values
through the European Union - as was done yesterday
with regard to Zimbabwe 4 give a clear signal of our
position.

Europeans worked long and with great passion to
rebuild a continent out of the ashes of the horrific
World War. It took people with ambition and great
political will. I wish to say that those same efforts can
be seen among so many leaders of the African
community, who apply that political vision and courage
in building and assisting their continent to overcome its
problems. A clear example of such vision is
undoubtedly the New Partnership for Africa's
Development (NEPAD), which is guided by those
principles 4 principles of responsibility, belonging
and the feeling of ownership of the process. This is
what we can see with satisfaction is occurring on the
African continent. This important Initiative clearly
demonstrates that Africa and Europe share the same
goals and interests. A new partnership on this basis
will enable Africa to reap the benefits of globalization.
It will also allow the international community and
Africa to get more results from what we are already
doing on a daily basis.

We all have a great challenge in the success of
Africa and its countries. It would contribute to creating
a more just and safer world. It would reduce
dependency on aid and contribute to global prosperity.
The success of Africa and its countries will mean
success for the entire world. The European Union
should congratulate itself on this path that will
undoubtedly be taken.

