Mr. Shalgham (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to welcome and
thank Mr. Nikola Spiric', Chairman of the Council of
Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina. I join previous
speakers in thanking Mr. Valentin Inzko, High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for his
briefing, and we wish him success in his duties.

Libya follows with great attention the ongoing
political process in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We note
that positive progress has been achieved in the recent
period with the signing of a broad agreement between
the leaders of the three principal political parties in the
country on constitutional reform issues that have been
long awaited. We also welcome the express readiness
of the leaders of the political parties to agree on and
move towards resolving the principal political issues,
including the outstanding conditions and objectives
that remain to be fulfilled before the transition from the
Office of the High Representative to the European
Union Special Representative can come into effect.

We also salute the adoption of the constitutional
amendment incorporating the Brcko District into the
Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitution, the adoption of a
War Crimes Strategy, and the endorsement of the
implementation action plans of the National Justice
Sector Reform Strategy. We hope that such positive
steps will continue to be taken so that Bosnia and
Herzegovina can attain lasting stability. Undoubtedly,
it is important at this stage to pursue the process of
constitutional reform in Bosnia and Herzegovina on the
basis of the principles of the Dayton Peace Agreement.

Despite the positive achievements that have been
made in Bosnia and Herzegovina, we still have some
concerns about the ongoing extreme nationalist
rhetoric that casts certain problems in the country in a
maximalist light. Such nationalist ethnic attitudes
could undermine the role of the State, delay progress in
achieving reforms, and pose a challenge to the very
foundation of the State, as defined in the Dayton Peace
Agreement, and to the Constitution of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. No one, we believe, can have any doubt
that such nationalist rhetoric could reignite the conflict,
thereby undermining stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the entire region.

Based on the foregoing, we appeal to all sectors
of Bosnia and Herzegovina's population to live up to
their political responsibility and find ways to coexist
through dialogue, respect for the institutions of State
and full cooperation with the High Representative.
They should also abide by the obligations imposed on
everyone under the Dayton Peace Agreement, the Paris
Agreement and relevant Security Council resolutions.

We have no doubt that Bosnia and Herzegovina is
confronting some difficult problems, and we believe
that the only solution is to find agreement and a
common vision for the future that is acceptable to all
the citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina within the
framework of the Dayton Peace Agreement. We believe
that would be the correct way to turn Bosnia into a
stable country based on ethnic and cultural diversity
and which would play a role in stabilizing the Balkans
and achieving prosperity and sustainable development
for all its citizens.

In conclusion, we emphasize that continuing to
pursue perpetrators of war crimes and crimes against
humanity and bringing them to justice will help heal
the wounds and ease the pain of the recent past in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and will help to achieve a
better future.

