Mr. Belinga-Eboutou (Cameroon) (spoke in French): My delegation would like first of all to
congratulate Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for East
Timor, and to thank him for his very informative
statement. My delegation also welcomes the presence
at this Council meeting of the Prime Minister of
Australia, The Honourable John Howard; we would
like in particular to thank him for his important
statement, reflecting his country's invaluable
contribution to the development of East Timor.

My delegation would like to extend a special
welcome to the Foreign Minister of East Timor. His
country will gain its independence on 20 May 2002; 20
May is also Cameroon's national holiday. On 20 May
2002, therefore, our two countries will be celebrating.
In anticipation of that happy event, Cameroon, which
looks forward to welcoming East Timor to the great
family of the United Nations, would like to assure the
Minister of its desire to maintain relations of
confidence and close cooperation with his country.

On 31 October 2001 the Security Council
accepted the recommendation of the Constituent
Assembly to the effect that the independence of East
Timor should be proclaimed on 20 May 2002. My
delegation is impressed by the work that has been
accomplished since that time by the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET).
As the report of the Secretary-General states, important
progress has been made in the political sphere and
concrete results have been achieved in the complex
task of setting up a public administration for East
Timor. The situation with regard to security has
continued to improve, and policies favourable to
economic and social development are being
implemented.

We note some specific instances of those concrete
advances and results. The first is the holding on 14
April of the election of the first President of an
independent East Timor.

The second concrete, positive case in point is that
the constitution of a new State is being worked out, a
constitution that is establishing a unitary, democratic
State, based on the rule of law and the principle of the
separation of powers.
The third concrete, positive achievement is that
the administrative structures are being strengthened,
particularly with the creation of an Inspector General's
Office, and measures are being undertaken by the
Timorese Government to accede to a number of
international instruments and organizations once
independence is declared.

The fourth positive example concerns the
repatriation of refugees. Cameroon welcomes the fact
that such repatriation is continuing. As Mr. Vieira de
Mello said earlier, there have already been 192,000
returns, with only 60,000 refugees remaining in West
Timor. We believe that in order to encourage the
process of repatriation, protection and follow-up
measures should be envisaged and enhanced. In this
respect, I join in the appeal made earlier by the United
Kingdom.

The fifth positive point concerns the relations
between East Timor and its neighbours. Cameroon has
been following this issue with the greatest interest,
since harmonious relations between Indonesia,
Australia and East Timor are of crucial importance for
this young State. We were reassured by the information
provided on future meetings to lay the foundations for
those relations and the prospect of the creation of a
South-West Pacific forum. We extend our best wishes
for success, in that regard, to the trilateral meeting of
26 February 2002 between Indonesia, Australia and
East Timor.

As we have seen, important advances have been
made that are inexorably leading to the independence
of East Timor. But the objectives that the Security
Council has set are still far from being achieved. It is
necessary to maintain a peacekeeping operation before
and after independence, and we add our voice in this
respect to the very eloquent argument made by the
Ambassador of Singapore for the United Nations to
remain in East Timor. He expressed with particular
eloquence the concerns and consequences to which we
would lay ourselves open in the event of an untimely
withdrawal.

We also think that the East Timor Public
Administration is still greatly dependent on the
resources of UNTAET for its operations. The
international community should therefore seek the
means to meet its needs after independence, lest too
great a downsizing of the means available for
government action become a destabilizing factor. In
that regard, we appreciate the plan for the successor
mission to UNTAET, which provides for the
maintenance of the United Nations peace mission to
ensure East Timor's stability.

As for international assistance in the area of
development and poverty reduction, we welcome the
initiative undertaken by UNTAET and the United
Nations Development Programme to develop plans
with a view to proper management of the State's
resources.

To conclude, Cameroon associates itself with the
recommendation of the Secretary-General that the
Security Council extend UNTAET'S mandate.

