Ms. Wroneeka (Poland): At the outset, I would
like to thank our briefers - Under-Secretary-General
Jean-Pierre Lacroix and Special Envoy Nicholas
Haysom - for the information they have shared with us
today. Since this is most probably the last time that we
are hearing from Special Envoy Haysom in the Council
in his current capacity, I would like to convey our
appreciation for his hard work and commitment, and
wish him all the best in his new assignment in Somalia.

Let me focus my intervention on two points: the
current situation in Abyei and the work of the United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA).

We take note of the relatively stable security
situation in Abyei at the moment, but at the same time
we recognize the challenges that remain on the political,
humanitarian and economic fronts. We note with regret
the lack of progress in the political process and the fact
that an administrative vacuum still exists in the Abyei
Area. The absence of effective formal authorities in
Abyei results in limited law enforcement and a lack of
good governance and the rule of law. It also hinders
the delivery of basic services to the population and
in particular affects access to safe drinking water,
education and health services.

I would like to emphasize that the primary
responsibility for the implementation of the 2011 and
2012 agreements lies with the Governments of both
countries. Poland believes that the Security Council
should remain unified in its messaging and encourage
the Governments of the Sudan and of South Sudan
to swiftly establish the joint mechanisms in their
full capabilities, normalize border arrangements
and - in the long-term perspective - elaborate a
political solution that will lead to lasting peace in Abyei.
Let me also stress the need to include women and youth
in the ongoing political process. There can be no doubt
that the current relative stability in Abyei is a result
of the role played by UNISFA. In that regard, Poland
would like to commend the efforts of the Ethiopian
troops and all of the United Nations personnel in Abyei.

We thank the Secretary-General for his
recommendations on how to adjust UNISFA to the
current situation in Abyei and the needs of border
communities of the Sudan and of South Sudan. We
agree that the Interim Force has to be able to meet
the needs on the ground. Therefore, UNISFA should
stand ready to engage in achieving a political solution
in Abyei and to support the implementation of the
agreements between the Sudan and South Sudan, in
cooperation with the African Union Commission and
the African Union High-level Implementation Panel.
We believe that the suggested reconfiguration of the
mission's tasks should be taken into account by the
Council and that further consultations thereon should
be held with the Sudan and South Sudan, as well as with
the African Union.

Let me conclude by stressing that there can be no
other way for the Sudan and South Sudan to resolve
the question of Abyei than through dialogue, including
intercommunal dialogue and reconciliation, and a
genuine political process. UNISFA's presence remains
crucial for the stability of Abyei, but it cannot substitute
for the role of the State. Poland believes that the Security
Council should remain united on this issue and support
all efforts aimed at achieving a lasting solution to the
status of Abyei.

