Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Jean
Arnault, for his briefing today and for the very valuable
work he is doing. We continue to strongly support the
United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia.

I also want to welcome Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Colombia, Mr. Carlos Holmes Trujillo. We are very
grateful for his commitment to the peace effort and
we know his personal dedication to this issue, based
on his very long experience, including as former
Peace Commissioner.

The Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and
Building a Stable and Lasting Peace in Colombia is the
result of a historic process, aimed at ending more than

50 years of conflict and violence. Colombia has proved
that through leadership, dialogue and diplomacy, even
the most difficult conflicts can be brought to an end.
At a time when too many conflicts are becoming more
entrenched, Colombia is an important inspiration to the
world. It also provides a very clear example of how a
united Security Council can contribute to peace.

President Duque and the leadership of the Fuerza
Alternativa Revolucionaria del Comun (FARC) should
be praised for their sustainedpolitical will and dedication
to the peace process. Their determination to implement
the peace agreement has provided an opportunity to
bring peace, socioeconomic development, security and
the rule of law to all parts of Colombia. Although an
irreversible course for peace has been set out, many
challenges remain. As very often after a complex and
long-standing conflict has been resolved, that is to be
expected. The continued engagement of all parties is
now crucial. To address the underlying causes that
have fuelled conflict and violence for so many years,
outstanding issues must be resolved. In that regard,
we are pleased to see that appointing members to
the Commission for the Follow-up, Promotion and
Verification of the Implementation of the Final
Agreement was one of the first actions of the new
Government. The Commission is without a doubt the
appropriate forum for taking those discussions forward.

Following conflict, as Jean Arnault just said, it is
often challenging to strike the right balance between
peace and justice. At the same time, it is an issue of
decisive importance for sustainable peace. The Special
Jurisdiction for Peace, with its objectives of guaranteeing
truth, justice, reparation and non-repetition, is a key
component of the agreement. Its independence and
autonomy must be fully respected. Cooperation among
all parties continues to be essential in enabling progress
on that central aspect of the agreement.

The transformation of the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo
(FARC-EP) into the FARC political party has been a
central part ofthe peace process. For the peace agreement
to remain credible, it is critical that effective and
adequate protection be ensured. It is also an important
component if the agreement is to serve as a model for
other efforts, including for the process with the National
Liberation Army (ELN). The killing of human rights
defenders, community leaders and FARC-EP members
and their families reportedly continues unabated. That
is of grave concern and underscores the need for the
State to fill the power vacuum and safeguard the rule of
law. We therefore welcome the national pact for life and
for the protection of social leaders and human rights
defenders, adopted on 23 August.

Bringing security, development and the rule of
law to conflict-affected areas is critical. We welcome
President Duque's emphasis on more focused and
tightly coordinated action by State agencies. A stronger
presence of civilian authorities and agencies providing
services to communities should be paired with efforts
to improve security in conflict-affected areas. The
necessary resources must be made available for bringing
Colombian institutions to all parts of the country, as
well as for mobilizing civil society, communities and
the private sector. The international community should
give all possible support to that endeavour.

We continue to stress the importance of the full
political, legal and socioeconomic reintegration of
former members of the FARC-EP. That includes
implementing productive projects, as well as addressing
the key issue of access to land. We welcome President
Duque's firm support for more effective reintegration.

On the ELN, we welcome continued direct
contact between its members and the Government.
Sweden, as a member of the Grupo de Paises de
Apoyo, Acompafiamiento y Cooperacion a la Mesa
de Conversaciones, will assist the process as much as
it can.

We welcome the commitment of Vice-President
Marta Lucia Ramirez to maintaining dialogue with
women's groups. Effectively implementing the gender
provisions of the peace agreement remains crucial for
achieving sustained peace. We also hope that the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia will become
a best-practice case study when it comes to youth and
the implementation of resolution 2419 (2018), which we
follow with great interest.

In conclusion, Colombia has travelled far on its
path towards peace. It is now crucial that it stay the
course and that all parties continue to do their part. The
unwavering support of the international community,
including the Council, remains critical. We must
collectively ensure that this historic opportunity can
bring peace and prosperity to all Colombians and
that Colombia continues to serve as an inspiration to
the world.

