Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): At the outset, we would like to express our sincere condolences in connection with the death of the Amir of the State of Kuwait, His Highness Sheikh Sabah. His passing is an enormous loss, especially given the important role he played in the region. I would like to offer our condolences to the Government and all the people of Kuwait. We thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for his briefing. This month, we have seen the signing of agreements between Israel and the United Arab Emirate and Bahrain. At every juncture of work on the Middle East peace process, Russia, as a permanent member of the Security Council and a participant in the Middle East Quartet, has always believed in the need for a comprehensive solution to the conflict. However, there has been an understanding that a just settlement of the Palestinian question based on international law as endorsed by the United Nations - including its resolutions, and on the Arab Peace Initiative and the fundamental principle of the two-State solution - must be an inherent component of that solution. That basis provides for the creation of an independent, sovereign and territorially contiguous Palestinian State within the 1967 borders and with its capital in East Jerusalem, which would live in peace with Israel. At the same time, we note once again that the whole range of final-status issues should be determined through direct negotiations between Palestinians and Israelis. These negotiations must be launched at the first possible opportunity. In his statement at the general debate of the seventy-fifth session of the General Assembly on 25 September, Palestinian President Abbas addressed that aspect and put forward an initiative aimed at the resumption of negotiations to resolve the Palestinian question.We firmly believe that one-sided efforts will not achieve a breakthrough. We need to strengthen collective diplomacy to ensure that the international community's efforts to create the necessary conditions for the implementation of the only viable two-State solution through direct Palestinian-Israeli talks do not fail. We call on our partners in the Quartet - the United Nations, the European Union and the United States - to strengthen cooperation to that end. We are also ready to engage in dialogue with key regional actors and to involve them in the work of the Quartet. In addition, Russia is actively working with various Palestinian representatives in order to bridge differences, while supporting the efforts of its Egyptian friends. In that regard, we reiterate our call to refrain from provocative actions and unilateral measures. First of all, annexation plans must stop. Israel must cease its settlement activities in the West Bank and its policy of demolishing Palestinian property. There must be an end to violence and terrorist activities. In addition, the parties should refrain from aggressive or provocative rhetoric. The international community should take active steps to alleviate the dire humanitarian situation in Gaza and the Palestinian territories, which are experiencing a socioeconomic crisis. The Palestinian people need assistance in combating the coronavirus. We will continue to support the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). There is both a humanitarian and a political dimension to UNRWA's work, as it has an important stabilizing effect on the Palestinian territories and the countries of the Middle East.
