Mr. Tidjani (Cameroon) (spoke in French): The
sad memory of those who died in Baghdad on 19
August 2003, in the United States on 11 September
2001, in Bali on 12 October 2002, and more recently in
Morocco and many other parts of the world is a timely
reminder of how vulnerable the world still is to
terrorism.

This is a new type of terrorism in its methods,
intolerance, wantonness and cowardice. It attacks all of
society, inflicting indescribable suffering upon the
peoples of the United Nations and plunging them into
what Voltaire described as convulsions of anxiety - to
which one might add fear. It poses a serious threat to
our most basic right: the right to life, a peaceful life,
based on love, fraternity, justice and solidarity.
Terrorism is therefore a matter of great concern, a
threat to international peace and security.

We have refused to give in to the diktat of
terrorism. We have not given up; to the contrary, we
have decided to react firmly and with perseverance. We
have defined a mobilizing strategy that is daily being
honed by the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001) to confine this monster and
fight more effectively against it.

The success of our collective struggle necessarily
requires a firm commitment by all international actors
and the strengthening of cooperation between all
States, on the one hand, and, on the other hand,
between States, international, regional and subregional
organizations and civil society.

However, we will not achieve maximum
collective security unless we develop a real policy to
exchange information, experiences and assistance. My
delegation believes that to be fundamental.

Against that backdrop, we believe that as a purely
legal matter there is an urgent need for an overall
international regulatory instrument to combat this evil.
Although there is an impressive body of anti-terrorism
conventions, there are gaps, due to the sectoral nature
of current measures. On that precise point, I recall with
regret that political differences are delaying consensus
in the Sixth Committee on the drafting of an overall
convention and a convention for the suppression of acts
of nuclear terrorism.

It would be suicidal for the international
community as a whole to continue to be passive
spectators in the face of the risk to all humankind of
the use of weapons of mass destruction by terrorists.

The effectiveness of our struggle also depends on
improving the international environment by eliminating
situations of injustice and poverty, which feed
intolerance and hatred.

Cameroon welcomes the largely positive work
done by the Counter-Terrorism Committee. In its two-
year existence it has received an impressive number of
reports - over 419; it has contributed greatly to
consolidating consensus on the objectives and
modalities of the struggle against terrorism, and to
strengthening national anti-terrorism capacity as well
as international cooperation in this sphere; and it is
helping to promote existing conventions, where its
effectiveness is illustrated by the growing number of
States parties.

The Counter-Terrorism Committee has become
the best tool to coordinate dynamic cooperation
between States and international and regional
organizations.

We owe all of that to the tenacity of a dedicated
and effective team, energetically presided over by our
colleague Ambassador Inocencio Arias, to whom I
once again express our full confidence and convey our
encouragement. The new programme covering the next
90 days, which he has just presented to us, is very
ambitious in its objectives and pragmatic in its
approach. My delegation fully supports that
programme, and very much looks forward to the report
that the Committee intends to submit regarding the
main problems encountered by States in implementing
resolution 1373 (2001). We urge the Committee to
submit periodically a report on the follow-up of the
major recommendations of the Council.

Finally, we are convinced that, after two years of
existence, the Committee could benefit from a process
of self-evaluation in order to look to the future in
practical terms and to remain effective in the fight
against terrorism.

The frequency of public debates on this topic
should not mean that they should be seen as a
commonplace ritual - quite the opposite. They should
enhance the awareness of almost all the peoples of the
United Nations of the scope of this pernicious threat to
our collective security.

The delegation of Cameroon is therefore grateful
to you, Mr. President, for having agreed to the
convening of a public meeting on this question.

