Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I congratulate the
friendly country of Uruguay on its election to the
Security Council and I thank you, Minister Rodolfo
Nin Novoa, for convening this important debate under
Uruguay's presidency. I also thank His Excellency
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his important
briefing to the Council on the current situation.

I would like to apologize on behalf of Foreign
Minister Riad Malki, who had planned to attend this
meeting but who, because of the recent storm and its
impact of flights, is unable to be with us. I am honoured
to deliver this statement on his behalf.

I would like to extend our congratulations to the
other new non-permanent members * Egypt, Japan,
Senegal and Ukraine - and I wish them success in
fulfilling their responsibilities under the Charter of the
United Nations. We also reiterate our deep appreciation
to Chad, Chile, Jordan, Lithuania and Nigeria for their
skilled service and principled positions on so many
critical issues during their respective tenures, including
the question of Palestine.

I express our appreciation to all of the ministers
joining us here today, which serves to underscore the
attention and concern they ascribe to the Palestine
issue and to the situation in the Middle East as a whole.
Among the ministers present is Foreign Minister
Mankeur Ndiaye of Senegal, whose country plays
an important role as Chair of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People - a responsibility that Senegal has undertaken
for the past 40 years, for which we are most grateful.

We are gathered again here at the Security Council,
which for seven decades has been entrusted with the
responsibility of upholding international peace and
security, to address one of the longest-standing issues
on the United Nations agenda, namely, the question of
Palestine and the situation in the Middle East. Every
day that passes with this institution failing to shoulder
its Charter duties means the death of more innocent
civilians, more destruction of property, lives and the
prospects for peace, and more hopelessness, representing
a continual and growing threat to international peace
and security.

While Palestine has figured prominently on the
agenda of the United Nations since the establishment
of the Organization, the plight of our people, tragically,
persists and peace continues to evade us. Neither
support nor solidarity for Palestine have been lacking.
What has been lacking is the political courage and
will to implement the countless resolutions of the
Security Council and of General Assembly in the face
of Israel's total intransigence and disrespect for all of
its obligations, including international humanitarian
law and human rights law. The failure to hold Israel,
the occupying Power, accountable and to compel
its compliance with the law has caused immense
suffering for the Palestinian people, among them
millions of refugees, thereby exacerbating an already
deplorable security, humanitarian and socioeconomic
situation, compounding the crisis many times over
and undermining the foundation for a just and lasting
solution.

In the past seven years alone, we have repeatedly
come to address the Council and have travelled from
capital to capital, while also presenting and supporting
ideas, texts and initiatives and urging action. Since
the adoption of resolution 1860 (2009), following the
Israeli war on the Gaza Strip from December 2008
to January 2009, the Council has failed to take any
action to redress this injustice. And in this period, at
least 2,500 more Palestinians, among them hundreds
of children and women, have been killed in repeated
Israeli wars on Gaza and in military raids in the West
Bank, including East Jerusalem. Tens of thousands of
civilians have been wounded and thousands have been
arrested, detained and abused by the occupying forces.
In addition, an inhumane blockade and vast destruction
have been continuously inflicted on Gaza. At the
same time, Israeli settlement construction in occupied
Palestine, especially in occupied East Jerusalem and
the Jordan Valley, has continued unabated, at the
expense of peace and the Viability and contiguity
of our State. Moreover, Israeli settler terror against
Palestinian civilians has reached unprecedented levels
and has inflamed religious sensitivities, particularly
with regard to the Al-Haram Al-Sharif and the Al-Aqsa
Mosque.

The world has witnessed on live television the
perpetration of war crimes against the Palestinian
people. Yet no action has been taken. As we speak,
Palestinians, the majority of them youth, are being
killed daily in the streets, with many executed
extrajudicially, by occupying forces and settlers. Israel
is also continuing its policy of collective punishment,
including the demolition of homes, withholding the
bodies of martyrs, and widespread arrest-and-detention
raids. Its suffocating blockade on Gaza also continues
to obstruct desperately needed reconstruction, to
deprive our people of all the basics of a dignified life,
and to deepen despair. There is no justification for
such violence and oppression against the defenceless
Palestinian civilian population. International
humanitarian law provisions, primarily the Fourth
Geneva Convention, prohibit such actions and obligate
the occupying Power to ensure, inter alia, the safety
and well-being of the civilians under its occupation, not
the other way around.

Claims that such violence and crimes are necessary
to ensure Israeli security are offensive and must be
rejected. All peoples are entitled to security, not only
the Israelis. I repeat: all peoples are entitled to security,
including the Palestinian people. It is not exclusive to
Israel and cannot be achieved by illegal and aggressive
actions that only fan the flames of violence and intensify
anger and tensions.

Those unlawful actions must be stopped. We cannot
allow the international community to turn a blind eye
to the horrors being endured by our people, nor can
we accept the continued refusal to end the impunity
and the immunity that has been granted to Israeli
officials, occupation forces and terrorist settlers, which
is making those repeated, widespread and systematic
crimes possible.

We cannot accept the reasoning of those who keep
demanding security for the occupying Power while
failing to demand security for the occupied people,
who are entitled to, and assured of, such security under
international law. The United Nations must act to ensure
protection for our people in line with international law
and its own resolutions, including Security Council
resolutions specifically calling for protection for
the Palestinian people. Precedents and the relevant
studies before the Council must be considered. We are
grateful to the Secretary-General and his Office of
Legal Affairs for advancing an important study to the
Security Council. As I said a few days ago, that study is
not to be added to the shelves. It has to be studied by the
members of the Security Council so as to arrive at the
appropriate conclusions in order to provide protection
for the Palestinian civilian population in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem.

Israel must choose between occupation and peace.
It is clear from the policies of successive Israeli
Governments that the colonial agenda has trumped
the peace agenda in Israel. And it is equally clear that,
without international intervention, this situation cannot
be reversed.

The continuation and expansion of the settlement
regime are a destructive reality we witness every
day, even if the world does not always see or hear the
bulldozers. Just last week, Israel audaciously declared
370 acres south of Jericho as so-called State land. That
constitutes one of the largest illegal land expropriations
in years. Recently, Israeli plans to construct more than
65,000 new illegal settlement units throughout occupied
Palestine were also exposed. Those plans, which
include thousands of units in occupied East Jerusalem
and the surrounding areas, including the so-called E-l
area, would sever East Jerusalem from its Palestinian
environs. Moreover, hundreds more units are being
constructed in the so-called Givat Eitam illegal
settlement, referred to as E-2, south of Bethlehem, just
to name a few of the more glaring examples. Everything
the Secretary-General mentioned in his briefing with
regard to settlements is correct and should be fully
supported and acted upon by the Security Council.
It is an understatement to say that any settlement
unit built anywhere in our occupied land brings us
a step closer to the end of the two-State vision. The
international community must directly address that and
send an unequivocal message to Israel now, before it is
too late. It cannot ignore these facts or the fact that the
Israeli Foreign Ministry recently released a document
inconceivably claiming that settlements are "legal"
under international law. The illegality of the Israeli
settlement regime has been reaffirmed by the Security
Council in several resolutions, by the High Contracting
Parties to the Geneva Conventions, by the International
Court of Justice, by the Human Rights Council, by
successive special rapporteurs and by international
fact-finding missions. Nearly every single State around
the world and all the members around this table, with
the exception of Israel, accept that position. No one can
deny that the forced transfer of Palestinian civilians
and the transfer of Israelis to the occupied territory
are grave breaches of international humanitarian
law and war crimes under the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court. Israel's arguments rely
on absurd interpretations of very clear legal texts and
on historical distortions and empty pretexts used for
decades to justify colonialism and apartheid, which are
two of the most condemned phenomena in history. Yet
Israel persists in spreading both, in word and deed.

The most striking aspect in the Israeli Foreign
Ministry's document is not the absurd argument made
in defence of the indefensible, but rather the fact that
it reconfirms Israel's total commitment to the colonial
settlement regime at the expense ofthe law and ofpeace.
The question therefore is not what we hope Israel will
do to end the settlement regime it continues to plan,
develop, expand, defend and commit vast resources
to, but rather what the international community will
do in fulfilment of its own obligations, as spelled out
by the principles of international law, the Charter of
the United Nations, the relevant conventions, including
the Fourth Geneva Convention, and the advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice on the
Legal consequences of the construction ofa wall in
the occupied Palestinian territory (see A/ES-10/273),
notably in relation to third-party responsibility. That
must be considered and acted on as a matter of priority
and urgency by the international community, especially
the Security Council.

The inalienable rights of the Palestinian people,
including to self-determination and freedom, are
non-negotiable and cannot be subject to the occupying
Power's goodwill or lack thereof. No State can, under
the pretext of supporting dialogue among the parties,
evade its own responsibility to uphold international law.
This is a time for action and responsibility. Our region
and the world cannot afford the looming breakdown,
which would lead to more chaos and suffering. Those
who believe the occupation is sustainable, or that
we will surrender to it, are mistaken. We remain
relentless in pursuit of our independence and our rights.
We call on the Council to play its role and fulfil its
responsibilities: end the oppression, end the occupation
and help make peace and justice a reality for all the
peoples of the region. That is the Council's duty. It
cannot be delegated, delayed or dismissed. Silence
and inaction are the accomplices of occupation and the
enemies of peace.

Today we must ask, have we all done everything in
our power and exhausted all means only to reach the
point of failure? Is there no way ahead? We continue to
believe another path is possible, that peace is possible
and that confrontation and war are not inevitable. We
have demonstrated a firm commitment to peace, but it
has no chance of leading to a lasting solution without
decisive international action in support of the two-
State solution on the pre-l967 borders and of measures
that hold accountable those who are destroying it. In
that regard, we are all aware that the Israeli settlement
enterprise in all its manifestations is the most formidable
obstacle to the peace we seek. Therefore, it has to be
removed from the path of peace, if we seriously want to
open doors to a meaningful process that could lead to
the end of the occupation, to the independence of our
State and to saving the two-State solution.

While we appreciate the strong positions expressed
by all Security Council members and the international
community at large against Israeli settlement activities,
those positions must be translated into action. That action
must start here in the Security Council. It must involve
measures on the part of all States and must transcend the
rendering of assistance. Israel must be held accountable
for its actions. Recent international reports, including
some by non-governmental organizations, have raised
important ideas that could help identify a way forward.
International mechanisms are also necessary, including
the convening of an international conference aimed at
ending the occupation and achieving peace, and the
establishment of an international support group to
advance that goal. Only with proper monitoring and
accountability can we hope to turn the tide and have a
chance of reaching safe shores. The priority should be
lasting peace, not temporary calm.

I came here today to appeal again for such action
on behalf of the Palestinian people, who are entitled to
and demand their freedom, and on behalf of all those
who seek and promote peace andjustice. Those needing
pretexts not to act will always find one: they will try to
make us address consequences rather than causes, tell
us to wait until the next election, or to understand that
more pressing issues loom, until everything collapses.
In recent months, several States have taken initiatives
and have shown leadership and understanding with
regard to the urgency of action, and have been able to
prioritize our cause among the many other key issues
they are working jointly to resolve. The time has come
for a collective process for Palestinian-Israeli peace.
The time has come for the Security Council to reflect
the express will of its members and of the international
community that it is mandated to represent. Excuses,
mild positions and half measures will not suffice. The
international will is being tested. Failure is not an
option.

