Mr. Mamabolo: I am honoured to once again
have an opportunity to update the Security Council
on the situation in Darfur and on issues concerning
the implementation of the mandate of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID). It is particularly important that we review
the progress made so far following the first phase of
the reconfiguration, in particular in the light of the
forthcoming strategic review of the mission in April.

The report of the Secretary General on the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(S/2018/154) covers the period from 16 December
2017 to 15 February 2018, during which UNAMID
started phase two of its reconfiguration.

Under the second phase, the J ebel Marra Task Force
is being operationalized. To that end, since January, the
Mission has embarked on the redeployment of military
and police personnel, as well as civilian staff, in order
to strengthen the operations of the Jebel Marra Task
Force. In addition, the construction of the temporary
operating base in G010 is under way. However, we
continue to face challenges in accessing Golo through
Kabkabiyah. One of our engineering contingents is
providing assistance in improving the condition of
the road. The mission force is currently organized in
two sectors, namely, the Jebel Marra Task Force, with
its headquarters in Zalingei, and the State Security
Assistance Force, which covers areas outside the area
of operation of the Task Force.

Furthermore, the reconfiguration in phase two also
entails a further reduction in the number of military
personnel to 8,735 and of police personnel to 2,500. We
have also reduced the number of civilian by 422, and are
expected to reduce it by approximately 158 more. The
deployment of formed police units to team sites from
which the military has withdrawn or rotated started at
the beginning of this month. We expect that the formed
police units will be fully operational at the Saraf Omra,
Korma, El Sherif and Masteri team sites by 30 March.

It is too early to make a realistic assessment of
the impact on the overall security and protection-of-
civilians situation in areas from which UNAMID
withdrew under phase one of the mission's
reconfiguration plan. Although there are some
administrative restrictions regarding access imposed
by the Government, nevertheless the mission continues
to engage with the Government to overcome those
challenges and to do everything within its mandate to
access and monitor the situation in those areas. We are
in the process of finalizing an assessment of the impact
caused by the closure ofthe various team sites to enable
us to determine the potential and actual impact of our
disengagement in those areas.
Intra- and inter-communal clashes persist in some
areas of Darfur, albeit at a relatively reduced scale. We
have also experienced instability in some traditionally
restive camps for internally displaced persons (IDP),
such as Korma, Hassa Hissa and Hamadiya. Those
clashes are mainly fuelled by traditional and long-
standing unresolved socioeconomic and political
issues that have been the root causes of Darfur's
conflict landscape over the years. UNAMID has been
intervening in a constructive way within the framework
of the mission's protection-of-civilians strategy.

The stalemate in the Darfur peace process persists,
despite our numerous efforts in support of President
Mbeki in our collective efforts to persuade the parties to
the conflict to sign cessation-of-hostilities agreements
and commence direct negotiations. The framework
for the negotiations continues to be the main issue of
contention. I maintain contact with the Darfur armed
movements, with the most recent meeting taking place
on 1 March in Addis Ababa. We continue to urge them
to accede to negotiations on the basis of the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur. I therefore call upon
Council members' respective countries to use their
bilateral channels to exhort the parties to the Darfur
conflict to sign cessation-of-hostilities agreements
and resume negotiations, including to use leverage
with Abdul Wahid to prevail upon him to acknowledge
the futility of war and to join the peace process. That
would be the only way whereby the people of Darfur,
and indeed the international community, could have
any realistic hope of achieving durable peace in Darfur.

The situation in Darfur now is not the same as it
was in 2003. Except for the sporadic clashes between
the Sudanese Armed Forces and the Sudan Liberation
Army/Abdul Wahid in the Jebel Marra area, there is
general absence of war in Darfur. I believe that the
adjustment of UNAMID's mandate and posture over
the years, from resolution 1769 (2007) to 2363 (2017),
was a clear recognition of that evolving reality. The
fundamental question is: What do we do with those
conditions of relative peace and stability in Darfur?
Over the past several months I have visited various
parts of Darfur to get first-hand information on what
the people of Darfur say and want. In a nutshell,
they say there is relative peace and stability; they
commend UNAMID for contributing to that state of
affairs; and they acknowledge the positive impact of
the civilian weapons-collection exercise initiated by
the Government. Nevertheless, there have been some
complaints from some members ofthe IDP communities
relating to the perceived lack of fairness of the civilian
weapons-collection exercise. That notwithstanding,
IDPs do want to return to their areas of origin, but
under conducive conditions. Most important, they
want resources for post-conflict reconstruction
and development.

Pursuant to resolution 2363 (2017), in collaboration
with the United Nations country team, the mission
continues to give priority to activities geared towards
supporting the stabilization of the situation through
economic, social and political initiatives and assistance
designed to consolidate the prevailing relative peace
and stability. Consultations with stakeholders are
being undertaken on the conceptual framework and
policy for implementing the stabilization mandate
in Darfur. Despite the relative stability, concerns
persist nonetheless that, owing to insecurity and land
occupation issues, many IDPs are not able to return
to their areas of origin. In that context, we have been
engaging with stakeholders, including the Government
of the Sudan, in search of durable solutions to the
problems of IDPs.

Without question, a significant amount of
resources is required for post-conflict reconstruction
and the development of Darfur. I therefore appeal to
all Council members to play their part, either through
bilateral commitments of resources by their respective
countries or through much-needed advocacy for early
recovery and development in Darfur. As the mission
engages in the stabilization phase, we are duty-bound
to do it in a manner that consolidates, not compromises,
the gains that our presence has achieved over the years.
Such actions should include the injection of resources
by the international community in order to assist with
socioeconomic development and the establishment, as
well as consolidation, of State authority throughout
Darfur. In the same vein, I would urge the Council to
ensure that adequate resources are mobilized and that
they are commensurate with the pace of UNAMID's
drawdown of its personnel to drive continued stability.

In conclusion, on behalf of UNAMID, let me
express our gratitude to the Council for its important
support. Especially as we embark on this critical stage
of UNAMID's engagement in Darfur, we will need
more, not less, of the Council's generous support.

