Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I thank you,
Mr. President, for putting this topic on the agenda. I
would also like to thank Special Coordinator Nickolay
Mladenov for his very impressive and, at the same time,
worrisome statement.

Mr. Mladenov spoke clearly of the dangerous
dynamic that he is observing and stated there is no
status quo to preserve. He said that we are living in
times of deterioration and radicalization. Therefore, I
think a debate is warranted even though there are other
crises in the region, such as Syria and Yemen, with very
bleak ongoing humanitarian disasters.

I would like to begin by aligning myself with the
statement to be delivered later by the observer of the
European Union (EU), who will lay out the common
EU position. Let me make five points.

First, Germany is steadfast in its commitment to
Israel, its security and Israel as a Jewish and democratic
State. Germany will not remain silent when Israel's
right to exist is questioned or compromised, as it is by
Iran. The Israeli Ambassador reminded the Council
that there are still Iranian missiles that are inscribed
with the phrase "Death to Israel".

Secondly, Germany underscores the importance of
the political process. We continue to promote and favour
prospects for a political process, which we believe is
urgently needed. In that regard, we support any attempt
to restart meaningful, direct negotiations between the
parties with the objective of reaching lasting peace.
We must all work together to bring the parties back to
the negotiating table. In that respect, almost everybody
around the table said that they remained fully and
firmly committed to the two-State solution. As the
Indonesian minister, who I welcome here today, said
in her statement, the only option to resolve the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict is a two-State solution based on
Council resolutions and the known parameters. That
also applies to the status of Jerusalem. In that context,
I also recall the relevant Security Council resolutions,
such as resolutions 478 (1980) and 2334 (2016), which
are binding international law. Resolutions are not an
a la carte menu. With regard to the political process,
we believe that confidence-building measures and
positive steps by both parties are essential and require
leadership, political will and very hard work. We call
on both sides to live up to their responsibilities so that
future generations can live in peace.

Thirdly, we must focus on Israel's settlement
policies. Israel's continuous expansion of settlement
activity is a matter of great concern. I want to highlight
what Mr. Mladenov said in his strong statement. I note
the figures that he gave on permits and what he said
about demolitions, displacement, seizures, as well
as what he said about the fear of future annexation. I
remind the Council that all of those settlement activities
are illegal under international law. They jeopardize
prospects for a future peace agreement on the basis of
a two-State solution. They create enclaves, obstruct
Palestinian development and incite violence on both
sides. I therefore call upon Israel to freeze its expansion
of settlements, its legalization of outposts, as well as its
demolition of Palestinian property.

Special Coordinator Mladenov also noted that
the increase in violence is a matter of great concern.
Germany strongly condemns all attacks, including the
firing of rockets and the use of incendiary kites and
balloons from Gaza, which put Israel's security at risk.
To those responsible, in particular Hamas, we affirm that
those attacks are unacceptable and must stop. Violence,
including terrorist attacks, and unrest increased in
the final months of 2018 in the West Bank, Gaza and
Jerusalem. We strongly urge all parties to de-escalate,
exercise restraint and refrain from putting the lives of
innocent civilians in danger. Violence against civilians,
especially if directed against the most vulnerable, such
as children or disabled persons, is unacceptable and
unjustifiable. Human rights need to be respected at all
times. At the same time, protests have to be peaceful
and the rights of demonstrators have to be respected.
We call on all sides to refrain from the use of excessive
force. On a more positive note, Germany encourages
all people-to-people exchanges, some of which are
led by women. We want to explicitly commend such
exchanges, which can contribute to easing tensions
between the parties.

Fourthly, on the humanitarian situation, in addition
to the increase in violence, the humanitarian and
economic situation in Gaza remains a matter of great
concern. Our immediate priority must be to ease
restrictions on movement and access. Humanitarian
and financial assistance to Gaza must not be obstructed.
We call on the Palestinian Authority to do its part to
improve the living conditions in Gaza. Let me also
commend the important work of United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA). To echo the words of Mr. Mladenov,
the work of UNRWA is essential and critical for
Palestinians. Nobody has been able to explain to me why
cutting funds to Agency is good for peace prospects.
All studies point to the fact that depriving young people
of the possibility of enjoying education leads directly
to terrorism and extremism. I once again thank all of
those who have supported UNRWA. It is important for
the youth in the region.

Lastly, on the process of intra-Palestinian
reconciliation, not least for the situation in Gaza, it is
very important for intra-Palestinian reconciliation to
resume. On this topic, Special Coordinator Mladenov
said that the hope for reconciliation is fading by the day.
We still believe that we must do all we can, even though
the situation is grim, particularly after the dissolution
of the Palestinian Legislative Council. We have seen the
prospects for reconciliation deteriorate and confidence
further erode. I would like to commend our Egyptian
friends for their relentless efforts to get Hamas and
Fatah together. We encourage Egypt to continue its
efforts despite the current situation. I call on Palestinian
actors to show leadership in finding common ground
to address the needs of the Palestinian people. We
are ready to continue to work with the Palestinian
Authority to strengthen democratic institutions.
Instead of fighting among themselves, I think that the
Palestinian leaders have an obligation to concentrate
on how they can support the frustrated youth and have
them go to school and work constructively so that they
do not become radicalized.

Let me end by echoing the words of our colleague
from Cote d'Ivoire, who focused not only on Middle
East peace but also peace in Syria and Yemen. He said
that for all of the problems that we face in the Middle
East, only a political solution can lead the way forward.

