Mr. Carlier Gonzalez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, let me congratulate the Kingdom
of the Netherlands for its successful presidency of the
Security Council for the month of March and to convey
to you, Sir, my delegation's sincere congratulations on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month. We wish you every success in your functions.

We thank the Secretary-General for his report
(8/2018/241) on the United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH), and in particular
thank Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix
for his briefing marking the Mission's first six months
of operations.

Colombia aligns itself with the statement made by
the Permanent Representative of Canada on behalf of
the Group of Friends of Haiti.

We are pleased to note that Haiti has continued to
move forward in consolidating the country's democracy
and stability. We note with satisfaction that the transition
from the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
to MINUJUSTH has gone smoothly, and that the
MINUJUSTH is fully operational. That shows that it
is possible to depend upon operations that fulfil the
roles for which they were established. As a friendly
country whose historical ties with Haiti have linked our
two countries since the birth of our nation, Colombia
believes that it is important to stress the fact that there
can be no real stability or sustainable development in
Haiti without strengthening democratic institutions.

We underscore that the Mission's primary goal
is to help the Haitian Government in strengthening
the rule of law, the judicial system and the Haitian
National Police, as well as human rights. All of that will
contribute to achieving the sustainable development
agenda in Haiti. As the police force and the judiciary
go hand in hand, it is necessary to bolster the capacity
of both sectors so as to strengthen the rule of law
and deal with urgent problems in Haiti. We concur
with the Secretary-General's report that the entire
judicial system, including the prison system, requires
meaningful reforms, and it is in such areas that it is
especially important to concentrate efforts, with the
political will demonstrated by the Government of
President Moise and the support of MINUJUSTH and
of the entire international community.

Greater efforts and resources must be accorded
to strengthening and training the Haitian National
Police so that it can be fully committed to providing
national security. In all such endeavours, we reiterate
the importance of gender mainstreaming in the work
of the Mission in a cross-cutting manner. We note
with satisfaction that, as was mentioned earlier, such a
spirit was illustrated by the gender makeup of the first
class of court clerks and police officers. Colombia will
continue to contribute its police, including in training
female police officers, as we have done since 2006.

The draft resolution that will extend the mandate
of the Mission for one year includes a clear way for
assessing progress made on the ground. Colombia
welcomes the flexibility shown by the Council to
evaluate the Mission's mandate in accordance with
the specific needs of the Haitian Government and the
general situation of the country.

In conclusion, as of now, Haiti is on board with
the United Nations to rethink formulating its primary
goals to maintain international peace and security that,
we believe, with the Secretary-General's proposal for
reform, takes us a step closer in the right direction. The
Haitian people and the Council can always count on the
support of my country.

The meeting rose at 12.25 p.m.
