Mr. ngowe (Botswana): My delegation is grateful to
you, Mr. President, for the timely initiative you have taken
in choosing this very important subject for our orientation
debate today. Anti-personnel mines are the scourge of
human society in most, if not all, conflict situations. They
are a cowardly and indiscriminate instrument of war. They
mercilessly kill and main their victims without warning and
without determining whether they are friendly or enemy
forces, unsuspecting civilian population or United Nations
peace-keepers. Moreover, land-mines remain hidden and
ready to claim new victims long after war has ended. Thus,
land-mines have a long-lasting and traumatic psychological
impact on whole populations.

The United Nations is always faced with the task of
facilitating the return and resettlement of refugees and
displaced persons in every peace-keeping operation. Land-
mines are, however, an impediment to this process.
Travelling by road to return home becomes a nightmare
because of the omnipresence of land-mines. The
resumption of economic activity for subsistence purposes
becomes a perilous exercise. The land cannot be tilled
because it is already planted with these invisible death
traps. In short, all economic activity literally comes to a
standstill as the roads and pathways to cities, villages,
fields and watering points become impassable due to
land-mines. This is the harsh reality that innocent victims
of armed conflicts have to contend with long after the
torturous ordeal of war has supposedly come to an end.
Obviously, this deeply frustrates the hopes and aspirations
of civilian populations that want nothing but the
rebuilding of their shattered lives in a peaceful
atmosphere free from the deleterious effects of war.

It is evident from these comments that land-mines
are a menace to human life during and long after conflict
situations. The international community must find
effective ways of preventing conflicts, as they result in
the laying of the diabolical land-mines. Where a conflict
erupts, every effort must first be made to raise awareness
about land-mines, and all mine-producing and mine-
exporting countries should restrict the sale of these
weapons to the belligerents.

Secondly, the response to a conflict that proves not
amenable to preventive measures must be an automatic
land-mine embargo.

Thirdly, it is not in the long-term interests of any
side in a conflict to lay mines, because, much as the
psychology of war obviously dictates inflicting maximum
destruction on the enemy by whatever means available,
land-mines are too costly to live with after war, in both
human and material terms. The warring parties must
therefore always appreciate that they will still have a
country to share and must live together as neighbours at
the end of conflict, and that land-mines do not allow the
wounds of war to heal easily and quickly.

Fourthly, and most importantly for today's debate,
when a cease-fire has been established or a decision has
been reached to establish a peace-keeping mission, the
mandate of such an operation must automatically include
demining at the top of its agenda, as has already been
done in some cases.

 

My delegation believes that because land-mines always
exacerbate the already adverse humanitarian situation in any
conflict, demining should always be given top priority in
every peace-keeping operation. It is important that the
demobilization of the combatants and the promotion of
national reconciliation should go hand in hand with
demining in order to facilitate the early return of civilians
to their homes and to productive lives.

Military rules and procedures dictate that belligerents
should mark and map their minefields. Experience has,
however, shown that this never happens, and where some
limited effort has been made to this end, the maps have not
proved accurate enough to be of any meaningful use or
assistance in the demining exercise.

While it may seem an exercise in futility to expect the
warring parties to remember their obligations to faithfully
mark and map their minefields, there is at present no
alternative but to insist that they should do so without fail
so that the process of demining can be performed with ease
during a peace-keeping mission. The international
community should not abandon the search for the most
practical ways of dealing with land-mines, including
considering instituting appropriate measures under
international humanitarian law to ensure such compliance.
Such measures could also act as a deterrent against the
laying of mines if there were clear penalties for non-
adherence to the applicable rules. This would indeed
facilitate the speed with which demining could be carried
out in any United Nations peace-keeping operation and thus
afford the peace-keeping mission an opportunity to carry
out its mandate more effectively.

All this presupposes the existence of a standardized
mine-clearance technology. My delegation deeply
appreciates the contributions of those countries that have
always been ready to provide assistance in the field of
demining technology. It is clear, however, that the demining
exercise is not often carried out with the anticipated speed
or the desired result, due to the lack of adequate capacity
and the diversity of mine-clearance technologies. It goes
without saying, therefore, that there is a need to develop an
advanced mine-clearance capability and technology, and the
United Nations system has an important coordinating role
to play in this area, for the good of all humanity.

It is a firmly held view of my delegation that the
scourge of land-mines will always be with us even if we
develop the best mine-clearance technology. The ultimate
solution to the menace presented by land-mines lies in the
complete prohibition of the production and use of these
horrendous devices of war. Mine-producing countries
should be urged not only to halt the production of
existing models, but also to halt the development of so-
called alternatives, such as remotely delivered and self-
destructive mines.

There is no doubt that war has always been a living
reality in the history of human civilization and existence.
It is a fact that there have always been rules and
regulations governing the conduct of those who made war
an industry, even in medieval times. It is therefore even
more compelling for us, in the last few years of the
twentieth century, to curb, prohibit and ultimately rid the
world of these tools of war which inflict permanent pain
on the human conscience.

