China thanks President Yusuf for his briefing on behalf of the International Court of Justice. This year coincides with the seventy-fifth anniversary of the adoption of the Charter of the United Nations and the centenary of the Statute of the Permanent Court of International Justice. It is timely and highly relevant for us to discuss how to strengthen the cooperation between the Security Council and the International Court of Justice. The 75 years of the United Nations has seen the rapid development of multilateralism and the continued advancement of the international rule of law. As principal organs of the United Nations, the Security Council and the International Court of Justice have made important contributions to maintaining international peace and security and promoting global equity and justice. Strengthening the cooperation between the Security Council and the International Court of Justice under the Charter is conducive to maintaining the United Nations-centred international system and the international order underpinned by international law. China wishes to make the following points. First, it is imperative to defend the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter and firmly safeguard the central role of the United Nations in international affairs. We must uphold the cardinal principles of international law and the basic norms governing international relations, such as sovereign equality, non- interference in internal affairs, the peaceful settlement of disputes and non-use of force, advocate multilateralism, implement the international rule of law and preserve the centrality of the United Nations in global governance. Secondly, we must safeguard the international collective security mechanism, with the Security Council at its core, and steadfastly defend the mission and authority of the Council. In fulfilling the mandate to maintain international peace and security, the Council represents the will of all States Members of the United Nations. The international community should support the Council in resolving regional hotspot issues, responding to security threats and promoting multilateral security cooperation, in accordance with the United Nations Charter, through political means and constructive dialogue. Thirdly, we must remain committed to the peaceful settlement of international disputes and fully leverage the important role of the International Court of Justice. In recent years, the numbers of cases submitted and the advisory opinions issued by the Court of Justice has continued to increase, which is a testament to the international community's growing trust in the International Court of Justice. The International Court of Justice should faithfully perform its duties pursuant to the United Nations Charter, strictly abide by the principle of State consent, ensure the equal and uniform application of international law and oppose double standards and exceptionalism. Fourthly, we must strengthen the interaction between the Council and the International Court of Justice and work together to make international relations more democratic and rules-based. The Council should respect and support the independent work of the International Court of Justice. The Court should use international law to help maintain international peace and security. The two organs should perform their respective duties and collaborate with each other under the United Nations Charter to ensure that all countries abide by international law and the basic norms of international relations, reject unilateralism and bullying and oppose unilateral coercive measures in contravention of international law. Seventy-five years ago, China was the first country to sign the Charter of the United Nations. As the largest developing country and a permanent member of the Security Council, China will continue to be a builder of world peace, a contributor to global development and a defender of the international order. As always, China will support the work of the Council and the International Court of Justice, work hand in hand with all parties, embrace multilateralism and the international rule of law, promote a new kind of international relations based on mutual respect, fairness, justice and win-win cooperation and build a community with a shared future for humankind.
