The Secretary-General: I thank the Government
of Rwanda for convening this discussion on regional
partnerships and United Nations peacekeeping,
especially in Africa. This is the second debate on
this subject this year (see S/PV.7196). Such active
engagement and such high-level representation by the
African Union (AU) and the European Union (EU) are
a testament to the importance of our combined efforts
to keep and build peace.
We have seen how the effectiveness of the AU
and and the United Nations can be enhanced when we
coordinate and complement our efforts. This partnership
has also benefitted from the European Union's growing
involvement in crisis management and post-conflict
stabilization. From Operation Artemis in the east of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo in 2003 to this
year's deployment of the European Union Force in the
Central African African Republic, the United Nations
and the EU have increased their strategic partnership.
By engaging early during the planning phase, we have
achieved an effective division of labour - for example,
in the areas of police and security sector reform.

Mali offers another important example of
effective cooperation. Our partnership with the
EU and the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) allowed for the rapid deployment
of military and police elements under the African-
led International Support Mission in Mali, which
was subsequently re-hatted under the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali. That cooperation led to the signing of the
Ouagadougou Preliminary Agreement in June 2013
under the mediation of Burkina Faso on behalf of
Economic Community of West African States.

Separately, the European Union has launched a
training mission to build the capacity of the Malian
armed forces. We have continued to work closely with
the European Union, which is launching a new mission
in Mali to build the capacity of law enforcement
institutions, as well as with the African Union Mission
for Mali and the Sahel on the regional dimensions of
the conflict. We are also working with the AU and
ECOWAS, along with Algeria and other regional
actors, in support of the ongoing political process. I
congratulate the Malian parties on the adoption of a
consensual road map for the inter-Malian negotiations
in the past week. I remain, however, deeply concerned
about instability in the north. I call upon all parties to
cease hostilities and cooperate with the joint security
commission led by the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).

In the Central African Republic, the United
Nations has been collaborating with the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS),
the AU, the EU and other key partners. The United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA)
and the African-led International Support Mission to
the Central African Republic (MISCA) are working
hand-in-hand to prepare for a transfer of authority on
15 September. An international mediation team has
recently been formed to support the political process,
including ECCAS, the United Nations and the AU.

I welcome the agreement reached on 23 July under
the leadership of President Sassou Nguesso of the
Republic of the Congo with the support of the AU,
ECCAS and my Special Representatives to the Central
African Republic and to Central Africa. That is an
essential first step in ensuring durable peace, respect
for human rights, the protection of civilians and the
rule of law.

In South Sudan, our peacekeeping mission, namely,
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan, has been
working closely with the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) since the outbreak of the crisis
in December. However, despite our efforts, the Council
heard on Wednesday, 23 July, that the situation is the
most rapidly deteriorating humanitarian crisis in the
world today, worse even than that in the Central African
Republic and Syria. I repeat my call to the leaders
on both sides to abide by the Cessation of Hostilities
Agreement signed on 23 January.

In Darfur, despite political and logistical challenges,
the United Nations and the AU will continue to intensify
their efforts to support the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur so that it can
discharge its mandated tasks. In addition, the United
Nations, the AU and the Government of Ethiopia are
jointly engaging the Sudan and South Sudan so as to
encourage both Governments to consolidate the peace
in the disputed territory of Abyei, with the support of
the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei on
the ground. Our partnership with the AU and IGAD also
extends to Somalia, where my Special Representative
is working with the envoys of the AU and IGAD to
advance the political process.

Partnerships with regional organizations should
continue to be based on the comparative strengths of
each organization. It is also important that we draw
detailed lessons from our recent transition experiences
in the context of Mali and, very soon, the Central
African Republic. We will continue to work to enhance
the predictability and sustainability of African-led
peace-support operations.

In Cote d'Ivoire, we will proceed with the
establishment of a quick reaction force to support the
United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI)
and our Mission in Liberia (UNMIL). That effort
would not compete with existing mechanisms nor With
our support for regional initiatives, such as the African
Peace and Security Architecture, including the African
Standby Force and its ECOWAS brigade.

It is consistent with our effort to transition out
of countries where peacekeeping operations have
contributed to restoring peace, security and stability.
By mid-2015, the peacekeeping footprint in West
Africa will be lighter, as UNOCI and UNMIL
downsize. In that process, it is important that regional
organizations play a greater role. But we are conscious
that the root causes of the conflicts have not yet been
fully addressed, and emerging transnational threats
pose new challenges to stability. It is therefore critical
to ensure that all precautions are taken. We strongly
support cooperation within the framework of the AU,
ECOWAS and the Mano River Union to reinforce the
individual and collective security of the countries of
the subregion.

Bearing in mind the evolution of transnational
threats, we will need to continue our dialogue on how
best to support host Governments. That could include
embedding specialized units in our operations so as to
provide policing and law-enforcement expertise and
capacity-development assistance for host Government
agencies.

We have been talking for some time about the need
for the United Nations and key regional actors to be able
to deploy more rapidly, especially in acute emergencies.
The EU Battlegroup was created for that purpose, as
was the African Standby Force. But despite years of
investment, we are still far from having predictable
and effective mechanisms for rapid deployment. In the
Central African Republic, the force generation process
for the European Union-led peacekeeping force was
slower than expected, and the EU Battlegroup was not
used. We are in a race against time for the re-hatting of
MISCA on 15 September, trying to secure the necessary
enablers and other contributions to MINUSCA.

We - the United Nations, the AU and the EU,
together With other key partners - need to do better. I
am convincedthat we can, ifwe use existing mechanisms

and capacity much more effectively and predictably,
and in a way that further strengthens others. The United
Nations stands ready to further support the efforts of
the AU and the regional economic communities to fully
operationalize the African Standby Force. We should
also stop looking at different tools in isolation or only
through the lens ofthe organizations concerned. Instead,
we should see how we can bring them together in a way
that will finally allow the international community to
respond much more quickly.
I recently announced in the Council Chamber my
intention to undertake a review of peacekeeping as we
approach the 15-year anniversary of the Brahimi report
(see S/2000/809). Over the past decade and a half, the
Council has repeatedly shown its confidence in the value
of United Nations peacekeeping by deploying missions
with complex mandates to tough environments.

We are constantly working to keep pace with
rising demands and emerging challenges. We are
already innovating and applying creative solutions in
coordination with our valued partners. The review will
help us further improve our mobility and agility so
that we can better fulfil our duty to protect civilians
in need. The review will also examine the tremendous
growth in our partnerships with regional organizations.
Deepening and strengthening those partnerships will be
critical to our collective efforts to meet the challenges
of the future.

