Mr. Doutriaux (France) (spoke in French): Today, in
renewing the oil-for-food programme for a sixth phase, the
Council is thinking of the very grave humanitarian crisis
affecting Iraq. Under the leadership of Mr. Amorim, the
humanitarian panel confirmed that the disturbing figures
given by United Nations agencies regarding the
nutritional, health and social situation of Iraq were
reliable and accurate. The Council will no longer be able
to say that it did not know. The Council, like Iraq, must
assume its responsibilities.

At the beginning of April the panel formulated
ambitious recommendations to improve the functioning of
resolution 986 (1995) and to assist the Iraqi population.
We would have hoped that all these proposals would have
come into force as of the beginning of this new phase.
We shall continue our endeavours to that end.

We are pleased to note that a positive gain seems to
have been achieved. We understand from the
consultations in the Council and from the addition of
paragraph 14 to the draft resolution that the Council will
be flexible and open on the question of the oil ceiling. If
Iraq should exceed the ceiling during the sixth phase, we
understand that the Council does not intend to ask
Baghdad to suspend its sales. The flow of goods will not
be interrupted.

In approving this sixth phase, we should also bear in
mind the very clear conclusion of the report of the
humanitarian panel (S/1999/356, annex II), which in
paragraph 58 states,

"the panel reiterates its understanding that the
humanitarian situation in Iraq will continue to be a
dire one in the absence of a sustained revival of the
Iraqi economy, which in turn cannot be achieved
solely through remedial humanitarian efforts."

Resolution 986 (1995), even in an improved form, will
therefore not be able to provide anything but a partial and
temporary response to the problem.

France hopes that the Council will quickly reach an
agreement, pursuant to the recommendations of the three
panels, that would make it possible to restore the unity of
the Council, resolve the humanitarian crisis, ensure the
resumption of normal relations between the United
Nations and Iraq and ensure regional security. I wish to
recall that last January we made proposals to that effect.

The President (spoke in French) I shall now put to
the vote the draft resolution contained in document
S/1999/588.
 

A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Argentina, Bahrain, Brazil, Canada, China, France,
Gabon, Gambia, Malaysia, Namibia, Netherlands,
Russian Federation, Slovenia. United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America

