Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, we thank Mr. Martin Griffiths, Mr. Mark
Lowcock and Mr. David Beasley for their briefings
today, and we express our full support for their efforts.

As of today, seven months have elapsed since the
entry into force of the Stockholm Agreement, which
represents seven months of stalemate affecting the
three pillars of the Agreement despite the Security
Council's commitment to moving the political solution
forward through United Nations-sponsored dialogue
expressed in its unanimous adoption of resolutions
2451 (2018) and 2452 (2019) among other developments,
including resolution 2481 (2018), which have all
reiterated the importance of the full implementation of
the Agreement. Nevertheless, despite the time elapsed,
we have not seen any constructive measures that would
help achieve its objectives.

The unprecedented blockade of Taiz has brought
suffering to its men, women and children for over four
years, and no tangible action has been undertaken to
implement the statement of understanding on Taiz.
Other forms of suffering include that of the thousands
of Yemeni families who yearn for the release and return
of the imprisoned, detained and forcibly disappeared.
No progress has been made on the implementation of
the prisoner-exchange agreement. Despite numerous
meetings ofthe supervisory committee, many challenges
have hampered the agreement's implementation,
thereby blocking the release of any prisoners, detainees,
abductees and forcibly disappeared persons.

With regard to the Al-Hudaydah agreement, whose
full implementation has humanitarian implications, it
too is based on agreements and understandings approved
by the Redeployment Coordination Committee (RCC)
at its multiple meetings, leading to an agreement to
undertake redeployment outside of Al-Hudaydah under
the supervision of the three members of the RCC.

In that regard, we welcome the fact that the RCC
has resumed its meetings following a five-month
suspension. Furthermore, we reiterate the importance
of these meetings for the full implementation of the
agreement. We should take into account the pivotal
role played by the tripartite verification and inspection
mechanism so as to allow the Yemeni Government
to exercise its sovereign role in monitoring and
redeploying in Al-Hudaydah.

We reiterate our firm position that there is no
military solution and endorse the Special Envoy's
position that not only is a military de-escalation needed,
but more importantly, all the elements of the Stockholm
Agreement must be implemented, which is the best way
for consultations focusing on comprehensive issues to
be resumed.

With regard to security developments, the State
of Kuwait strongly condemns continued attacks on
civilian and critical infrastructure in the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia. We fully support the Kingdom and
all measures being taken to maintain its security and
territorial integrity. The Houthis' relentless attacks
against Saudi territory are in blatant violation of
international humanitarian law and a clear threat to
regional security and stability, thereby justifying the
arms embargo provided for in the relevant Security
Council resolutions.

With regard to the humanitarian situation, at the
previous meeting on this subject (see S/PV.8551),
Mr. David Beasley discussed permanent solutions
to the humanitarian situation. He cautioned that the
World Food Programme (WFP) might have to suspend
its activities in Sana'a, which is under Houthi control,
leading to the denial of humanitarian assistance
for some 850,000 people. As a result of ongoing
intransigence and the failure to respond to the WFP's
rational, legitimate demands, that actually happened
on 20 June. Mr. Beasley called for an independent
beneficiary-identification using biometrics in order to
ensure that humanitarian assistance is not manipulated
or diverted again. We also welcome Mr. Beasley's
remarks about an agreement with the Houthis to address
all the aforementioned problems.

We also commend the positive role played by the
Yemeni Government, which continues to pay salaries
to public-sector employees and retirees. In addition, the
Yemeni Economic Committee is trying to facilitate fuel
shipments and access to the Red Sea Mills and open
routes for humanitarian assistance, notwithstanding
the major security challenges. We reiterate our call on
all parties to cooperate with relief and humanitarian
agencies, refrain from placing obstacles to their
movements and ensure the safety of personnel, who
deserve our appreciation for their tireless efforts
to provide humanitarian assistance despite the
harsh conditions.

In conclusion, we reiterate our call on all Yemeni
parties to fully implement the Stockholm Agreement
on the city of Al-Hudaydah and its three ports, the
prisoner-exchange agreement and the Taiz statement of
understanding, so as to complement the efforts of the
Special Envoy for Yemen aimed at reaching a political
solution underpinned by the three terms of reference,
namely, the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative and
its Implementation Mechanism, the National Dialogue
Conference outcomes and all relevant Security Council
resolutions, including resolution 2216 (2015). The
goal is to end the crisis, preserve the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Yemen and
cease interference in the country's internal affairs.

