Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): First of all, of course, we want to express
our sincere condolences to the Governments and the
peoples of the United States and Indonesia in the wake
of their recent tragedies.

We thank Mr. Lowcock for his comprehensive
briefing. We very much appreciate the work of United
Nations humanitarian agencies, particularly when
it is conducted impartially in strict observance of
the United Nations principles for the provision of
humanitarian assistance.

Against a backdrop of the successful liberation
of large parts of Syria from terrorists, efforts are
continuing to restore normal life and return refugees
and internally displaced persons to their homes. We
must unite to collectively and actively assist in those
processes and not to obstruct them on politicized pretexts
or with dozens of frankly incomprehensible conditions.
The Russian initiative to convene an international
conference on Syrian refugees was designed to help
unite those efforts. The authorities in Damascus have
given security guarantees to those who want to return
home and are working on a legal framework that would
facilitate their rapid reintegration.

The flow of Syrians returning from Lebanon is
increasing. We can see the effect that the opening ofthe
Nasib crossing has had on the Syrian-Jordanian border.
People on both sides of the border have been waiting
impatiently for several years for this transportation
artery, which supports regional, trade and human
links, to start functioning again. Such steps deserve
every encouragement for the contribution they make to
achieving a principle as fundamental to the stabilization
of the situation in the Middle East as the establishment
of good-neighbourliness.

The implementation of the memorandum of
understanding on stabilizing the situation in the
de-escalation zone in Idlib based on the high-level
Russian-Turkish agreement is proceeding successfully.
Our Turkish partners are doing everything they can to
get the armed groups and their heavy weapons out of
the demilitarized zone. However, the militias based
there continue to violate the terms of the agreement by
firing on nearby villages, and there are new reports of
suspicious movements of Al-Nusra Front members and
White Helmets with toxic substances. We should point
out that the de-escalation agreements were temporary
from the start, and no one has taken thejob ofeliminating
the terrorist presence in Syria off the agenda. If the

provocations by radical elements continue, Russia
reserves the right to support effective action by the
Syrian Government to eliminate terrorist strongholds.

We share the Secretary-General's concern about
the disastrous humanitarian situation in Rukban. And
in general, the humanitarian situation in Syria would
improve if the coalition stopped violating the Syrian
Arab Republic's sovereignty through its illegal presence,
by which I particularly have in mind the well-known
Al-Tanf military base in the south of the country and the
coalition presence east of the Euphrates. The economic
activity in those illegally occupied areas, without
coordinating with the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic, also raises numerous questions generally.

Leaders from Russia, Turkey, Germany and
France met in Istanbul on 27 October and adopted a
joint statement, and we are grateful to the President
of Turkey for that important unifying initiative. The
summit participants expressed a general disposition
to cooperate with a view to further normalizing the
situation in Syria, for which the conditions have been
established in the framework of the Astana format
through the efforts of Russia, Turkey and Iran. A
commitment was expressed to a political settlement
under the auspices of the United Nations in accordance
with resolution 2254 (2015) and with full respect for
Syria's sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity. Incidentally, the question of collaboration
between the Astana process and the so-called small
group was also discussed at the Istanbul summit.

The importance of getting the work of a
constitutional committee started based the decision of
the Syrian National Dialogue Congress in Sochi was
acknowledged, and we hope that it will be able to start
before the end of this year, assuming that the conditions
are conducive. The professionals, however, realize that
it must be recognized as legitimate by all parties if
it is to be efficient and effective. It is important that
everyone understands that it is the people of Syria
who are responsible for its fate, and it is they who
must determine every aspect related to their State's
structure during the course of the dialogue. After so
many years of war, the country will have to undergo a
process of national reconciliation, one way or another.
And Syria has always been distinguished by a high
level of national reconciliation. The United Nations,
the international community and Syria's friends can
help, but imposing ready-made solutions, ultimatums
or deadlines on the Syrians is wrong and futile. And in
any case, the empirical evidence shows that trying to
impose solutions in any regional crisis does not work.

In answer to the numerous questions that have been
directed to us, I would like to inform the members of
the Council that the joint statement by the leaders who
participated in the quadrilateral summit in Istanbul will
be circulated as an official Security Council document
in the next few minutes, and I can assure the Council
that is contains exhaustive answers. I thank the Council
members who supported the joint statement and thereby
affirmed their willingness to work constructively in the
quest for a political settlement of the conflict in Syria.
Iwould like to bring to the attention ofmy colleagues
who continue to use terms such as "the Syrian regime"
the fact that such usage is contrary to all the relevant
Security Council resolutions, which speak only of the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic. A respectful
approach is needed, and it would also help to advance
the political process.

