The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Algeria, Ethiopia, Kenya, Norway
and Somalia, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council's agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item Without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Daale
(Somalia) took a seat at the Council table; the
other aforementioned representatives took the
seats reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

The President: On behalf of the Council, I wish to
extend a warm welcome to His Excellency Mr. Moses
Wetangula, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic
of Kenya.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Augustine Mahiga, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and head of the United Nations
Political Office for Somalia.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Mahiga to take a seat at the Council
table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend invitations under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to His
Excellency Mr. Tete Antonio, Permanent Observer of
2
the African Union to the United Nations, and His
Excellency Mr. Pedro Serrano, head of the delegation
of the European Union to the United Nations.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Antonio and Mr. Serrano to take the
seats reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/20lO/447, containing the report of the
Secretary-General on Somalia.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Augustine Mahiga. I now give the floor
to Mr. Mahiga.


