Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
important statement.

This Security Council debate on nuclear
non-proliferation, disarmament and security is a timely
opportunity to reiterate the need for all Member States
to fully comply with their obligations and
commitments with regard to arms control, disarmament
and all aspects of the non-proliferation of every type of
weapon. We believe that international peace and
security will only be fully achieved when the world is
free of weapons of mass destruction, the threat they
pose and the risk that they could be used by terrorists
and non-State actors.
3
In 1967, with the adoption of the Treaty of
Tlatelolco, the Latin American and Caribbean region
became the world's first densely populated nuclear-
weapon-free zone. That Treaty served as a model for the
establishment of other such zones in Africa, the South
Pacific, South-East Asia and Central Asia, as well as for
the recognition of Mongolia as a nuclear-weapon-free
country. The rejection of the possession, use or
manufacture of this type of weapon by more than 100
States members of nuclear-weapon-free zones provides
an important contribution to non-proliferation, while
also serving as a confidence-building measure in the
area of disarmament, thereby contributing to the
maintenance of regional and international peace and
security.

Colombia, as a State party to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and a country
that does not possess nuclear weapons, has been an
advocate for the universalization and effective
implementation of that international instrument. In
fulfilment of its obligations, Colombia has established
a safeguards agreement with the International Atomic
Energy Agency, as well as an additional protocol
thereto.

Although there has been progress in reducing
nuclear arsenals - in connection with which I should
like to commend the entry into force, on 5 February
2011, of the Treaty between the United States of
America and the Russian Federation on Measures for
the Further Reduction and Limitation of Strategic
Offensive Arms - much remains to be done to achieve
their total elimination. All nuclear-weapon States
without exception should make progress on that
commitment in a verifiable, irreversible and definitive
manner.

As a State party to annex 2 of the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, we would like to reiterate the
importance of the Treaty's entry into force. While the
declarations of moratoriums on nuclear tests made by
various nuclear-weapon States constitute progress on
the issue, only a legally binding commitment will
prevent the carrying out of new nuclear explosions and
their negative effects on international peace and
security, as well as on human beings and the
environment.

As a State member of the Conference on
Disarmament, Colombia believes that, in order to
overcome existing differences between nuclear and
non-nuclear-weapon States, there is a need to adopt a
legally binding instrument on negative security
assurances.

While the treaties establishing nuclear-weapon-
free zones include additional protocols aimed at
ensuring respect for non-nuclear status and against the
use or threat of use of nuclear weapons, so long as
general and complete nuclear disarmament is not
achieved and the category of nuclear-weapon State
continues to exist, it will continue to be urgent and
necessary for the Conference on Disarmament to make
genuine substantive progress on negotiating an
agreement on this issue.

A fissile material cut-off treaty is another legally
binding instrument that remains to be negotiated in that
multilateral forum in order to contribute significantly
to non-proliferation - for non-proliferation also
entails preventing access to fissile materials and
technologies, including knowledge and information
about nuclear weapons. We reiterate our willingness to
work with every member of the Conference on
Disarmament to ensure that the Conference resumes
negotiations on pending international agreements in the
area of disarmament and is able to emerge from the
paralysis it has experienced for the past decade.

Nuclear terrorism poses a threat for every State
without exception. It is therefore necessary that we join
efforts to effectively confront it. Colombia, which
understands the scope of the threat, has undertaken the
necessary domestic legislative steps to ratify the
Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear
Material and its Amendment, as well as the
International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of
Nuclear Terrorism.

I should also like to refer to resolution 1540
(2004), which not only complements international
efforts in the areas of disarmament, the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and
combating terrorism, but also identifies the new threat
posed by the possession by terrorists and non-State
actors of such weapons, their delivery systems and
related material. The resolution provides for
international cooperation and assistance to be provided
to States to ensure its effective implementation as a
central element of prevention.

With the support of the Organization of American
States, the Stimson Centre and the Stanley Foundation,
the first Andean workshop on resolution 1540 (2004)
was convened in our country. At the workshop, the
countries of the region provided information about the
progress they had made in the implementation of the
resolution and their requirements in that respect.

Finally, my country views nuclear disarmament
and non-proliferation as part of a comprehensive
process aimed at achieving general and complete
disarmament in all its aspects and with regard to all
types of weapons. It is thus important that all United
Nations organs, within their respective purviews,
commit themselves in a resolute manner to achieving
the tangible objectives that have been set, which
include the adoption of an arms trade treaty,
strengthening the implementation of the Programme of
Action on Small Arms and Light Weapons, and the
early entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-
Test-Ban Treaty.

