The President (spoke in Chinese): I will now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
China.

At the beginning of the meeting, I expressed on
behalf of the members of the Security Council our
highest respects to Ambassador Kamel Morjane. Now I
would like associate myself fully with all the kind
words addressed to him by previous speakers.

The peace process in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo is now at a critical juncture. If it does not
move forward, it will slide back. It is therefore a
challenge for the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the States in the Great Lakes region and the United
Nations to find a way to maintain this hard-won
momentum for peace and to push forward the peace
process in order to achieve lasting peace and
development in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Great Lakes region. However, the conflict in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo remains so
complicated that no quick solutions can be easily
found. The Security Council should therefore seize the
opportunity, remain focused and advance the peace
process in a step-by-step and well-planned manner. I
share the Views expressed by many of our colleagues in
this regard. At this stage, there are three questions that
deserve the Council's special attention.

First, plans for the disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration, repatriation and resettlement (DDRRR)
of the armed groups should be implemented in an
effective manner. The implementation of this process
hinges mainly on three crucial conditions. First, there
must be real progress in the inter-Congolese dialogue.
Real progress in this regard can increase mutual trust
among the Congolese parties to the conflict and can
also help encourage the parties to totally abandon their
plans to seek political and economic gains through
military means. In addition, there must be a total
cessation of assistance of all kinds, weaponry and
military assistance in particular, to the armed groups.
The countries concerned must scrupulously honour
their commitments made in the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement. In this regard, the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) should exercise, within its
capacities, effective monitoring over the DDRRR
process of the armed groups by strengthening its
coordination with the Joint Military Commission.
Furthermore, there must be timely and adequate
financial and economic assistance from the
international community so as to make DDRRR
process an integral part of the peace process.

Secondly, the demilitarization of Kisangani
should be realized as soon as possible. We endorse the
proposed increase in MONUC's deployment in
Kisangani and recommend that MONUC step up its
contacts with the Rassemblement congolais pour la
de'mocratie (RCD-Goma), with a View to putting
pressure on RCD-Goma to implement Security Council
resolution 1304 (2000). We support the holding of the
inter-Congolese dialogue on Congolese territory at an
appropriate time and free of foreign interference. The
realization of the United Nations goal at Kisangani will
mark an important step in the peace process.

Thirdly, the third phase of deployment of
MONUC represents a crucial step taken by the United
Nations to promote and consolidate a durable peace in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in the entire
Great Lakes region. Member States and the Secretariat
should therefore remain ready to ensure that both
human and material resources will be in place promptly
once the decision for deployment is made.

In addition, economic reconstruction and
development are vital to lasting peace and security in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo; the
international community should therefore give equal
weight to this issue. The priority in this regard at the
moment is to keep the Congo River open for navigation
and to ensure that the small projects proposed by the
Council's mission to the Great Lakes region yield
results as soon as possible.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I call on the representative of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

