Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I
would like to offer you my best wishes, Sir, as you
assume the presidency of the Security Council, and to
express the thanks of the United Kingdom to
Ambassador Wang Guangya for his stewardship of the
Council in the month of February.

I associate myself with the comments that
Ambassador Ryan is soon to make on behalf of the
European Union.

Looking at the darkness which prevailed in
Bosnia and Herzegovina 10 years ago, we can only
reflect today on the very considerable success that has
been achieved. Our thanks go to the High
Representative and his predecessors and to Prime
Minister Terzic for their contributions. In addition, we
express our gratitude for the briefings we have heard
this morning.

It is important to look forward. As others have
said, there are now two clear routes opening up for
Bosnia and Herzegovina that will anchor that State into
Euro-Atlantic structures. The first route - the
prospective Stabilization and Association Agreement
with the European Union - is a substantial prize on
the path towards eventual membership of the European
Union. But, more than covering Bosnia and
Herzegovina's relations with Brussels, this would also
help to define the country's relations with its
neighbours in South-Eastern Europe and the relations
of South-Eastern Europe with the European Union. I
very much welcome the increased role of the European
Union and the contributions it is making, particularly
on security and stability.

However, the second route is the Partnership for
Peace (PFP), which is a key goal. The reason why this
is a key goal came out very simply in a phrase Lord
Ashdown used when he said that membership of the
PFP would make war or internal conflict much less
likely. This is because it will require the unified
command of the armed forces and will facilitate a
much-needed reform of the various armed forces
within Bosnia and Herzegovina. That is not only good
for internal stability; crucially, it helps put an end to
the nonsense of the present unsustainable and
indefensible level of gross domestic product currently
spent on defence. In my view, a continuing role by the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) in Bosnia
and Herzegovina will also be appropriate, as we go
through the transition in the next months.

Guiding Bosnia and Herzegovina towards
becoming a successful nation-State requires political
leadership, without a doubt, but also requires
increasing the rule of law to what we euphemistically
call international standards and achieving justice and
reconciliation. The Bosnian War Crimes Chamber is
thus a key contribution. I agree with Ambassador
Pleuger on the need for more international support for
the Chamber. The United Kingdom has pledged 10 per
cent of the annual costs for the next five years; that
will be our contribution.

Beyond that, the arrest and delivery to the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) in The Hague of Mr. Karadzic and
Mr. Mladic remains an essential element of
reconciliation and justice. Those currently harbouring
and supporting these two indictees are doing absolutely
no favours for the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
While it is right that we should have and promote a
closure strategy for the ICTY, it is also wholly
consistent to say that those two men must be brought to
face justice in The Hague. In the view of the United
Kingdom, without that, there can be no true justice and
no end to the malignant influence of those two. Until
they are in The Hague facing justice, in our View, the
international community will not have finished its job.
Resolution 1503 (2003) sets out very clearly the
obligations of all of us in this connection.

Lord Ashdown focused on the economic issues,
and it is right to underline their importance and the
scale of the challenge. Economic reform with the
sustained support of the international financial
institutions and the European Union is absolutely
essential. We were encouraged by the discussions in
the margins of the most recent Peace Implementation
Conference, and we hope very much that that process
will continue.

Alongside the need for economic development is
the need to prevail over organized crime, not just
because of the loss of revenue to the Government, but
because of the pernicious influence exerted on the
region and, indeed, beyond the region.

In conclusion, I would like to make one
observation and pose two questions. First, the High
Representative raised the issue of the de-certification
process for some 800 policemen and the 150 of them
who have already appealed. The International Police
Task Force (IPTF) appears to have taken proper
decisions, but the implementation of those decisions, at
the time, within Bosnia and Herzegovina, was
technically flawed. The United Kingdom thinks it is
right that we should ask the Bosnia and Herzegovina
authorities to regularize the situation and to do so
according to the terms that they were obliged to follow
at the time, but did not. This point was emphasized by
Under-Secretary-General Guehenno earlier. I think the
Security Council should support that, but it should also
say that a fair, defensible review procedure should
apply to those who are appealing their dismissal. In our
View, very tough criteria need to be applied to any such
procedure. The last thing we want is for the system to
be capricious or to open the way for the unacceptable
return of individuals who were rightly excluded. We
think there will need to be appropriate and close
international involvement in that process. Like the
representative of Germany, I very much welcome the
willingness of the Secretariat to take part in some form
of process.
I conclude with two questions. First, the case of
Bosnia and Herzegovina can be approached only in its
regional context. We have not said very much this
morning about cooperation with Belgrade. Could I ask
what the High Representative sees as the impact on
Bosnia and Herzegovina of developments both in
Serbia and Montenegro and, perhaps, more widely?

Secondly, we always talk about the dependency
culture. Are we getting to a stage in which we can
detect signs of much less dependency? I thought there
were some encouraging prospects in what the Prime
Minister said, but what is the exit strategy - and its
timescale - for Bosnia and Herzegovina to move into
a normal relationship with the international
community?

