Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): May I once again
thank and congratulate Sweden for selecting such a
good menu of themes for us to discuss in the Security
Council. I was here in 2007 for the first Security
Council climate change debate (see S/PV.5663), and I
think that today's discussion is already shaping up to
be a very worthy continuation in that area. It is obvious
that there is a great deal of common ground. I thank the
Ministers who have taken the time to be present here
in the Council today to share their very interesting,
compelling and sad stories.

The Earth is known as the Blue Planet but many
of today's speakers have described the way in which
the most iconic geographic features of the planet are
being irredeemably affected by climate change, which
serves as an important warning to us all. It is hoped that
today's meeting will provide us with a renewed sense of
commitment to taking action. I would like in particular
to welcome the remarks made earlier by the Minister of
Water Resources of Iraq about joint cooperation with
neighbouring countries in an attempt to solve some of
the resource problems that flow from climate change.

As many others here would agree, it was
Ms. Ibrahim's briefing about her people that was the
most compelling. She painted a very graphic picture
of the link between development and security, what
it means on the ground for ordinary families and how
vulnerable they are to developments, such as terrorist
acts, because of the incredibly stark and unfair choices
they face. I thank her for bringing that to the Council's
attention. We in the United Kingdom will work as hard
as we can with Sweden and other partners in an attempt
to assist the United Nations in finding answers to the
points raised by various Ministers today.

This topic must be considered holistically
throughout the United Nations system. We very much
welcome some of the ideas that you, Madam President,
and the representative of Netherlands have outlined.
The interplay between climate and security is not an
abstract theoretical risk. If we do not manage climate
change, it will threaten lives, livelihoods and economies
across the globe. Along with migration, it will begin to
have an impact on all economies, including those not
directly affected by climate change. One statistic that
really struck me was one provided by the World Bank,
which estimates that 720 million people are at risk of
being pushed into poverty by climate change by 2050.
That is not only a shocking statistic in itself; it also
means that climate change would reverse much of the
progress made in the first quarter of the twenty-first
century. We are therefore working against ourselves if
we do not act to address the topic. That is in addition
to the fact that there will be other consequences of
conflict and instability that arise from climate change.

My Prime Minister, Theresa May, has gone on
record to say that there is a clear moral imperative
for developed economies to help those who stand to
lose most from the consequences of climate change.
We have pledged $7.7 billion in international climate
financing to help alleviate the problem. The actions and
solutions we agree on in the Security Council must take
into account all the risks we face today and how they
might interact, so as to address potential risks in the
future. IfI may say so, I believe that the Council has
been quite good about reflecting those points in recent
resolutions, in particular those on Lake Chad, Somalia
and the Sahel. Our task is to effectively implement
those resolutions.

For our part in the United Kingdom, we have
committed to championing a sharper focus on
building resilience to climate change. Ahead of the
Secretary-General's 2019 climate summit, we will
be collaborating with a range of actors, including
Governments, aid agencies, regional bodies and the
United Nations, to launch actions we hope will be
genuinely transformational in order to build climate
resilience. As i said, Madam President, we completely
agree with you that we need an improved understanding
of climate-related risks. We ourselves have been
working on climate-risk assessment and were among
the first countries to conduct a national climate-change
risk assessment. We will support other countries in
conducting their assessments. We have worked very
closely with experts in China, India and the United
States to look at complex systemic risks, including how
climate change interacts with security. Together with
the Chinese, we will develop a framework to monitor
climate-related risks continuously, which we hope to
launch later this year. Therefore, there is a great deal
of good work being done. We can all support each other
and ensure that we build on our progress, rather than
duplicate it.

I will conclude by saying that we have always
known, in particular in the United Nations, about
the interdependence between security, development,
stability and other issues, such as human rights. That
in itself is not a new concept; indeed, the Charter
of the United Nations alludes to it. It is true to say
that it is now all intensifying as the world become
increasingly complex. Above all, it is exemplified by
climate change, which was given a very moving voice
by Ms. Ibrahim's testimony. I hope that we can all leave
here with renewed determination to put right some of
the problems highlighted by speakers.

