Mr. Matjila (South Africa): I would like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on Germany's
assumption of the Security Council presidency for
April. South Africa will support Germany as you lead
the Council through the month. We would also like to
warmly thank the French presidency for its work in the
month of March, including the Council's visit to Mali
and Burkina Faso. In addition, I would like to welcome
the presence of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of
Kuwait, Poland, France and Germany here among
us today.

I would also like to thank the briefers, Mr. Maurer,
Mr. Lowcock and Ms. Modirzadeh, for their insightful
briefings on such an important topic as the promotion
and strengthening of the rule of law, particularly
international humanitarian law. We particularly
took to heart the issues raised by the President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC).

The seventieth anniversary of the Geneva
Conventions and the Protocols Additional thereto
provides us an opportunity to reassess our commitment
to international humanitarian law and humanitarian
principles, notably the principles of humanity,
neutrality, impartiality and independence.

In this regard, the applicability of international
humanitarian law in conflict situations remains relevant
in order to preserve humanitarian space in order to
facilitate impartial humanitarian action, including
the provision of the necessary medical treatment to
all parties to conflict and the delivery of life-saving
supplies and assistance to the civilian population.

It is for this reason that South Africa considers
the attacks on humanitarian workers and medical
practitioners in conflict situations to be serious
violations of international humanitarian law and
encourages States to push back to prevent these
incidents from becoming the norm in conflict areas.

To that end, South Africa resolved to embark on
a project to champion the cause of "Health care in
danger" by creating public awareness in collaboration
with the ICRC office in Pretoria. Having witnessed
the dangerous conditions under which humanitarian
workers and medical practitioners are working in war
zones without protection, South Africa wishes to align
itself with the efforts and endeavours of the States
members of the international community in seeking to
address this dire situation.

The changing nature of armed conflict, from
inter-State to intra-State, requires adherence
to international humanitarian law by parties to
non-international conflict so as to ensure the greater
protection ofthe civilian population. All actors to armed
conflict, including foreign troops, in particular during
partnered operations or more general partnerships with
other States or armed groups to support the conduct of
military operations, ought to abide by the provisions of
international humanitarian law.

The United Nations could play at least three
important roles with respect to the implementation of
international humanitarian law.

First, during peacetime, it is important for the
United Nations to assist Member States, at their request,
in cooperation with the International Committee of
the Red Cross, with the dissemination of international
humanitarian law instruments and their codification
into domestic legislation, and, in cooperation with
other United Nations organs and organizations, with the
entrenchment and enhancing of respect for international
human rights law.

Secondly, the United Nations should continue to
play a vital role in monitoring compliance with, and
the prevention, stopping and punishment of violations
of, international humanitarian law and applicable
international human rights law during times of armed
conflict. It is important to note that a proactive
approach of dissemination and education should be the
primary focus, not a reactive approach where action is
taken only following grave breaches of international
humanitarian law.

Thirdly, States must adopt, ratify and codify in their
national laws the Geneva Conventions and the Protocols
Additional thereto. Auditing, improving, reinvigorating
and accelerating implementation is equally as crucial.

Given South Africa's active role in peacekeeping
and conflict-resolution processes, the Government has
made efforts to train, and integrate practical measures
for, the armed and security forces, in partnership with
humanitarian organizations, to enhance knowledge of
and compliance with international humanitarian law.
We encourage other States to consider similar measures.

In addition, South Africa, together with the ICRC,
co-hosts annually a regional conference at which
participants from the Southern African Development
Community, the East African Community and
the Economic Community of West African States
are represented and where the implementation of
international humanitarian law by various countries
is discussed.

Just as national Governments have the primary
responsibility to ensure the safety and protection of their
civilians, national courts also have a clear obligation
to bring perpetrators of violations of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law to
justice under national laws that support implementation.

In conclusion, South Africa firmly believes that
the full implementation of and respect for international
humanitarian law leads to reduced casualties and
promotes the protection of the critical civilian
infrastructure essential for emergency assistance
during conflict as well as part of the long-term recovery
of societies affected by conflict. We stand ready to
partner with the relevant actors, in particular the
ICRC, to commemorate this year's anniversary so as
to give prominence to the Geneva Conventions and the
Protocols Additional thereto as they continue to guide
the actions of parties during armed conflict.

