Mr. Clegg (United Kingdom): None of us here
today can fail to be concerned about the damage caused
by the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons. We
all know the statistics. For every minute of our debate,
a man, woman or child will die as a result of armed
violence. We also know the facts. The only way we can
tackle the issue seriously is by working together as an
international community.

First, let me be clear. Tougher regulation is not
about restricting the legitimate trade and use of small
arms, such as in peacekeeping operations around the
world. We do, however, have a duty to uphold human
rights. Without tough global rules in place to govern
the sale and availability of those weapons, too often
they end up in the hands of criminals, terrorists and
insurgents who use them to destabilize societies, fuel
conflicts, prop up rogue regimes and commit atrocious
acts.

As we saw during the tragic events in Kenya
recently, those people did not confine their bullets
to the battlefield. They use them across the world to
terrorize and harm ordinary people.

Resolution 2117 (2013) gives us the chance to
strengthen our joint efforts to tackle the issue and help
secure peace and stability. A key part of that work, as
the resolution recognizes, is the Arms Trade Treaty. The
Treaty sets outs, for the first time in history, a global set
of legally binding rules to stop small arms and light
weapons being sold, without concern for their ultimate
use. Just yesterday, another 18 countries committed
to the Treaty. We need just 50 States in total to ratify
the Treaty so that it may enter into force. The United
Kingdom is committed to ratifying it before the end of
the year, because unless we put it into practice and start
making it work on the ground, it will remain no more
than a paper commitment. So I call on all ofthose States
that have not yet done so to make the commitment to act
as soon as possible.

The resolution is also a reminder that when it
comes to arms embargoes, words are not enough. It is
our collective responsibility to actively enforce them.
That means we need to empower countries that need
extra support to enforce embargoes. We need to turn up
the pressure on countries that willfully allow or support
their violation and bring such cases to the attention of
the Council. We should not hesitate to prosecute those
individuals and organizations breaking export controls
within their own borders.

Finally, we cannot forget that those weapons are
often used to intimidate women, children and men
caught up in conflict through rape and other acts of
sexual violence. Preventing the proliferation of small
weapons is one important way that we can help to stop
such horrendous acts. Over 115 States have endorsed the
Declaration on Preventing Sexual Violence in Conflict.
I would encourage all other States yet to do so, to join
us in pledging their commitment to that initiative, in
order to strengthen United Nations efforts and help
organizations on the ground to support victims and
their families.

In conclusion, I wish to thank you again, Madam
President, for raising the issue and giving us the
opportunity to renew our efforts to tackle the illicit
transfer of small arms and light weapons.

