The Secretary-General: I am honoured to be
here today and to welcome this esteemed delegation.
Today's meeting is an important symbol of
collaboration between the African Union and the
United Nations. It is also another concrete
demonstration of our common commitment to work
with the Sudanese people in addressing the serious
challenges they face.

Today, the Panel will brief the Security Council
on its report (S/2009/599, annex I), which has been
adopted in its entirety by the African Union Peace and
Security Council. The Peace and Security Council also
established a High-Level Implementation Panel
comprised of former Presidents Thabo Mbeki and
Pierre Buyoya and retired General Abdulsalami
Abubakar. We are privileged to receive their first-hand
briefing.

The report of the High-Level Panel provides a
frank assessment and insightful analysis of the
situation in the Sudan and offers numerous proposals
for the way forward. Perhaps above all, the Panel
members have insisted on seeing the Sudan in its
totality. They have clearly articulated the links between
the crisis in Darfur and broader efforts to implement
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA).

Their insights come at a critical moment. In little
more than three months, elections are scheduled to take
place. In just over a year, the two referendums that will
determine the future shape of the Sudan are scheduled
to be held. The National Congress Party (NCP) and the
Sudan People's Liberation Movement (SPLM), as the
two parties to the Comprehensive Peace Agreement,
have taken steps to prepare for these major events, but
there is still much to be done. We must remember that
neither the election nor the referendums are ends in
themselves. Managing the results - whatever the
outcome - will require genuine cooperation between
the NCP and the SPLM.

In the meantime, violence, in South Sudan in
particular, is occurring at a disturbing scale and
frequency. In Darfur, the peace process has reached a
critical point. Chief Mediator Djibril Bassole' has been
working with the Government of Qatar to generate
momentum by giving civil society a strong voice at the
peace talks. Representatives of civil society and armed
movements have agreed to resume consultations in
Doha on 18 January 2010, which will be followed by
09-66048
direct talks between the Government and the
movements on 24 January 2010.

Efforts must continue to encourage the
Government, and more especially the rebel movements,
to make concessions and embrace the consensus that
Mr. Bassole is building. In my view, the High-Level
Implementation Panel and the international community
at large have a critical role to play here. By giving
Mr. Bassole' our unequivocal support, we will send a
strong message to all parties that they must engage in
the negotiations that he is leading.

Beyond that, the Panel can make an invaluable
contribution to the soft landing we are all working
towards after the election and referendums by helping
the parties to the CPA to bridge their differences. That
is an outcome that is badly needed not only for the
Sudan itself, but also for the Sudan's neighbours and,
indeed, for all of Africa.

The High-Level Panel also addressed the difficult
issues of justice and reconciliation in the Sudan. Its
efforts to develop creative and pragmatic proposals are
highly commendable. We must keep sight of the
importance of compliance with resolution 1593 (2005),
which refers the situation in Darfur to the International
Criminal Court.

I have just concluded a very productive meeting
with the Visiting delegation, in the course of which we
agreed on the importance of continuing close African
Union-United Nations cooperation on the Sudan.
Beyond our co-management of the African Union-
United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, we must
make every effort to ensure that the activities of the
United Nations in the Sudan and the work of the
African Union's High-Level Implementation Panel are
mutually supportive.

It will be the Sudanese people who solve the
Sudan's problems. But working together, the United
Nations and the African Union can provide them with
critical assistance on their difficult journey towards
lasting peace and prosperity.

