Mr. Kamanzi (Rwanda): My delegation wishes
to put on record its appreciation to the delegation of
the United Kingdom for scheduling this very important
and timely meeting, which has provided my
Government with an opportunity to take stock of the
achievements made during the more than five years
since the Security Council adopted its first resolution
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict,
resolution 1265 (1999), and to reflect on those areas
where action remains inadequate. Allow me also
wholeheartedly to congratulate the Secretary-General
on his comprehensive and very enlightening report
(S/2005/740) on the matter.

The Security Council's agenda on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict addresses a broad
spectrum of violations of fundamental rights, violations
that target the innocent civilian populations. In such
circumstances, those populations are threatened with a
wide range of abuses, including those condemned in
the relevant internationally agreed instruments
pertaining to the promotion and protection of human
rights.

It is imperative to underline that the protection of
civilian populations in armed conflict is strictly
mandatory for all States and all parties concerned in a
situation of armed conflict. A higher threshold in that
respect, however, should be contemplated in those
situations where populations are at risk of genocide or
other large-scale atrocities. One most important and
far-reaching development in this regard is the
commitment made by heads of State or Government at
September's world summit to protect civilians from
genocide, ethnic cleansing, crimes against humanity
and war crimes. My Government wishes to seize this
opportunity to reiterate its sincere gratitude to all
delegations for their solemn adherence to that
commitment.

My Government is of the view that the agreement
and the settlement by our heads of State and
Government in the world summit was a recognition
that collective action is the only way forward if we are
to free humanity once and for all of such grave
violations, which have been recurrent in recent decades
in many parts of the world. It was recognition that
business as usual is inadequate and can no longer
prevail.

We firmly believe that the responsibility for
protecting populations from genocide, war crimes,
ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity lies first
and foremost with the State itself, as articulated in the
World Summit Outcome (General Assembly resolution 60/1). Yet we also contend that collective responsibility
is needed, and we support all courses of action
envisaged in the outcome resolution, including with
regard to the international community being prepared
to act in a timely and decisive manner through the
Security Council in accordance with the Charter,
including Chapter VII, where a State is manifestly
failing to protect its populations from those atrocities,
whenever necessary and appropriate.

Given that reference to the undeniable role of the
Security Council in that respect, we believe it is
appropriate for the Council to support this important
development on the agenda for the protection of
civilian populations. We urge the Council to seriously
consider including in the draft resolution under
consideration an expression of its willingness to
discharge its mandate and to act accordingly by
endorsing the commitment set out in the outcome
resolution of the world summit regarding the
responsibility to protect populations from genocide,
war crimes and ethnic cleansing.

The safety of civilian populations in all
circumstances, let alone situations of armed conflict, is
the very foundation of the legitimacy of the nations in
the name of which we stand. The claim of the principle
of national sovereignty will be fully valid only when
all our nations, individually or collectively, will have
turned their commitment into effective action and when
they will have set up appropriate preventative and
protective mechanisms to uphold that safety.
Empowering relevant bodies such as the Security
Council to take up that challenge is the first step
forward, which we cannot afford to overlook.

