Mr. Koonjul (Mauritius): We also thank
Mr. Hedi Annabi, Assistant Secretary-General of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, for his
comprehensive briefing this morning.

Today's meeting is taking place at a very crucial
stage in the peace process. This is an opportunity for us
and for other participating States to assess the situation
together and to look for ways and means to support and
accelerate the return to normalcy, peace and
reconciliation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

We would also like to welcome the appointment
of Mr. Amos Namanga Ngongi as the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We would like to
assure him of our full support in the challenging task
that awaits him.

We note the positive outcome of the preparatory
meeting of the inter-Congolese dialogue, which took
place from 20 to 24 August at Gaborone. We welcome
the decision of those attending the preparatory meeting
to reconvene in Addis Ababa in October 2001. A first
important step in the right direction has been made by
bringing together for the first time since the war broke
out, three years ago, the representatives of the
Government, the rebel movement, opposition parties
and civil society groups. We welcome the free and
reconciliatory approach adopted by all the parties
signatories to the Lusaka Agreement. This is a clear
demonstration of the desire for peace and
reconciliation by the Congolese people in general. We
commend them for that and encourage them to pursue
their efforts.

My delegation expresses its gratitude to
Sir Ketumile Masire, the facilitator of the inter-
Congolese dialogue, for his relentless efforts in
organizing the preparatory meeting. It is now vital that
the Council encourage the facilitator and the Congolese
people to maintain the present momentum for the next
stage of the dialogue itself. Mauritius has all along
emphasized the need to ensure an open, representative
and all-inclusive process for the dialogue, which
should include civil society and Congolese women. We
hope that representativity and all-inclusiveness will be
maintained.

As preparation for the inter-Congolese dialogue
continues, we should not lose sight of other important
aspects of the peace process. My delegation considers
that the Council will have to address the following
issues as a matter of priority.

First, the parties to the Lusaka Agreement should
now be urged actively and urgently to finalize their
comprehensive plans for the withdrawal of foreign
forces and for the disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation or resettlement (DDRRR)
of armed groups.

Secondly, the DDRRR process should proceed
without any further delay. The Council must also start
giving due consideration to the issue of the economic
recovery of the country to accompany the DDRRR
process. While we recognize that the World Bank and
the International Monetary Fund have been sensitized
to play an important role in the country's economic
recovery, it would perhaps be a positive stride forward
if a pledging conference of bilateral and multilateral
donors could be held in the near future.

Thirdly, the United Nations Organization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC)
will require additional manpower in the important task
that it will be called upon to undertake during the third
phase. My delegation believes that the next phase
should be addressed with all the seriousness it
deserves, particularly the issue of MONUC's strength,
which we once again emphasize should be compatible
with the task it faces.

The complete cessation of the illegal exploitation
of the natural resources of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo is an objective that the Council should
pursue vigorously. We understand that the Panel of
Experts on the Illegal Exploitation of Natural
Resources and Other Forms of Wealth in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is currently in the
region. We call upon all the parties concerned to extend
their full cooperation to the Panel. We wish to stress
that the natural resources of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo belong to the people of that country
alone. We condemn all illegal exploitation, especially
by foreign elements. It is in this spirit that my
delegation looks forward to the report of the Panel of
Experts.
Notwithstanding the progress made in the peace
process, we have still not reached an irreversible
situation. We urge all the parties to the Lusaka
Agreement to commit themselves fully to
implementing the agreement and to refrain from any
act that might derail the process. My delegation is
particularly concerned about the recent events and
reports that have been brought to our attention, namely,
the gunshots at the helicopter used by the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC) earlier this month,
fortunately without any casualties. We condemn this
act, and we appeal to all the parties, signatory and non-
signatory of the Lusaka Agreement, to cooperate fully
with MONUC.

The status-quo situation in Kisangani needs to be
condemned in no uncertain terms. The Rassemblement
congolais pour la democratie (RCD-Goma) cannot
continue defying the relevant Security Council
resolutions on the demilitarization of Kisangani. The
international community must continue to exert all
possible pressure on the RCD-Goma to comply with
the Security Council resolutions.

The activities of the armed groups in the east of
the country are also matters of serious concern. All
support to these armed groups must immediately cease.

There are reports that the Front pour la liberation
du Congo (FLC) of Mr. Bemba is not withdrawing
from Equateur province as envisaged. We appeal to
them to honour their earlier commitment and to
withdraw their forces as early as possible.

The dialogue among the leaders of the region, in
particular those of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Rwanda and Burundi, seems to have slowed
down, if not disappeared. We feel that it is important
that leaders of the region communicate with each other
as a measure of confidence building. The international
community should encourage the leaders to engage in
dialogue as often as possible. In this respect, my
delegation proposes that the Secretary-General, who
will be visiting the region shortly, facilitate more
frequent meetings among the leaders.

Finally, my delegation reiterates its appeal for the
respect for human rights and humanitarian law all over
the Congolese territory. We also call upon the
humanitarian agencies to come to the help of those who
are needy in the country.

