Mr. Munir (Pakistan): We thank the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Spain and the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Palestine, Mr. Malki, as well as the other
Ministers, for coming to address the Council this
morning. We also thank Deputy Secretary-General Jan
Eliasson for his briefing.

The entire Middle East today is in turmoil, and
the conflagration in the occupied Palestinian territory
is worsening. We are sitting on a powder keg. If that
is not threatening international peace and security, we
do not know what is. Israeli restrictions on Palestinian
freedoms and rights, harassment by Israeli settlers,
tensions around the holy sites and the bleak prospects
for peace have pushed Palestinians onto the streets.
There is talk of the beginning of the third intifada.

This morning, Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson
was categorical in his briefing. The reason for the current
crisis is that the Palestinians do not see any hope. We
agree with Foreign Minister Malki that the status quo
is unacceptable. We appreciate the Secretary-General's
visit to the region. He said in Ramallah yesterday,

"The only way to end the violence is through
real and visible progress towards a political
solution, including an end to the occupation and the
establishment ofa Palestinian State".

We believe that time is quickly running out, and the
Council cannot remain a spectator as hope continues to
fade. By holding two emergency meetings over the past
week, the Council has shown that it is fully seized of
the matter, but much more is required. We support the
Palestinian demand for international protection. The
paper on the subject that the Secretary-General shared
with the Council yesterday provides options that the
Council needs to discuss seriously. We, the international
community, cannot allow the wanton disregard for
international human rights and humanitarian law.

The Council can help with both protection and
final status issues. Setting timelines and parameters to
make the two-State solution a reality is both urgent and
critical. That will provide the hope that the Palestinian
youth yearn for. Only hope can bring the region back
from the precipice. The Palestinian flag has found its
place at the United Nations. We hope that Palestine will
soon be accepted as a full Member as well.

Lasting peace can be achieved only through political
solutions, not through heavy-handed tactics and the use
of live ammunition against unarmed civilians. The fear
among the Palestinians of a changed status of the holy
sites in Jerusalem is real and needs to be addressed,
and not just by words but by actions. The Council has
a responsibility to ensure peace and security in what
is the most volatile region of the world. We must never
forget the Palestinian civilians, whose struggle for self-
determination is epic yet remains unfulfilled.

