Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Guatemala wishes to join the delegations that have
expressed their horror at the attack carried out this
morning in Abuja. We offer our profound condolences
to the United Nations family and the Government and
people of Nigeria.

Allow me, Sir, to thank you for having convened
this open debate on the subject of United Nations
peacekeeping operations, and in particular for the very
pertinent concept note you prepared to guide our
debate (S/2011/496, annex). I also wish to thank the
Secretary-General for his presentation to us this
morning.

Guatemala is a country that has benefited from
United Nations peacekeeping, especially in the area of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
immediately after our peace accords were signed in late
1996. We have also participated actively in
peacekeeping operations as a troop-contributing
country. In other words, we have been both a
beneficiary of and contributor to peacekeeping, and the
topic is therefore of more than passing interest to us.

We agree with the concept note that peacekeeping
operations have been a central enterprise of our
Organization, and, on balance, highly successful. Their
nature and scope have changed considerably over the
years, especially since the landmark report of Lakhdar
Brahimi of 2000 (S/2000/809). We note from the
United Nations website on peacekeeping that, since
then, the Secretariat has prepared 21 major reports on
the subject, covering many areas that had not
previously been taken into account. There is also a
forward-looking agenda thanks to the New Horizon
process, of which the concept note curiously makes no
mention. Peacekeeping also dovetails into
peacebuilding, which widens and deepens this thematic
topic.

I would like to address only one aspect of this
broad and complex topic, which relates to the
distribution of responsibilities among Member States in
peacekeeping operations. The issue is mentioned in the
concept note, but my inspiration comes primarily from
my personal experience chairing the discussions in the
Fifth Committee on the peacekeeping budget for July
2011 to June 2012. My main point is that, so long as
roughly 90 per cent of the budget is provided by less
than 10 industrialized countries, while roughly 90 per
cent of the troops are provided by a different set of 10
developing countries, we will have a great deal of
accumulated tension that is tantamount to an accident
waiting to happen, or, if you will, a potential collision
between States that could compromise the future of
such endeavours.

A statement of only five, or rather four, minutes
does not leave much room for elaboration, and even
less for formulating proposals. But the diagnosis is
clear. We must rationalize the manner in which the
rates of reimbursement for costs undertaken by troop-
contributing countries are calculated. On the other side
of the equation, we may want to revisit the scale of
assessments to finance peacekeeping.

My main concern, however, arises from the troop
contributor's point of View. There is no rational
explanation of how the rates for compensating troop
and equipment contributors are calculated, and no
rational cost-benefit analysis on United Nations
peacekeeping as a whole. Of course, the benefit of
saving lives and keeping the peace cannot be expressed
in dollars and cents, but the costs of doing so do have
precise numerical values. The only thing we have to go
on for now is that, clearly, the United Nations is getting
value for money when it comes to peacekeeping.

In our judgment, it is not useful to View
peacekeeping as a large-scale outsourcing exercise
through which developed countries contract lower-cost
troops from developing countries to carry out the hard
and dangerous work. Among other things, this is quite
degrading for troop-contributing countries.

Speaking for my own country at least, we
perceive participation in peacekeeping not as a well-
remunerated service, but as a genuine partnership
under the flag of the United Nations in order to
accomplish what the Charter intended - the noble aim
of keeping the peace. It is the sense of pride and
professionalization of our armed forces, as well as a
sense of commitment, that motivate us to participate in
peacekeeping, even in countries far from our own, such
as the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Having said that, we expect to recuperate the cost
of our participation in peacekeeping, in the spirit
reflected in General Assembly resolution 63/285 and
further developed in paragraphs 69 and 70 of
resolution 65/289 on the review of the methodology for
rates of reimbursement to troop-contributing countries.

