Ms. Gendi (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to start by congratulating you, Mr. President, on
the assumption by Viet Nam of the presidency of the
Security Council, and to thank you for your invitation
to this thematic debate on a very important theme, in
order to address it from all its angles, whether security,
political or humanitarian. I would also like to
congratulate the Secretary-General and thank
Ms.Coomaraswamy for her significant presentation
and her untiring efforts to protect children in armed
conflict. I would like to commend the Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict for its continuous
efforts, which we hope will bear fruit in eliminating all
forms of violence perpetrated against our children in
armed conflict.

Egypt has studied with much interest the
Vietnamese concept paper and what it contains on the
need for the United Nations to address the growing
linkage between development and the situations of
children in armed conflicts. That important idea was
raised at a time when the United Nations was
concentrating on this matter only from the perspective
of its effect on international peace and security and on

human rights, without attempting to protect or establish
the right to development as one of those rights. There
is no doubt that development, when available in its full
range, can help to overcome the causes of conflict,
establish peace and enable a return to normal life in
situations of conflict. That would, in turn, protect
children from any threat against their lives and from
any form of violence that might be perpetrated against
them, especially during armed conflict, whether
manifested through the use of child soldiers or through
sexual or other abuse against children.

There is no doubt that the linkage between
development, peace and human rights, as endorsed by
our leaders at the 2005 World Summit, requires more
attention on our part through the implementation of
that linkage on the ground, especially in the light of the
positive effects of sustainable development and the
eradication of poverty on efforts to achieve peace,
prevent conflict and resolve any future conflict. Special
emphasis must certainly be placed on efforts to
establish that linkage in the coming period on the part
of the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict
and the General Assembly, in cooperation with the
various entities of the United Nations, in particular the
Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict and UNICEF.

The report of the Working Group shows some of
the limited achievements accomplished in several
countries where children have suffered as a result of
armed conflicts, including cote d'Ivoire, Congo,
Sudan, the Philippines, Colombia and others. At the
same time, the report indicates that the situation is still
very volatile and that the phenomenon is still spreading
around the world and taking new and different violent
forms. That makes it imperative for the Working Group
to intensify the preparation of reports on the situation
of children in armed conflict in every armed conflict
and in every situation where children are under foreign
occupation in all its forms and manifestations.

While the Working Group, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict and UNICEF work to that end,
special emphasis should be placed on the reintegration
and rehabilitation of those children, their
reintroduction to normal life and the creation of the
necessary conditions for them to enjoy similar
standards of education, nutrition and health to those
enjoyed by children in advanced countries. That will
require the commitment of more financial resources
and better coordination between the Security Council,
General Assembly and Economic and Social Council.
It will also require active participation between the
private sector and civil society, with all its institutions,
and the support of international financial institutions.

In order to achieve such a goal, Egypt was among
the first countries to call for a visit by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to Palestine,
Lebanon and Iraq, to examine the disgraceful
humanitarian situations that children there are exposed
to under foreign occupation and to come up with
recommendations that could be feasibly transformed
into decisions of the Working Group. However, the
reports submitted by Mrs. Coomaraswamy on those
visits, which were very objective and impartial, were
only mentioned in passing in the report of the Working
Group. At the same time, apart from a brief reference
to the case of Afghanistan, the report did not mention
anything related to children who are detained or in
prison. No mention whatsoever was made of their
situation, destiny or future, or of what kind of
measures should be applied to guarantee their release
and rehabilitation and preserve their future, especially
in the case of Palestinian children detained in the
prisons of the Israeli occupation forces and Iraqi
children detained by the international coalition forces.

The Working Group must begin to look into the
situation of those children, especially in the light of the
adoption by the UNICEF Executive Board of the
UNICEF Child Protection Strategy, in a way that
guarantees an effective way of dealing with an entire
generation of children who have been detained for
vague or trivial reasons. That effort should be aimed at
dealing with the root causes that led those children to
resort to violence, at the forefront of which is
occupation itself. Such a solution must be aimed at
ending all forms of occupation and must endorse the
need for occupying forces to respect human rights and
their international obligations as an occupying
authority and fulfil their responsibility to guarantee
that all people enjoy their inalienable rights, especially
the right to self-determination.

