The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Plurinational State of Bolivia.

Bolivia would like to thank Mr. Parfait Onanga-
Anyanga, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for the Central African Republic, for his
briefing. We also thank Mr. Andrew Gilmour,
Assistant Secretary-General for Human Rights, and
Mr. Marco Impagliazzo, President of the Community
of Sant'Egidio, for their valuable participation.

We are concerned about the continuing violence
perpetrated by armed groups in the Central African
Republic, which affects not just the parties directly
involved in the conflict but is also seriously harmful to
the civilian population, in particular those who are most
vulnerable, including women and children. It is also
making the humanitarian situation even worse. In that
regard, Bolivia condemns the attacks by armed groups
on civilians and on the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA). We acknowledge the difficult
challenges that the country is facing in the process of
restoring stability, which must be achieved through
inclusive dialogue and serious, sustained commitment
from the parties to the conflict.

We deeply regret the deaths ofMINUSCA personnel
and citizens of the Central African Republic that have
occurred as a result of the violence. We commend
the work of the men and women of MINUSCA,
who are fulfilling their mandate in a hostile and
unstable environment. We also firmly condemn any
sexual exploitation or abuse by any of the parties to
the conflict, including Mission personnel. Bolivia
demands that anyone accused of sexual exploitation
be duly investigated by the appropriate authorities and
prosecuted in accordance with the seriousness of the
crime, in order to ensure that such violence does not
go unpunished.

The violence in the Central African Republic has
had serious humanitarian consequences. According to
information provided by the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, approximately 50 per cent of
the population has been affected by clashes between
armed groups. One in four health-care facilities have
been destroyed and two out of three people have no
access to health services. Food insecurity affects one
in four people and a disturbing total of 2 million are
now at risk. One in five people have also been forcibly
displaced. In April alone more than 40,000 people were
internally displaced as a result of the violence in the
north-eastern and south-eastern regions of the country.
According to the Secretary-General's latest report
(S/2017/473) the total number of displaced persons
increased from 401,000 in February to 426,000 in
March. Violations of international human rights law
and humanitarian law have exacerbated the situation.
Hundreds of men, women and children have become
victims of sexual violence, human trafficking or
arbitrary arrest or detention. Bolivia urges all armed
groups to lay down their weapons. We call on all
the parties to the conflict to set aside their sectarian
interests, whatever they are, in order to avoid creating
obstacles to productive dialogue and to enable them to
build on efforts to restore stability to the country.

In view of the difficult period that the Central
African Republic is going through, which can only
get worse if instability continues and peace is not
established, we urge the international community to
contribute to the support needed for the disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation process
for former combatants. We welcome the efforts of
regional organizations, including the African Union,
the Economic Community of Central African States
and the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region, as well as of neighbouring countries and the
Community of Sant'Egidio, which will continue to
be crucial to supporting the political initiatives for
peace and cooperation aimed at a lasting reconciliation
process through African solutions for Africans, in
full respect for the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of the Central African Republic. We
also support the National Recovery and Peacebuilding
Plan and the Framework for Mutual Engagement
between the Central African Government and the
international community.

In conclusion, we believe that we must continue to
help to lay the foundation for lasting stability in the
Central African Republic and to support all relevant
initiatives, with the full and committed support and
agreement of the international community, based on
respect for the law, justice, reconciliation and peace.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the Central
African Republic.

