Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): I wish
to begin by thanking the Secretary-General for the
statement he just made. I endorse every word of it. He
was right to focus his statement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina - a new, fragile State in South-Eastern
Europe, which has experienced very difficult times, as
we all know, and which does not deserve that. Bulgaria
has frequently expressed its appreciation and support
for the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina as a stabilizing factor not only for that
country, but for the region as a whole. We take this
opportunity to confirm our support and to thank the
men and women who have done such excellent work.

I also wish to emphasize that, as a State party to
the Rome Statute, Bulgaria strongly supports the
principles and values applied therein and will work to
strengthen the International Criminal Court so that it
can become an effective organ for the international
community to combat the most serious crimes and
immunity and for justice against war criminals.

At the same time, my country wished to abstain
in the vote on the draft resolution, not because we do
not support the principle of a United Nations presence
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. To the contrary, we do. We
wanted to draw attention to a very serious situation to
which the Secretary-General referred, which is the lack
of unity in the Council on this issue. That is a very
serious situation. We trust that the disappearance of a
United Nations presence from Bosnia and Herzegovina
will be temporary.

As I said during our closed consultations, we
appeal to all Security Council members to seek
compromise. As the members of the Council are aware,
during informal contacts in the past few days, my
delegation proposed various formulas to get out of the
situation in which we find ourselves today. However,
we did not succeed. That is why my country abstained
in the vote on this draft resolution.

In conclusion, I wish to express once again the
hope that Council unity will be restored very soon.

