The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia in which they request
to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual practice,
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Misic' (Bosnia and Herzegovina) and Mr. Nobilo (Croatia) took
places at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the 5 October
agreement by the Bosnian parties to a cease-fire,
including by terminating all hostile military activities
and Herzegovina, as of 10 October 1995 provided
that fullgas and electrical utility service is restored
to Sarajevo. It welcomes all efforts to restore such
service and calls upon the parties to cooperate fully
with such efforts. The Security Council urges the
parties fully to comply with all provisions in the
cease-fire agreement once they come into effect.

"The Security Council also welcomes the
decision of the Governments of the Republic of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Republic of Croatia,
and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) to attend proximity peace talks by the
end of this month, to be followed by a peace
conference. It reiterates that there can be no military
solution to the conflict in the Republic of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, and strongly urges the parties to
negotiate in good faith on the basis of the Geneva
Declarations of Principles of 8 September 1995
(S/l995/780, annex II), and the Further Agreed
Principles of 26 September 1995.

"The Security Council also welcomes the
3 October agreement by the Government of the
Republic of Croatia and the local Croatian Serb
authorities in eastern Slavonia to Guiding Basic
Principles For Negotiations. It strongly urges both
parties to negotiate in good faith towards a peaceful
final settlement to the conflict consistent with the
Council's resolutions."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/l995/50.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council will remain seized of the matter.

