Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I would like to
thank Executive Representative Toyberg-Frandzen and
Ambassador Rishchynski for their valuable briefings.
We also appreciate the participation of Mr. Samura
Kamara, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Sierra
Leone.

I would like to join others in offering my
congratulations on the progress made through the
combined efforts of all parties concerned. The United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra
Leone (UNIPSIL) is surely an exemplary case of
the United Nations system's effective coordination.
Lessons learned through its activities should be shared
and applied to other countries dealing with post-
conflict peacebuilding. As we have witnessed, the
determination of Sierra Leoneans to achieve peace and
stability has been the driving force behind the progress
that UNIPSIL, the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
and other partners have made so far.

The 2012 elections marked a watershed in Sierra
Leone's political history. The two major political
parties are now required to take on more responsibility
for moving the country forward. We hope the political
leadership will address the ethno-regional imbalance
in order to further strengthen political inclusivity and
social cohesion. With good governance and the rule of
law, Sierra Leonean society can reach its full potential.
In that context, we hope the Sierra Leonean authorities
will continue to broaden their engagement not only with
the political community but across the entire social
spectrum, including with women and young people.

The implementation of the Agenda for Prosperity
is also a priority for the Government. Sierra Leoneans'
strong aspirations should be translated into sustainable
development and prosperity. As Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon stressed during his visit to Sierra Leone
earlier this month, the United Nations should continue
to stand together with its Government and people. The
Republic of Korea also fully supports the consolidation

of peace and the promotion of democratic governance
in Sierra Leone.

