Mr. Takasu (Japan): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this important debate. I would also like
to congratulate Austria on its leadership in promoting
the cause of the protection of civilians. In addition, we
are grateful to the Secretary-General; Mr. John
Holmes, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator; and
Ms. Kyung-wha Kang, Deputy High Commissioner for
Human Rights, for their valuable presentations.

The Security Council has developed a number of
normative standards and frameworks on the protection
of civilians since it adopted resolution 1265 (1999).
They include, inter alia, the aide-memoire for
reviewing mission mandates, revised earlier this year,
and resolution 1894 (2009), just adopted. At the same
time, we should acknowledge that enormous and wide-
ranging challenges to the protection of civilians -
such as sexual violence, child soldiers, deliberate
attacks on humanitarian personnel and other violations
of international humanitarian and human rights law -
remain in many parts of the world. The most pressing
task for us now is to determine how we can put those
normative frameworks and standards into practice.

First and foremost, international humanitarian
and human rights laws must be acceded to by all
States. Regrettably, many of the States involved in
armed conflict have not yet acceded to such key
instruments as the Additional Protocols to the 1949
Geneva Convention and the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court. We urge all States to
become parties to those instruments.

Once ratified, those instruments must be
complied with and implemented. States have primary
responsibility for protecting their citizens. However,
States in armed conflict often lack the capacity and the
institutions necessary for such implementation. It is
essential that those States strengthen their law-
enforcement institutions, promote security sector
reform and establish the rule of law. The international
community should support the efforts of those
countries in their capacity-building. Japan will extend
assistance as much as possible in that regard.

We must also address equally serious violations
by non-State actors, which often operate outside the
effective rule of government and deliberately make use
of civilians to attain their goals. The Security Council
must address serious violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law whenever they
occur, make its position known and urge parties to take
steps to ameliorate the situation. If necessary, the
Council should take measures to verify the facts and
establish accountability, and sometimes also impose
targeted sanctions to ensure the compliance of State
and non-State groups with international law.

The United Nations assumes direct responsibility
for protecting civilians where United Nations
peacekeeping operations are deployed, and it is tasked
with doing so. Of course, that is easier said than done.
Out of the 15 peacekeeping operations currently
deployed, eight are tasked with a protection mandate.
Many of those missions face difficulties in
implementing their complicated and demanding
mandates with limited human and material resources.
The areas in which they are deployed are generally
large, and in many cases mission personnel do not
necessarily have a clear understanding of how a
Security Council mandate should be translated into
operational activities on the ground.

If a mandate is to be successfully implemented, it
must be realistic and feasible. In other words, in
determining the mandate of a peacekeeping operation,
the Security Council must fully take into account local
security and other situations, as well as available
resources and field support. That is important for the
credibility of the Council and of the United Nations as
a whole. From the perspective of guaranteeing
credibility, we request the Secretary-General to ensure
this by communicating clearly to the Government and
the people of the host country the specific role that the
mission is expected to perform.

Some missions have begun to take innovative
approaches to translating the will of the Council into
an operational plan. Unfortunately, many have not. In
order to overcome that situation, we request the
Secretariat to formulate and develop an operational
concept and guidelines on the protection of civilians
that are most appropriately tailored to meeting mission-
specific requirements and situations on the ground.

At the same time, I wish to emphasize that
protection does not mean merely protection from
imminent military threat. A protection mandate needs
to be implemented not only by a military component,
but also by a civilian component, to deal with issues
such as human rights violations and civil-military
coordination. Therefore, each mission with a protection
mandate needs to develop a comprehensive strategy.

In that regard, I wish to underline that
empowering vulnerable people - children, refugees,
internally displaced persons and others - also
contributes to protecting civilians and preventing the
recurrence of conflict. Empowerment is a core notion
of human security. We believe that it provides added
value to an operational plan and strategy for the
protection of civilians.

In addition to improved guidelines and a strategy,
it is essential to ensure an appropriate level of human
and financial resources, training, information about the
local situation, assets and equipment, including land
and air transportation, and communications for
effective mandate implementation. It is therefore
indispensable to consult very closely with troop-
contributing countries, police-contributing countries,
major finance-contributing countries and host countries
in the early stages of mandate formulation. In
particular, we need to strengthen predeployment
training, because the skills necessary for a protection
mandate differ significantly from those required for
other operations.

We are very pleased at the high priority now
being placed on this issue by the Secretary-General, the
Secretariat and the Security Council itself. I hope that
the outcomes of exercises such as the New Horizon
study, the joint study between the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, and the
Security Council Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations will be fully reflected in order to strengthen
partnerships with all stakeholders, including, inter alia,
troop-contributing countries, police-contributing
countries and major finance-contributing countries.

In conclusion, if the Council is to take
appropriate action, it must receive timely and accurate
information on the ground. United Nations missions
with protection mandates should provide the Council
with more detailed information about the protection of
civilians on the ground. We value the meetings of the
Security Council Expert Group on the Protection of
Civilians in order to receive briefings from the
Secretariat on the latest information prior to
consultations on the mandates of specific missions.

The Security Council should continue to improve
its work both in the formulation stage and in the
implementation stage. Resolution 1894 (2009), adopted
today, is an important contribution to setting the course
that the Council should follow. In other words, we
should closely monitor progress against the yardsticks
provided for in the resolution.

I would like to conclude by reaffirming Japan's
strong commitment to enhancing the security of
vulnerable people caught in conflict.

