Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
are grateful for the convening of this meeting and for
the informative briefing by Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK).

We would like to welcome the presence of Mr. Ivica
Dacic', First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister
of Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and Ms. Vlora Citaku,
Ambassador of Kosovo. We also wish to highlight
that the most senior officials have expressed their
commitment to the dialogue facilitated by the European
Union in order to normalize their relations. We
emphasize the importance of involving the citizens of
both countries, particularly women and young people,
in building a shared Vision of the future. We welcome
the initiatives promoted by UNMIK and UN-Women in
that regard.

We believe that, in order to consolidate and sustain
peace in Kosovo and stability in the Balkan subregion,
the progress made in recent months should allow a

comprehensive implementation of resolution 1244
(1999) and the Brussels Agreement. In the light of
those instruments, we believe that the recent legislative
initiatives on the transformation of the Kosovo Security
Force into an army must be carefully evaluated,
considering the presence and role of the Kosovo
Force (KFOR) in the country, as well as its impact
on the process of political dialogue between Pristina
and Belgrade.

We underline the importance of respecting and
strengthening the rule of law and the trust of citizens
in the institutions. In that connection, we highlight
the work of the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo, especially in the area of promoting and
protecting human rights. We underscore the need to
respect the work and autonomy of the justice system to
guarantee access to justice and effective accountability,
thereby enabling it to fight effectively against corruption
and impunity.

We also emphasize the importance of recognizing
ethnic, religious and cultural diversity in order to
consolidate the rule oflaw and make headway on pending
issues, such as the establishment of the association/
community of Serb-majority municipalities, the safe
and dignified return ofinternally displaced persons and
respect for protected areas of cultural heritage.

On the other hand, we must express our concern
about the risk posed to Kosovo and other countries of
the subregion by the return of foreign terrorist fighters.
The support of the international community is vital in
that area, in accordance with the agenda promoted by
the Council's Counter-Terrorism Committee.

I would like to conclude by expressing our
appreciation for the work carried out by UNMIK,
as well as by KFOR, the European Union and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
in support of building sustainable peace in Kosovo.

