The President (spoke in Russian): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Bangladesh, Canada, India,
Pakistan, the Philippines and the Republic of Korea, in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the consideration of the item, without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend invitations under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Alain Le Roy,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations;
Lieutenant-General Sikander Afzal, Force Commander
of the United Nations Mission in Liberia; Lieutenant-
General Babacar Gaye, Force Commander of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo; Major General
Moses Bisong Obi, Force Commander of the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan; Major General Robert
Mood, Head of Mission and Chief of Staff of the
United Nations Truce Supervision Organization; and
Major-General Luiz Guilherme Paul Cruz, Force
Commander of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I would also like to welcome the other Force
Commanders present with us today.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
2
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Peacekeeping is one of the key activities of the
United Nations, an effective instrument for maintaining
international peace and security. This year the number
of peacekeepers has reached a historic high. Two-thirds
of these are uniformed personnel who play a lead role
in addressing such challenging tasks as supporting the
efforts of national Governments to restore stability and
strengthen peace, ensuring the protection of civilians,
and monitoring ceasefires.

We hope that today's meeting will give us an
opportunity once again to better understand the current
problems faced by peacekeepers, and their military
contingents above all, as they carry out the duties
entrusted to them by the Security Council. We hope
that it will help to enhance the Security Council's level
of military expertise.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Le Roy, Lieutenant General Sikander
Afzal, Lieutenant General Babacar Gaye, Major
General Moses Bisong Obi, Major General Robert
Mood and Major General Luiz Guilherme Paul Cruz.

I give the floor to Mr. Le Roy.


