Mr. Fowler (Canada) (interpretation from French):
I am pleased to have the opportunity to participate today
in the Security Council's debate on the situation in Haiti.
Canada is also pleased that the members of the Council
seem prepared to adopt a draft resolution implementing
the recommendations made by the Secretary-General in
his most recent report on the United Nations Support
Mission in Haiti (UNSMIH).

Canada sees the draft resolution that is to be adopted
today as a significant milestone - the most recent in the
series of steps taken by the international community to
consolidate democratic government in Haiti. This adoption
is also, we believe, an event of considerable importance
for the United Nations. First and foremost, this draft
resolution establishes a new Mission to assist the
Government of Haiti through a final transition period of
four months, beginning on 1 August. But it is also
important for what it augurs for the medium and the long
term in Haiti, beginning in December this year with the
end of the United Nations Transition Mission in Haiti
(UNTMIH).

Over the next four months, the United Nations
Transition Mission in Haiti will continue to help the
Government of Haiti professionalize its police force, as
President Preval requested last November. Starting from
zero only two years ago, the Haitian National Police
(HNP) has made slow but continuous progress towards
the point at which it will assume complete responsibility
for all police functions in Haiti. The mandate of the
Transition Mission reflects this progress. The civilian

 

police officers of the United Nations will now concentrate
their efforts at departmental headquarters and at the HNP
national headquarters in Port-au-Prince. This geographic
concentration should permit the civilian police force to
focus on the very specific training needs of the National
Police.
It should be underlined that the responsibility for
maintaining the security and stability of the country will
now be assumed by the Government of Haiti as the
Transition Mission develops a plan and timetable for the
early and efficient handover of these responsibilities to the
National Police. With its leaner and more focused mandate,
the Mission will undergo a corresponding reduction of its
personnel and will thus complete its transformation from
the large peacekeeping operation established in 1995, with
a strength of approximately 6,000 military and 700 civilian
police personnel, to a contingent of 250 civilian police and
a headquarters unit of 50 military personnel having full
command and control over a voluntarily funded security
element.

(spoke in English)

Canada supports the draft resolution that the Council
seems poised to adopt. Having participated in the
consultations on the draft, we would like to pay tribute to
the other members of the group of Friends of the Secretary-
General for Haiti for the invaluable role they have played
in Haiti's progress to date, and also to express appreciation
for the steadfast support of the Group of Latin American
and Caribbean States throughout these negotiations. Canada
would also like to thank members of the Council, the
Russian Federation and China for the exceptionally collegial
and constructive manner in which discussions on the draft
resolution took place.

We are particularly pleased that the United Nations
will have command and control over the Mission's security
element. With this essential precondition met, Canada is
prepared to commit approximately 650 Canadian troops as
a voluntary contribution, entirely at our own expense, to
UNTMIH's security element. In addition, we expect that 60
Canadian Civilian Police (CIVPOL) officers will be made
available to participate in the United Nations Mission until
the end of November this year. Our soldiers look forward
to continuing their mission under United Nations command
and control and to maintaining their extremely happy
association with their Pakistani colleagues, with whom they
have operated so effectively over these past two years.

Similarly, our police monitors, who will make up
about one quarter of the international force, are proud to
associate themselves with this multinational effort to
provide the people of Haiti with an effective and reliable
police force, a sine qua non for a stable democracy. We
are also pleased that the French Government will again
make a major contribution of CIVPOL officers to the new
Mission.

The Council's deliberations here today offer an
example of how, in recent years, the United Nations and
the international community as a whole have been able to
develop new and innovative ways of responding to the
needs of nascent democracies. Indeed, peacekeeping in
Haiti has not followed the classic peacekeeping model as
it was understood for many years by this Organization.
We believe Security Council-mandated missions have
made a significant contribution to institution-building in
Haiti over the past two years and, while United Nations
military troops will be withdrawing in four months' time,
we anticipate that they will use the coming transition
period well to consolidate the progress they have achieved
over the past couple of years.

We welcome the Secretary-General's assertion in his
recent report that the end of UNTMIH and of the United
Nations military presence in Haiti, and the transitional
phase to which I have referred, will not mean the end of
United Nations involvement in Haiti. We must all
acknowledge the reality that it will take much more time,
effort and generosity to create truly effective and stable
institutions of democracy and to foster long-term
economic stability in Haiti. The problems, as we are all
well aware, are deep-seated, and Haiti will be able to
address them only with the steadfast economic and
technical support of the international community over the
many years to come.

In particular, we hope that we can continue to build
on the peace-building and institution-building in which
UNSMIH, the joint Organization of American
States/United Nations International Civilian Mission in
Haiti, the United Nations Development Programme, the
United Nations Children's Fund, the World Food
Programme, the World Health Organization, the United
Nations Population Fund and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, to name but a
few, have all been engaged through their varied and
vitally important programmes. As the draft resolution
before us suggests, such endeavours should now become
the focus of the international community's assistance to
Haiti, and we look forward to the Secretary-General's

 

report in two months' time on subsequent peace-building
international assistance to Haiti.

Certainly a commitment to the peace-building process
in Haiti is one of the principal pillars of Canada's bilateral
relationship with Haiti. In addition to food aid and
humanitarian assistance, Canada's very large bilateral
development programme has included such small-scale but
fundamentally important projects as the reconstruction of
courthouses, support for the reorganization of the Justice
Ministry and fiscal reform. Over the coming four months,
however, we intend to work very closely with the
Government of Haiti, the donor community, the United
Nations Secretariat, the specialized agencies, funds and
programmes and the international financial institutions to
determine how best to meet Haiti's needs in the longer
term.

The next four months will be important ones for Haiti.
Among other important steps, its civil police will be
assuming full responsibility for all police functions
throughout Haiti. We believe that all the various actors in
the international community, Canada among them, must
continue to play a full part in providing support and
assistance to Haiti as political stability, respect for
fundamental freedoms and economic development take root.

In closing, on a personal note, allow me not only to
thank you, Mr. President, for your excellent leadership of
the Council's deliberations over the course of this busy
month, but also to express my country's deep appreciation
for your extraordinary contribution to the United Nations
over the five years you have represented Sweden so
effectively among us. In all things, you have simultaneously
represented your country's interests while protecting the
prestige and authority of the United Nations, and you have
done so with poise and dignity. We will miss you greatly
and wish only good things for you and your family in the
years to come.

