Ms. Pajevic' (Montenegro): We thank the President
for convening today's debate on the role of youth in
countering violent extremism in promoting peace. We
commend Jordan's strong commitment to this issue.
We also thank today's briefers for their outstanding
presentations.

Montenegro aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of European Union. However,
I would like to highlight some points of particular
importance to my country.

Today, more than 1 billion people are defined as
youth. Youth are vital stakeholders in shaping social
and economic development, challenging social norms
and values and building the foundation of the world's
future. They have proved to be instrumental in fostering
constructive dialogue among religions, faiths and
civilizations, and have provided valuable contributions
to the promotion of peace, tolerance and diversity.

We are witnessing the devastating and enduring
impact of Violence and the culture of violence, which
is overwhelming different parts of the world. In
particular, young people face obstacles, ranging from
discrimination, marginalization and poverty, to violence.
Their voices are distinctively underrepresented on issues
that concern them, including violent extremism a one
of the most critical challenges that youth face today.
Young people are the main Victims of direct violence in
conflict situations, but they are also the perpetrators of
violence, owing to their vulnerability to both voluntary
and involuntary military recruitment.

Extremism is not something that can just be
ignored, but needs to be tackled head-on because its
consequences are clear. The risk of extremism grows
where young people have no education and no hope
for the future, as that makes them most vulnerable to
the influence of radical ideas. However, Governments
cannot act alone on this issue. Additionally, we should
be aware that no external power can bring about the
transformation of hearts and minds. That task falls on
countries and their peoples themselves. The potential
of youth to facilitate the process of countering violent
extremism is often undermined. Therefore, we believe it
is crucial to involve youth in the process as stakeholders
and decision-makers. That would allow them to gain
ownership of the policies that affect them and all of us.

Montenegro commends all the efforts aimed at
addressing the needs and priorities of young people and
at proposing sustainable solutions to their problems.
There are many talented and creative young men and
women who are pioneering in innovation, new social
media tools and means to reach the young population.
My Government has taken stock of that fact. Through
the education system, we prepare young people to
think in a creative and critical way, to cooperate,
communicate and take risks. The goal of our economic
policy is to foster, encourage and facilitate the creation
of new jobs and new businesses, as well as the growth
of existing ones, with special emphasis on youth.

In addition, through the implementation of different
programmes and projects, such as the one that we are
implementing with the United Nations Development
Programme, called Youth Empowerment, we provide
the younger generations with self-confidence and
ambition to be constructive and valued members of
society as well as to be successful in the new globalized
economy - while promoting peace, tolerance and
diversity. We will expand similar programmes and
projects, and we are currently preparing a new strategic
and legislative framework. We believe that such
investments are the winning card for any society that
strives for a better future and are also the best antidote
to violence.

Many States have a predominantly young population.
Therefore, it is a demographic and democratic
imperative that young people be active participants
in decision-making and be treated as a Vital asset for
society. Providing youth with the right educational
tools for crisis-prevention and peacebuilding impact
positively on youth's development and helps to bring
about more sustainable peace. Moreover, addressing
the realization of the human rights of young people is a
way of influencing the social and economic conditions
and the well-being and livelihood of future generations.
Only by approaching the issue of violent extremism and
promoting peace in this way, can we ever hope to face
the challenges of ensuring lasting global peace.

Montenegro remains committed to addressing this
important issue, with the aim of ensuring better inclusion
of youth in mainstream decision-making processes and
reducing their political and social marginalization. We
will also continue to be a reliable partner of the United
Nations in its activities in the promotion of tolerance
and reconciliation. Proud of its values and achievements
and confident in the future, we will work along side it
for the realization of international peace and security.

