Mr. Egeland: A discussion of complex crises and
the United Nations response is important to have at a
time when so many people remain trapped by conflict
and caught up in long-term complex crises, issues
which are integral to my role as Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator.

Complex emergencies and their aftermath
embody not only military and security dimensions but
fundamental political, economic, social and
humanitarian dimensions as well. They are longer-
running crises where the very process of conflict has
had a dramatic impact on societal structures,
government institutions and the ability of extended
families and communities to support each other. That is
why there is a responsibility and a need for
international assistance. A comprehensive and
integrated approach is crucial if real and sustainable
achievements are to be made. In situations of
transition, for example, progress on security and
political developments need to be accompanied by
corresponding progress on the humanitarian, social and
economic fronts if the peace is to take hold.

It is therefore the collective responsibility of all
of us - the Security Council, the General Assembly,
individual Member States, regional organizations, the
various United Nations departments, agencies and
programmes and non-governmental organizations -
not only to perform our respective roles as effectively
as possible, but to respond to these issues together, as a
cohesive whole. We all have an important role to play,
whether in addressing the underlying causes of
conflict, preventing armed conflicts from taking root,
intervening during armed conflict to protect civilians
and provide lifesaving humanitarian assistance,
supporting peace processes or assisting countries
emerging from conflict through the delicate period of
transition into situations of consolidated peace and
sustainable development.

Every day men, women and children in conflicts
around the world are being actively and deliberately
targeted by parties to conflicts and subjected to
extreme violence and other grave human rights abuse.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo alone, more
than 2 million people have been killed as a result of
long-term conflict, and tens of thousands of women
and children have been subjected to unspeakable forms
of sexual violence. Currently, a staggering 50 million
people have been displaced from their homes by
conflict, and many of them are struggling to survive in
harsh conditions. The suffering inflicted on civilians in
complex emergencies is all too often aggravated by the
denial or restrictions on humanitarian access to
populations in need.

The current crisis in the Darfur region of the
Sudan provides an alarming example: more than 1
million civilians, mostly women and children, have
been displaced and are in dire need of shelter, water,
food and medical supplies. Complex emergencies
increase vulnerability, and when natural disasters occur
concurrently the effects are extreme, as the devastating
floods in Haiti this week demonstrate. These grave
concerns demand a concerted response by us all.

In situations of armed conflict, Governments bear
the primary responsibility to provide humanitarian
assistance and to protect civilians. It is when
Governments do not have the capacity or are unwilling
to provide assistance and protection that the United
Nations must execute its special role and
responsibilities. All United Nations departments and
humanitarian agencies stand ready to carry out this
important work whenever and wherever it is required.
But we cannot do so when we are denied access to
populations in need, when the safety and security of
our personnel is threatened and when we do not receive
adequate funding for our humanitarian work.

Tragically, it is those who most need our
assistance who are often denied it. In 20 conflicts
around the world, humanitarian access is being either
denied or obstructed for an estimated 10 million people
in need of food, water, shelter and medical care.
Restrictions on access continue to deny life-saving
assistance to some 500,000 civilians in Liberia, 2.2
million in the Central African Republic and 1.5 million
in Cote d'Ivoire. A similar situation exists in
Afghanistan, where access to 1 million people in rural
areas in the southern and eastern parts of the country is
very limited and insecure.

Assistance to civilians in need is also undermined
by the skewed flows of humanitarian funding for
complex emergencies. In 2003, humanitarian appeals
for 13 African crises sought $2.2 billion, and less than
half of that amount was received. Meanwhile, the $1
billion sought by the United Nations appeal for Iraq
alone was fully met by donors. This reflects the harsh
reality that political interests, strategic priorities and
the media spotlight create enormously disproportionate
responses. I encourage the Security Council to consider
carefully the links between the maintenance
international peace and security and inadequate
funding in certain crises.

Post-conflict situations exemplify the importance
of ensuring that adequate funding is provided not only
for life-sustaining humanitarian assistance, but also for
other programmes that will impact significantly on
sustainable peace. Effective peace and reconciliation
processes require effective social and administrative
structures. It is important, therefore, that schools and
their teachers, health centres and their workers, local
administrative offices and local welfare and community
structures not be neglected by the international
community.

Our experience with the consolidated appeals
process, however, reveals that while donor countries
are willing to support initiatives that address immediate
humanitarian needs, the longer-term or medium-term
tools of peace, such as education, health care and
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes, are often under-funded.

The Security Council has a critical role in
responding to complex emergencies and protecting
civilians. Thus, in resolution 1296 (2000), the Council
requests the Secretary-General to bring to its attention
situations of grave concern in respect of the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. We should make more
frequent use of that mechanism. It is equally critical
that we bring situations of concern to the attention of
the Council as early as possible. Greater use should
therefore be made of resolution 1366 (2001) on the
prevention of armed conflict, which encourages the
Secretary-General to convey to the Security Council
his assessment of potential threats to international
peace and security.

Early warning is critical to conflict prevention.
Timely and effective early-warning analyses play a key
role in helping the United Nations and the broader
international community to detect and prevent complex
humanitarian crises. For example, in Guinea-Bissau,
contingency planning enhanced United Nations
preparedness in the event that humanitarian assistance
is required. But there is no point in contingency
planning if we do not have the resources to do
something about it.

Today's conflict management cannot be
successful without the strong and decisive involvement
of regional organizations. For example, the African
Union's current involvement in the Darfur crisis is
critical to the international community's response.
Similarly, the timely deployment of the Economic
Community of West African States Mission in Liberia
forces was instrumental in responding to the political
opportunity of bringing stability to that war-torn
country.

Issues such as human trafficking, the illicit flow
of arms, the illegal exploitation of natural resources
and the cross-border movement of displaced persons
and combatants require regional mechanisms and
commitments if they are to be properly addressed. The
regional and international communities, in turn, have a
responsibility to provide targeted long-term assistance
to weak States to strengthen their institutions, to
respond at an earlier stage in humanitarian crises and to
maintain a robust presence in post-conflict countries to
promote respect for human rights, the consolidation of
good governance and peace-building processes.

At the root of most conflicts are issues of poverty,
corruption, deliberate manipulation of minority groups
and social inequity and exclusion. Dealing effectively
with complex crises requires us to address these root
causes. In countries recovering from conflict, peace
and national reconciliation ultimately depend on
changes in attitude and behaviour within society. This
is particularly the case in societies that have become
polarized. Far too often, peace processes are seen as
the prerogative of combatant forces, but lasting peace
and national reconciliation will depend on developing a
social climate that seeks to sustain peace. All sectors
and elements of society, not just fighting forces, need
to be brought together to this end of reconciliation. The
critical role of women in peace processes must be
recognized and actively supported.

It is the millions of voiceless that require our
attention and commitment. It is the father who is
powerless to protect his family from brutal attacks, the
mother who has no access to medical care and is
helpless to save her sick child, the young child who
wakes up each morning faced with the trauma of war
and violence and a life without a future, and the
teenage girl who has been brutally raped and may
never fully recover from the internal injuries she has
suffered.

Those are the people who are depending on us.
They will judge our success, a success that will be
determined by the number of people we are able to
assist and protect as a result of swift and decisive
action. The Security Council's continued commitment
to this shared goal is vital.

