Ms. Bensouda: I thank you, Mr. President, for
this opportunity to present my Office's twenty-fourth
report on the situation in Darfur, pursuant to resolution
1593 (2005).

Six months have passed since my last report to the
Council (see S/PV.7710), and indeed nearly a decade has
passed since the first warrant of arrest was issued by
the International Criminal Court (ICC) in the situation
in Darfur. As I present this twenty-fourth report before
the Council today, it is with immense regret that I
acknowledge once again that all five suspects against
whom warrants of arrest have been issued by the
International Criminal Court in this situation remain
at large.

As the longing for justice of the Victims of Rome
Statute crimes in Darfur remains unfulfilled, the
suspects Mr. Omar Al-Bashir, Mr. Abdel Hussein and
Mr. Ahmad Harun continue to occupy high-ranking
positions within the Government of the Sudan without
subjecting themselves to the scrutiny of the law so that
their guilt or innocence can be established. What is
more, Mr. Ali Kushayb continues to be active in the
Government of the Sudan's aligned militias operating
in Darfur, while another suspect, Mr. Abdallah Banda,
also remains at large in the Sudan.

Time may lapse, but time does not erase the fact that
serious crimes have been committed in Darfur, resulting
in the untold suffering of victims. And time will not

change the fact that those five men stand accused of
multiple crimes against humanity and war crimes, and
additionally, in the case of Mr. Al-Bashir, genocide.
Those constitute the world's most serious crimes. We
must ensure that time also does not erode this fact in our
memories, nor our obligations to hold those responsible
for those egregious crimes accountable.

Let me recall by way ofa few examples the gravity
ofthe crimes. It is alleged that between August 2003 and
March 2004 in the town of Mukjar, West Darfur, over
70 men were summarily executed after being detained
and tortured by the Janjaweed and the Sudanese Army.
In that same period, women and girls were raped and
sexually assaulted. Civilians were attacked, forcibly
expelled from their homes and herded into camps for
internally displaced persons.

In an attempt to stop the violence and restore peace,
the African Union (AU) deployed a peacekeeping
operation in Darfur. Yet despite their protected status,
in September 2007 rebel forces under the command of
Mr. Banda are alleged to have attacked and murdered
AU peacekeepers at their base in Haskanita, including
one peacekeeper from a State that is currently a
member of the Council. The courageous women and
men who risk their lives in international and regional
efforts to maintain peace deserve not only our respect
and admiration, but also the best protection we can
afford them. That protection surely includes holding
those who target and attack peacekeepers accountable
for such crimes.

Those are a just a few illustrations of the many
crimes I am trying to prosecute as a result of the
referral from the Security Council - crimes that the
Pre-trial Chamber of the International Criminal Court
have determined there are grounds to believe were
committed by the Darfur suspects.

I refer to those crimes because it is critical that
we do not lose sight of the ultimate purpose of these
half-yearly briefings. These briefings should be more
than a simple routine in fulfilment of a prescribed
timetable. They should be seen as an opportunity for
dialogue and an exchange of views between my Office
and the Council on how best to achieve the objectives
of resolution 1593 (2005), so that independent and
impartialjustice can be delivered to the Darfur victims.

As my report makes clear, the Rome Statute system
has two essential pillars, namely, a judicial pillar,
provided by the International Criminal Court, and an
execution and enforcement pillar, provided by State
parties, and in the context of the Darfur situation,
also the Council. The Office's reports are intended not
only to provide relevant updates, but also to galvanize
and mobilize the Council to enforce the obligations
created by resolution 1593 (2005) and the Rome Statute
legal framework.

Resolution 1593 (2005) was intended to enable my
Office to establish the truth and deliver justice to the
victims of Rome Statute crimes in Darfur. Instead, as
time passes, ICC fugitives continue to travel across
international borders unimpeded by the failure of the
Sudan, other States, including - I regret to say - some
States parties, to enforce the Court's arrest warrants.

A further aggravating factor is the Council's
inaction. It is no surprise then that victims and witnesses
of the Office are slowly but surely losing faith in the
process of international criminal justice in Darfur. We
must ask ourselves some tough but honest questions.
What are we to say to Victims who continue to suffer in
Darfur, to the individuals who have uprooted their lives
to be witnesses and had the courage to tell their story?
How can we maintain their trust in the judicial process
when they continue to observe Mr. Al-Bashir and other
suspects traversing the globe with impunity? Victims,
including some I have met with personally, are puzzled
and dismayed by the Council's lack of action.

It is almost eight years since the Pre-Trial
Chamber of the International Criminal Court issued
the first warrant of arrest against Mr. Al-Bashir. Yet
during each reporting period, Mr. Al-Bashir travels
to different States, attending events ranging from
presidential inaugurations to international sporting
events. According to my Office's information,
Mr. Al-Bashir has crossed international borders on 131
occasions since March 2009, and on 14 occasions to
State parties and on 117 occasions to non-State parties.
His movements are traceable. The world knows where
he is, where he travels to - often in advance, from the
media. There is ample opportunity for Mr. Al-Bashir
to be apprehended - if the political will exists among
States, and indeed the Council. As I stated to the
Council in June, the lack of action by this organ has
emboldened States to continue to host Mr. Al-Bashir.
It also emboldens the Darfur fugitives to travel, as
demonstrated by a recent visit by Mr. Al-Bashir,
together with Mr. Hussein, to a non-State party. This
open display of impunity undermines resolution 1593
(2005) and the credibility of the Council.

The legal position regarding the obligation of
States parties to arrest and surrender Mr. Al-Bashir
should he travel to their territory could not be clearer.
As Pre-Trial Chamber 11 stated in its non-compliance
decision of9 April 2014,
"[n]owhere in any decision issued by the Court is
there the slightest ambiguity about the Chambers'
legal position regarding Omar Al-Bashir's
arrest and surrender to the Court, despite the
arguments invoked relating to his immunity under
international law".

As the Council will recall, South Africa failed to
arrest Mr. Al-Bashir during his visit in June 2015. On
8 December 2016, the Chamber issued a decision to
convene a public hearing, to be held on 7 April 2017,
in relation to a possible finding of non-compliance
for South Africa's failure to arrest and surrender
Mr. Al-Bashir to the Court. The Chamber has not only
invited South Africa and my Office to make written and
oral submissions, but has also invited the United Nations
to attend the hearing and be heard. That opportunity
will allow the United Nations to set forth its position on
non-compliance with Security Council referrals to the
Court and the role to be played by the Security Council
in non-compliance proceedings. The Chamber further
invited all interested parties to provide any relevant
submissions should they wish to do so.

More recently, the Court found States parties
Uganda and Djibouti in non-compliance for failing to
arrest Mr. Al-Bashir during Visits to those countries in
July of this year, and referred the matter to the Council.
In those decisions, the Court emphasized the critical
role of the Council when non-compliance findings are
referred to it. Specifically, it stated,

"[i]n the absence of follow-up actions on the part of
the Security Council, any referral to the Court under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations
would become futile and incapable of achieving its
ultimate goal of putting an end to impunity".

I can only underscore the necessity of the Council

taking swift and concrete action to ensure compliance
with all arrest warrants against the fugitives in the
Darfur situation. That includes action against the Sudan
for its continued and open defiance of the Court's orders
and resolution 1593 (2005). The Pre-Trial Chamber has
now issued 13 decisions finding non-compliance and/
or requesting for appropriate action to be taken against
the Sudan and States parties for failing to arrest Mr
Al-Bashir and other fugitives. At a minimum, the
Council should consider referencing those decisions
in a separate draft resolution, as has been done in the
Libya situation when this organ adopted resolution
2213 (2015).

It is not enough for Council members to continue
calling for support for the Court. Such calls have to be
matched with concrete action. In that regard, serious
consideration should be given to New Zealand's
recommendation on 9 June. New Zealand stated that,
when a finding of non-compliance is received, the
Council should consider using the tools at its disposal,
such as a draft resolution, statement, letter or meeting
with the country concerned. And let us not forget that the
failure to execute warrants of arrest is not limited to the
case of Mr. Al-Bashir. To date, the ICC arrest warrants
against Mr. Harun and Mr. Kushayb have remained
outstanding for almost 10 years, against Mr. Hussein
for almost five years, and against Mr. Banda for a little
more than two years.

I take this opportunity to call on all States to fully
cooperate with the Court in the arrest and surrender of
suspects against whom ICC arrest warrants have been
issued. Allowing suspects to travel across international
borders with impunity not only severely undermines the
Council's credibility and that of the Court but equally
erodes public confidence in our common responsibility
to end impunity for the world's most serious crimes,
as well as our ability to ensure that victims attain the
justice they so rightly deserve.

In the face of the failure to arrest the Darfur
suspects, it is no surprise that allegations of the
commission of new crimes under the Rome Statute
continue to be reported in Darfur. According to the
information that my Office has obtained, hundreds
of civilians have been reportedly killed since April
2016. The area of Jebel Marra continues to be one of
conflict and instability, and that has a dire impact upon
civilians. Since June, there have been new clashes
between the Government of the Sudan and the Sudan
Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid faction in Jebel Marra,
resulting in aerial bombardments by the Government.
Approximately 80 civilians were allegedly killed as a
result of these bombardments, mainly in Jebel Marra.

Moreover, as the Council is aware, the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) reported on 1 July that women and
girls continue to suffer from sexual and gender-
based violence, including conflict-related violence.
Particularly worrying is the recent, and as yet
unconfirmed, allegations by Amnesty International
that the Government of the Sudan may have deployed
chemical weapons against civilians during several
attacks on Jebel Marra over the course of 2016. It is
alleged that 200 to 250 people, including many children,
may have died from exposure to chemical weapons. My
Office is taking the steps that it can to verify whether
the allegations are true. I note that the Government of
the Sudan has denied the claims, and to date both the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
and UNAMID have not come across evidence that
supports those claims.

However, it must also be noted that the Government
of the Sudan severely restricts access of UNAMID and
other organizations to the Jebel Marra region. Denying
access to the UnitedNations, the African Union and other
international humanitarian actors prevents aid from
getting to the Victims and internally displaced persons,
and potentially enables the parties to the conflict to
cover up crimes against civilians committed in the
conflict zones. It is imperative for the Government of
the Sudan to facilitate access to Jebel Marra. Consistent
with its policy of total non-cooperation with the Court,
the Sudan also denies access to my Office to prevent it
from investigating alleged crimes.

I also feel compelled to say a few words about
resources. With the Office's multiple situations and
cases, it will be increasingly difficult for the Office to
allocate needed resources to the Darfur investigation
in the coming year given the recently approved 2017
budget of the Court. Nevertheless, despite limited
resources, the total lack of cooperation by the Sudan
and the inability to investigate in Darfur, my Office
continues to conduct inquiries and investigations. The
team assigned to the Darfur situation has interviewed
additional witnesses since my previous report and
obtained further evidence regarding not only previous
crimes, but also allegations of current crimes. Further
efforts are being made to identify potential witnesses.
Overall, despite many challenges, my team continues to
make progress. The support of the Council in obtaining
additional funding from the General Assembly would
significantly increase the investigative capacity of
my team.

On every occasion that I report to the Council on the
situation in Darfur, I am forced to voice my concerns
about the very same challenges, the sum total of which
amounts to justice still eluding the victims in Darfur. I
wish I could be here today to inform the Council and
the Victims that the judicial process has significantly
advanced. But I cannot. As long as the Council does not
take direct action to induce the Sudan and other States
to execute the arrest warrants, I will likely be here next
June delivering the same message. The lack of progress
must weigh heavily on our collective conscience and
must not be allowed to continue.
I end on this point, and I ask the members of the
Council to consider it carefully: it was a watershed
moment for international criminal justice when the
Council voted in favour of referring the situation
in Darfur to the International Criminal Court. The
referral signalled to the world and to the victims the
Council's determination to fight against impunity
and foster justice and accountability in Darfur. That
determination must guide the Council today as it did
then. I ask the Council to give new life to resolution
1593 (2005) by giving my Office the support that
it needs in order to advance its investigations and
prosecutions in the Darfur situation. For the sake of
the victims in Darfur, the members of the Council must
break the current impasse. Under the critical watch of
history, we must not allow "never again" to ring hollow
and taunt the memory of the victims in Darfur. To be
sure, the world yearns to see the Council employ its
authority with confidence and conviction in full support
of international criminal justice. This body's effective
follow-through in the Darfur situation is the litmus test
of the Council's ability to fulfil that promise.

