Mr. Gambari: Thank you, Sir, for this
opportunity to address members of the Council on the
them of this wrap-up meeting: "Conflicts in Africa:
Security Council missions and United Nations
mechanisms to promote peace and security".

Security Council missions to Africa are a clear
demonstration of continuing interest in and engagement
with crises and conflicts on the continent. Beyond that,
however, they need to be effective instruments for
conflict prevention, conflict management and conflict
resolution. In this regard, the selection of mission
locations, the timing of the missions and what they
accomplish on the ground as well as at Headquarters
become the most critical questions that need to be
addressed at this meeting of the Council and in the
future.

Therefore, as the Council embarks on its
forthcoming missions to Central and West Africa, there
is a need to apply the lessons learnt from previous
experiences and also to explore further linkages
between peace and security, on the one hand, and social
and economic development, on the other. This short
presentation will highlight a few areas in which I
believe the Council may wish to consider further
efforts, and it will conclude with some
recommendations on the way forward.
As to applying the lessons learnt, first, the
Council would be well served by considering using
multidisciplinary United Nations expert support prior
to and after despatching its fact-finding missions to
potential or actual conflict areas in Africa. This would
promote a more efficient use of Council missions' time
while on the ground and also facilitate effective follow-
up actions. The Department of Peacekeeping
Operations recently led a multidisciplinary mission to
Cote d'Ivoire and a similar one is planned for the
Central African Republic, to be led by the Department
of Political Affairs. These are examples of an
integrated multidisciplinary approach whose benefits
may include comprehensive conflict prevention and
conflict-management strategies.

Secondly, preventive measures that have the
prospects of success must be designed and
implemented through active collaboration with and
support from subregional and regional organizations.

Thirdly, in general, conflicts in Africa cannot be
resolved without taking their regional and global
dimensions fully into account.

Fourthly, it should be recognized that the
international community has not yet been particularly
successful in post-conflict peace-building in Africa
and, perhaps, elsewhere and that more concerted efforts
need to be made in these areas. In this regard, the
failure of the international community to engage in
serious efforts to consolidate peace in the Central
African Republic, Liberia and Guinea-Bissau after the
end of the earlier international peacekeeping operations
in those countries can largely be attributed to the
relapse into conflict there. Therefore, greater and more
creative efforts by the international community in a
concerted and comprehensive manner, involving not
only the United Nations, but also the Bretton Woods
institutions and donor countries, are essential for
successful peace-building.

I shall now address some pressing issues
demanding urgent consideration.

The Security Council missions to both Central
Africa and West Africa are particularly timely because
they will provide the Council with an opportunity to
learn first hand and thus make informed judgements on
a host of issues. In Central Africa, for example, we
would urge the Council, first, to evaluate the current
mandate and resources of the various United Nations
peace operations for much-needed adjustment,
especially the missions in Burundi and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo; and secondly, to revisit the
possibility of holding an international conference on
the Great Lakes region to discuss the future of the
region, as the idea of the conference gained momentum
recently as progress was made in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Burundi peace processes.

Moreover, the mission to West Africa provides a
unique opportunity for the Council to assess the
capacity of regional organizations to participate in
peace operations and, in particular, to assess how the
international community might assist the capacity of
the African Union and the Economic Community of
West African States in general and their deployment to
Burundi and Cote d'Ivoire respectively; to evaluate
progress made in accomplishing the benchmarks that
should guide the pace of the drawdown of the
personnel of the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL); to assess the vulnerability of
Sierra Leone to security threats after the withdrawal of
UNAMSIL and, in this connection, to evaluate the
capacity of Sierra Leone's security sector to respond to
any internal and external threats; to explore with the
Sierra Leone Government and development agencies
what effective peace-building measures need to be
enhanced as UNAMSIL draws down its troops; to
ascertain how the international community might best
seize the opportunity of the forthcoming elections to
facilitate an end to the conflict in Liberia and evaluate
the type of engagement that could result in creating
conditions conducive to credible nationwide elections
in Liberia; to assess the current degree of engagement
in cote d'Ivoire to promote the effective
implementation of the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement up
to the 2005 elections.

My recommendations are as follows. Upon the
return of the mission to Headquarters, the Council may
wish to consider the following topics for thematic
discussions in order to promote greater coherence of
action by the system as a whole: the rule of law and the
promotion of internal security and human rights;
minimum conditions for holding credible elections;
security sector reform; measures to enhance
transparency and accountability in the management of
State wealth and resources; strengthening State
authority through the civil service and legislatures; and
enhancing the capacity of regional organizations to
undertake peace operations.

Secondly, while visiting actual or potential
conflict areas, the Security Council should develop
sustainable contacts with major stakeholders or parties
on the ground. That will, inter alia, facilitate the
transmission, reception and consideration of the
various resolutions and presidential statements adopted
by the Council and directed at those actors.

Finally, when the missions return, the Security
Council may also wish to consider measures to foster
greater coordination and coherence in the United
Nations response at the intergovernmental level to the
interrelated issues of peace, security and development
in Africa. To move that process forward, the Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council may
wish to consider holding joint meetings periodically as
a way of mobilizing international support for Africa in
the areas of conflict prevention and resolution, for
which the Security Council has a mandate, and of post-
conflict economic rehabilitation, reconstruction and
development, for which the Economic and Social
Council has a unique responsibility.

In conclusion, let me say that the Secretariat
stands ready to assist the Council in the further
elaboration and subsequent implementation of
proposals that might emanate from today's discussion
and subsequent ones aimed at promoting peace and
security in Africa.

