Mr. Chabar (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me to thank you, Mr. President, and the other members
of the Security Council for having convened this urgent
meeting to address the new escalation in the Middle
East. We would also like to take this opportunity to
thank the Secretary-General for his efforts and good
offices aimed at finding a solution to this crisis. We
also thank him for his briefing to the Security Council
on the recent developments in the Middle East.

The Moroccan Kingdom is, of course, following
with great concern the current serious situation in the
Middle East and the developments of the past few
days, in both Lebanon and the Gaza Strip. In this
connection, the Moroccan Kingdom strongly condemns
the use of excessive force, in contravention of all
international humanitarian instruments. In that regard,
we would like to express our solidarity with the
brotherly Palestinian and Lebanese peoples.

The current situation in the region is likely to
worsen, given Israel's determination to continue its
aggression against the brotherly Lebanese State,
targeted at its basic infrastructure, and its vital sites
using the methods of collective punishment and
displacement of thousands of innocent and defenceless
civilians. Because of the bombardment, the number of
displaced persons is constantly increasing, which will
lead to a serious humanitarian crisis unless the
international community responds in a serious manner.
It is also worth noting that, in view of the worsening
crisis in this brotherly country, it is increasingly
difficult for our Lebanese brothers to access food and
other basic supplies, given that there is no emergency
plan to provide assistance to victims. In that context,
the Moroccan Kingdom urges the international
community to act promptly to contain this crisis and
allow humanitarian relief agencies to deliver
emergency humanitarian assistance to victims. In
solidarity with the Lebanese people, the Moroccan
Kingdom responded swiftly to the Lebanese
Government's appeal, and sent humanitarian assistance
to alleviate the suffering of the brotherly Lebanese
people.

Needless to remind the Council that this
aggression adds up to another aggression against the
Palestinian people, perpetrated in silence and in the
absence of the international community. The
Palestinian people are experiencing destruction of
infrastructure, the murder of innocent people and
arbitrary arrests of symbols, officials and leaders of the
Palestinian Authority and the Palestinian people's
legitimate representatives.

We note with great concern the inability of the
Security Council to take the necessary measures in the
face of this tragic situation to put an end to this
aggression, so as to pave the way for diplomatic action
to find a solution to this crisis. We strongly urge the
Security Council to assume its responsibilities under
the Charter of the United Nations, particularly with
regard to the maintenance of international peace and
security. In that context, the Moroccan Kingdom would
like to express its support for any initiative that could
contribute to the following: first, an immediate
ceasefire, in order to pave the way for diplomatic
action to defuse the crisis; secondly, a lifting of the
blockade against the Lebanese State; thirdly, support
for the Lebanese authority in its endeavour to exercise
its sovereignty and control over its entire territory;
fourthly, the delivery of humanitarian assistance to
Lebanon so that it can face this crisis, and the opening
of secure humanitarian corridors in order to bring the
necessary aid to civilian populations; fifthly, the free
movement of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL) so that it can carry out its mission,
particularly in providing humanitarian assistance and
protection to innocent civilians.

Lastly - and this pertains to the Palestinian
cause - the Moroccan Kingdom, calls for the release
of all Palestinian ministers and elected representatives,
who were arrested by the Israeli army, and reaffirms
the need for an immediate end to the violent campaign
in the Palestinian territory and for the urgent
withdrawal of the Israeli army from the Palestinian
territories, as well as for an end to the policy of
collective torture and the targeting of civilians.

The Israeli Government's persistence in its
present policy signals that the cycle of violence and

counter-violence will continue. This represents a
concrete threat to regional and international peace and
security. In this context, the Moroccan Kingdom urges
the international community to strive for a lasting, just
and comprehensive settlement to the Middle East issue
and expresses its deep conviction that negotiations
remain the only way to bring about a peaceful
settlement and international legitimacy.

