Mr. Seixas da Costa (Portugal): Portugal fully
supports the previous statement, delivered by the
representative of Belgium, Ambassador Ste'phane De
Loecker, on behalf of the presidency of the European
Union. As many of our Views are contained in that
statement, I will focus on specific points to which my
country attaches particular importance at this juncture.

Allow me at the outset, Mr. President, to
underline and to welcome your presence here today as
an expression of the importance Ireland has always
attached to East Timor. For many years I had the
privilege of witnessing the commitment of your
country, and your personal commitment in particular, to
this question, and it is for me a very happy occasion to
see you here today presiding over this meeting.

I would like to start by conveying Portugal's deep
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his report on
East Timor. His recommendations set out clearly the
way for a smooth and gradual transfer of
responsibilities from the United Nations to the
legitimate Timorese authorities.

The Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello whose
excellent work deserves all our gratitude and has been
an important factor of prestige for the United
Nations - gave us his reading of the facts, and we are
very grateful for that. I would like to subscribe mot par
mat to what my colleague, the Permanent
Representative of France, Jean-David Levitte, said
about the role of Sergio Vieira de Mello, about the
quality of his work and his outstanding contribution to
the prestige of this Organization.

The Council also had the opportunity to hear
Chief Minister Mari Alkatiri, head of the Timorese
delegation, which also includes the Minister of
Finance, Ms. Fernanda Borges, and the Deputy
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Fernando Araujo. I
hope his briefing on the situation on the ground has
helped the Security Council to make a better
assessment of how the things are and what must be
done in order to prepare the road for independence. I
think his realism, but also his vision, represent a clear
guarantee that the Timorese affairs will remain in good
hands.

I also want to thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to listen to presentations by the
representatives of the World Bank and the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP), which have
played and will continue to play a very important role
in the transition of East Timor to independence.

Portugal has several times before commended the
work of the Timorese and the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET).
The progress achieved in areas as diverse as the
rehabilitation of infrastructure, the reopening of
schools, the provision of basic health care, the setting
up of a civil service and the establishment of police and
armed forces is remarkable and truly impressive. We
believe that such progress has set East Timor on a
successful path to independence, and we hope this
course can be maintained and sustained. The
engagement and support of the Security Council as a
whole, and its members individually, has been
fundamental in achieving such results. We trust the
Council will continue to support this effort and make
East Timor a positive precedent for the future of United
Nations operations.

I cannot overemphasise the importance of
ensuring sustainable peace and security in East Timor,
especially in the light of the present international
situation. That region of the world has enough factors
of instability, and we should not create the conditions
for more to arise.

Resolution 1272 (1999) clearly states that the
mandate of UNTAET consists of the following
elements:

"to provide security and maintain law and order
throughout the territory of East Timor; to
establish an effective administration; to assist in
the development of civil and social services; to
ensure the coordination and delivery of
humanitarian assistance, rehabilitation and
development assistance; to support capacity-
building for self-government; to assist in the
establishment of conditions for sustainable
development".

This mandate was unprecedented in scope and
complexity. In spite of UNTAET's tireless effort, these
tasks will not have been completed by the time of
independence. The overall security and political
situation will still be fragile. Therefore, it is vital to
safeguard and build upon the progress achieved in
order not to jeopardize the enormous investment made
by the international community and, in particular, by
the Timorese themselves, including in terms of human
lives.

This Council, in fact, has already acknowledged
this fact by stressing, on several occasions, the need for
a substantial international presence in East Timor after
independence.

Allow me now to focus on the specific proposals
put forward by the Secretary-General in his report. We
understand that these proposals still need to be refined.
Further planning will need to be made in the light of
the outcome of the Constituent Assembly, the Views of
the all-Timorese Transitional Cabinet, coordination
among all international actors, and the security
developments on the ground. But we strongly believe
that the report of the Secretary-General contains the
right framework for the future presence of the United
Nations in East Timor. As a major troop-contributing
country, Portugal fully supports the Secretary-
General's plans for the establishment of an integrated
mission, with a military, police and civilian component,
including a civilian unit to support the future
independent Government.

We believe both the numbers and timing proposed
by the Secretary-General for reductions in all
components are rational and sensible. His
recommendations for the post-independence period are
achievable within the foreseeable future, which is more
than can be said of other United Nations operations.
They are also affordable, as the amounts involved will
be reasonably small, especially if we think that this
may be the only success story for the United Nations in
recent years. Most of all, they are absolutely
indispensable to insuring the fulfilment of UNTAET's
mandate and avoiding jeopardizing everything that has
been achieved until now.

In considering the future of East Timor and the
United Nations role in it, it is fundamental to address
the question ofjustice and human rights. We welcome
the progress made so far both in the establishment of a
Timorese judiciary and in the setting up of a Truth and
Reconciliation Commission. We also welcome the
progress made in the investigation of the serious crimes
committed in East Timor in the course of 1999.
However, efforts in this area need to continue, as they
are fundamental for the long-term political and social
stability in the country. Portugal therefore supports the
Secretary-General's plans to include in the post-
independence United Nations mission a serious crimes
unit and a strong human rights presence throughout the
territory.

Portugal hopes this Council can agree on
endorsing the recommendations put forward by the
Secretary-General for the post-independence mission in
East Timor. Anything short of that would risk
conveying a very negative message to the Timorese, to
the United Nations on the ground and to the region. I
trust that that is not what the Council wants at this
point.

The United Nations success in East Timor will
not be measured just by its achievements in the three or
four years in which it was present in the country.
Rather, it will be judged in the light of the
sustainability of those achievements, especially of the
administration and institutional framework it leaves
behind.

As the Secretary-General rightly pointed out in
his report "Ultimately, the responsibility to establish a
Viable state in East Timor clearly belongs to its
people." We couldn't agree more. The Timorese have
fought for years to gain their independence. They have
demonstrated enormous courage and political maturity.
They have shown they want to be responsible for their
own destiny and have the capacity for that But they
have also asked for our support - a modest support,
actually, in face of the daunting tasks ahead of them. It
is a duty for us, the United Nations, to assist them in
that endeavour. It is for this Council simply to act
according to the responsibilities entrusted to it by the
Charter of the United Nations.

