Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Peru
would also like to begin by expressing our condolences
to the families of the victims of the recent terrorist acts
that have taken place in various parts of the world, acts
that we strongly condemn.

Peru welcomes the holding of this quarterly open
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question. We thank Under-Secretary-
General Rosemary Di Carlo for her comprehensive
briefing and the briefings by the o-Directors of
EcoPeace, Nada Majdalani and Gidon Bromberg.

Peru notes with deep concern and regrets that the
destructive cycle between Israelis and Palestinians
is not stopping, which constitutes an unsustainable
and destabilizing scenario for the Middle East and
for the international community. We are alarmed that
the prospects for a political solution are becoming
increasingly vague, and that unilateral decisions and
actions, or announcements thereof, may degenerate
into an even greater escalation of tension and violence.

Guided by its commitment to multilateralism,
international law and the peaceful settlement of
disputes, Peru supports the solution of two States with
internationally recognized and secure borders, to be
negotiated directly between Israel and Palestine on the
basis of the pre-1967 borders. These negotiations must
also determine the final status of Jerusalem.

We recognize Israel's right to provide for its
own security and existence through the exercise of
self-defence, as long as it is exercised in accordance
with the principles of legality, proportionality and
precaution. The human rights of Palestinian citizens,
including minors, cannot be overlooked. To that end,
we must recall Israel's obligation to comply with the
resolutions emanating from the Security Council. In
particular, we consider it urgent to put an end to the
increased-settlement, building-demolition and eviction
practices in the Palestinian territories occupied since
1967, in accordance with resolution 2334 (2016). Such
practices are contrary to international law, jeopardize
the territorial integrity of the Palestinian State and
undermine the chances of achieving a two-State solution.
We are also dismayed by the increasing deterioration of
the humanitarian situation in the Occupied Palestinian
Territory, and how it contributes to increased levels of
radicalization and extremism among its population.

We emphasize the urgency of ending the blockade
of the Gaza Strip, which began prior to the recovery
of control of the area by the Palestinian Authority,
and of providing Israel with the necessary guarantees
for its security. We also consider it important to align
humanitarian assistance with development plans that
offer hope and opportunities to the youngest. Projects
such as those related to water promoted by the EcoPeace
seem to us to be very relevant in this regard.

We wish to join in the expressions of concern made
by various Council members following the unilateral
decision of the Israeli Government to withhold a
significant amount of Palestinian tax revenues, given
the humanitarian impact that this has on the afflicted
Palestinians. We welcome the announcement by the
League of Arab States regarding temporary financial
contributions to cover that shortfall, but we believe
that should not obviate the need for the Paris Protocol,
which governs economic relations between Israel and
the Palestinian Authority, from being respected.

We would like to conclude by expressing our full
support for the efforts of the Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay Mladenov,
to prevent further escalation and promote dialogue
between the parties, as well as by reaffirming our
commitment to the search for a solution to the question
of Palestine, which will contribute to the achievement
of sustainable peace in the region.

