Mr. Babadoudou (Benin) (spoke in French): My
delegation wishes to join previous speakers in
expressing thanks to Judges Pocar and Mose, as well as
to Ms. Carla Del Ponte and Mr. Hassan Bubacar
Jallow, for the briefings they have given us on the
activities they have carried out within the completion
strategy for both Tribunals by the year 2010. After
having listened with great interest, my delegation is
rather encouraged by efforts made over the past six
months, particularly with speeding up internal
procedures, referring some cases to national
jurisdictions, and so forth. In particular, I would note
the establishment of a working group within the ICTY,
which has made proposals that, I believe, are rather
wise and will help speed up the work in that
jurisdiction.

Secondly, my delegation remains somewhat
pessimistic with regard to the two Tribunals
accomplishing their tasks by 2010. If we take account
of the comments and remarks by the Presidents and
Prosecutors, in particular those by President Pocar, we
feel that there are sufficient imponderables, factors that
are beyond their control that might well delay
proceedings. We believe that we will need to work in
concert with the States concerned and with the will of
States involved in order to hunt down fugitives as fast
as possible, because we believe that that is where the
main task lies. Until we get our hands on those
fugitives it will be very difficult to predict the length of
the mandate, unless we can foresee now that those
individuals still at large may never be arrested, in
which case it would be necessary to try them in
absentia.

Thirdly, we believe that further means need to be
made available for the construction of a new
courtroom, as well as for an increase in the number of
Appeals Chamber judges and ad litem judges. We have
been told here how useful those judges are.

Fourthly, we believe that both Tribunals must
pursue efforts to improve their internal management
and efficiency, as well as measures to speed up
proceedings. All of this must be done, however, with
full respect for the principles of equitable justice and
respect for the human rights of the detainees; that is
essential. We also need cooperation from States, as we
have already said.

Finally, the Security Council must be able to see
its responsibilities through to the end.

For my delegation, the completion of the work of
these Tribunals cannot be measured in time, but rather
when we have brought the last suspects to the
Tribunals and when the victims feel that justice has
been done. Then, we can consider the work of these
Tribunals to have been completed.

