Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I would like to
begin by welcoming you to the Chamber, Mr. President,
as well as Foreign Minister Holguin Cuellar.

The United Kingdom welcomes the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2261 (2016) today. The special
political mission that the resolution mandates is an
important step forward towards peace in Colombia. It
is an outcome that both the Government of Colombia
and the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia
have called for. I pay tribute to the leadership shown,
particularly by President Santos Calderon, in bringing
this issue to the Council. I am pleased that the United
Kingdom could lead the drafting of the resolution, and I
am delighted that we received such strong support from
all Council members.

The United Kingdom is a great supporter of the
Colombian Government's efforts to secure peace - a
peace that has, sadly, eluded Colombia for over five
decades. In that time the Colombian people have shown
great resilience. We welcome the progress made since
the negotiations began, in 2012. The agreements already
reached on rural development, political participation,
illegal drugs and, most recently, victims' rights and
transitional justice, are testament to the commitment
of both parties. The joint communique issued last
week, which sets out the monitoring mechanisms for
the ceasefire and the cessation of hostilities, is another
positive step towards the final peace agreement.

It is to the credit of the parties that they have
worked together to bring this issue to the Council.
It is not common for a country to refer itself to the
Council, but that is exactly the sort of role the United
Nations should be playing, namely, supporting conflict
prevention and conflict resolution at the national level
alongside others, including members of the Community
of Latin American and Caribbean States.

I hope that today will mark the start of the final
stage of Colombia's peace talks and that this resolution
itself will help build confidence and momentum towards
the final peace agreement. The United Kingdom will
play its part by working with Colombia, other Council
members and the Secretariat. Together we can ensure
that the implementation of this resolution will be swift
and effective so that it supports Colombia to realize a
stable, prosperous future for all its citizens. To do so, I
hope we can draw on the world unity shown today. It is
that unity that we will need to sustain if we are to make
progress in support of Colombia's peace agreement and
on so many of the other issues that we face this year.

Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of 
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I wish
to extend a special greeting to Foreign Minister Maria

Angela Holguin Cuellar on this very important day for
her country and the future of the people of Colombia
and all its children.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela co-sponsored
and voted in favour of resolution 2261 (2016), for we are
convinced that it constitutes clear support for the peace
process in the sister nation of Colombia - a country
to which Venezuela is inevitably joined by geography,
culture, history and the integrationist legacy of Simon
Bolivar, our liberator and common father of our
countries, as well as the powerful determination of
our peoples to live in harmony and peace. Venezuela
and Colombia have always been together as a region
and greater nation. The impetus for the revolution for
independence in Latin America, led by the liberator
Simon Bolivar, led to Colombians and Venezuelans
helping each other and, in heroic deeds, to cross the
Andes in order to bring freedom to New Granada in
Boyaca, to Venezuela in Carabobo and to Ecuador
in Pichincha - and finally, all us together as Latin
Americans and as children of Gran Colombia, the
greatest political creation of Simon Bolivar, to sealing
our independence in the glorious battle of Ayacucho.
It is that shared history that has kept Venezuela and
Colombia together as brothers, and both of our nations
are proud of that fact today and forever.

We are very pleased that the resolution just
adopted recognizes and makes mention of Venezuela's
contribution and commitment to dialogue and peace in
our neighbouring country. In that context, we would like
to take this opportunity to highlight the contribution
of, and pay well-deserved tribute to, the tireless efforts
and the determined political commitment to peace
of Commander President Hugo Chavez Frias, who
worked relentlessly, nobly and with sincere interest,
friendship and Bolivarian willingness for peace in
Colombia - one of his dearest wishes. For our country,
today's resolution represents the continuation of his
integrationist legacy.

For decades, we looked on with deep sorrow as
our Colombian brothers fought each other in a conflict
that passed through various phases and which had deep
social roots and a complex political and ideological
history. That protracted war, which lasted for more than
five decades, brought with it a lamentable toll in terms
of human lives, displaced people and destruction. In
the light of that reality, our deeply Bolivarian country
could not be indifferent to the pain and tragedy in our
sister republic as a result of the conflict.

That is why we welcomed thousands of refugees and
people displaced by war, victims of the various factions
of the armed conflict in Colombia. In that way, the
people and the Government of Venezuela have helped
and continuously contributed to the peace process and
opened its doors and its arms to those who were forced
to flee violence and threats to their personal safety.
More than 5 million Colombian brothers and sisters,
legal and illegal migrants alike, as well as refugees, are
now living in Venezuela. We have taken them in like
the brothers and sisters that they are. Venezuela has
given them all the guarantees and rights that citizens of
Venezuela enjoy, on an equal basis.

Our country has always been willing to participate
in efforts to bring about peace in Colombia, at the
request of the Colombian Government and the relevant
players in the conflict and with no intention whatsoever
to intervene. The unwavering will of our Government
to cooperate in a peaceful settlement was expressed in
the dedication and commitment of our former President
Hugo Chavez Frias and our current President, Nicolas
Maduro Moros, and took the form of supporting the
sister Republic of Chile in the peace negotiations held
between the Colombian Government and the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia - Ejercito del
Pueblo (FARC-EP), a process to which we were invited
to participate with Cuba and Norway as guarantors.
The parties, which have been holding talks in Havana
in the framework of the General Agreement to End
the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace,
signed on 26 August 2012, agreed to ajoint communique
agreement on 19 January 2016, which requests the
United Nations to set up a special political mission of
this multilateral Organization to act as an international
component and coordinator of the tripartite mechanism
to monitor and verify a definitive bilateral ceasefire
and cessation of hostilities, as well as the laying down
of arms.

Our country commends that initiative and is
grateful for the willingness of the United Nations and
all the members of the Security Council, as reflected
in the adoption of today's resolution, in order to
contribute through a specific function to the overall
efforts towards peace in Colombia. We are awaiting
the next steps, both of the parties in Colombia and of
the Organization, to define the operational aspects,
functions and composition of the political mission,
which must take full account of the terms of established
injoint communique No. 65, issued by the Government
of Colombia and the FARC-EP, which led to the request
for the special political mission Ijust mentioned.

We are extremely pleased that, in line with what
was agreed in the joint communique, the resolution
recognizes, and makes direct reference to, the
contribution of the member States of the Community of
Latin American and Caribbean States (CELAC) to the
special political mission approved by the Council today.
We welcome that willingness and we hope that CELAC,
through its full commitment to peace in Colombia,
will be reflected in the character and functions of the
political mission. We therefore encourage considering
the possibility of the head of the mission reporting to
the rotating CELAC presidency, as our Latin American
and Caribbean organization is a committed guarantor
of peace in the region.

The countries of CELAC have a prominent role
role to play in the composition of the political mission.
The members of our political mechanism followed with
interest and hope the development of the peace process.
In statements issued at their summit meetings, they
have expressed their support for the dialogue process
between the Government of Colombia and the FARC-
EP, welcomed the progress made and urged the parties
to continue the process aimed at putting an end to the
internal armed conflict, which has had affected the
political, social and economic development of a sister
nation.

Finally, our country wishes to reiterate its full
commitment to the negotiation process leading to
peace in the sister republic of Colombia. We again
welcome the voluntary joint initiative of the Colombian
Government and the FARC to turn to the Organization
to ask its support in the final phase of the dialogue. We
also reiterate our respect for the sovereignty, territorial
integrity, political independence and unity of Colombia,
as well as its inalienable right to manage its internal
affairs without interference or imposition. We note its
support for CELAC's cooperation and the inclusion
of its members in the political mission, as well as its
full conviction that the resolution we adopted today
represents a valuable contribution and a positive step
towards peace.

This adoption is an important step, but not the last
one: it is one more step towards the end of the conflict.
From here, therefore, we express the hope that the
parties will fulfil what has been agreed and that we
will soon see in Colombia a cessation of violence and a
lasting peace - with reconciliation, social justice and
inclusion for its people.

