Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Once again, we voice our principled position
vis-a-vis the inadmissibility of Pyongyang's nuclear
missile programme. It must be expeditiously and
promptly put to an end. The ballistic missile launches
of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea constitute
a major threat to sea and air transit in the region and
jeopardize the lives of ordinary civilians, in this
instance the citizens of Japan.

We call for full compliance with the Security
Council's resolutions. Pyongyang must end the banned
programmes, return to the non-proliferation regime of
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
and the safeguards of the International Atomic Energy
Agency, and join the Chemical Weapons Convention. At
the same time, Security Council members must seek a
peaceful, diplomatic and political solution to the issues
plaguing the Korean peninsula. The Council must seek
to reduce tensions in the region. There is no other way.

We oppose the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea's missile launches, but as we have repeatedly
noted, it is impossible to address the issues plaguing
the peninsula through sanctions and pressure alone.
This path will not enable us to achieve the result we
seek insofar as it proposes no option for engaging the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea in constructive
negotiations. There can be no military solution to the
issues plaguing the Korean peninsula. We believe
that all further Security Council resolutions on the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea must explicitly
underscore that fact.

We must also preclude additional unilateral
sanctions on top of those imposed by the Council
itself. If the situation on the Korean peninsula is to be
normalized, there is a need for an approach that includes
both an end to the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea's missile tests and an abandonment of military
infrastructure build-up, including the Terminal High
Altitude Area Defense system. The exercises being
conducted must be scaled down. There is an urgent need
to create an atmosphere of trust among the States of
the region and, in principle, to build an architecture of
security in North-East Asia. The road map for settling
the myriad issues plaguing the Korean peninsula can
be constituted by the joint Russian and Chinese ideas
advanced in various formats, including the joint Russo-
Chinese statement of4 July.

Once again, we categorically reject military
solutions to settlement of the issues plaguing the
Korean peninsula. Political tools must be leveraged. We
welcome the fact this approach has been enrhsined in
presidential statement S/PRST/2017/16, which has just
been adopted.

The meeting rose at 8.20 pm.
