Mr. Haraguchi (Japan): It has been observed
repeatedly that, as technology advances and
globalization continues, international terrorism
becomes even more immense a threat to international
peace and security, for the following reasons.

First, terrorism is an attempt to materialize
terrorists' aims by creating terror and fear and is thus
completely incompatible with the principal purpose of
the United Nations, that is to say, the establishment of
a fair and decent world based on the rule of law.

Secondly, terrorists not only threaten the world
through terrorism itself but also jeopardize the
attainment of a civilized order by engaging in and
promoting the illicit trafficking of drugs and the export
of arms for the purpose of acquiring funds and means.

Thirdly, as the notion of deterrence is basically
ineffective in preventing terrorism, the acquisition of
weapons of mass destruction by terrorists, once
accomplished, will lead to the unimaginable horror of
the disaster caused by the use of such weapons. We
must therefore resolutely take action against terrorism.

There has been a series of terrorist incidents
recently in countries such as Morocco, Pakistan, the
Philippines, Russia, Saudi Arabia, Tunisia and Yemen.
Much remains to be done, despite the tremendous
efforts made so far by the international community. It
is therefore now more important than ever for all
members of the international community to show the
political will to take forceful counter-terrorism
measures and to have the capacity to implement them.
As for the matter of political will, many countries have
expressed their resolve with respect to this issue on
numerous occasions, but those nations also need to
give substance to their words by taking actions, such as
becoming parties to all of the counter-terrorism
conventions and protocols.

Concerning capacity, it is becoming increasingly
more important that assistance for capacity-building be
extended to developing countries and Japan greatly
appreciates the clearing-house function performed by
the CTC in this regard. Information and knowledge
accumulated through the assistance matrix and the
exchange of letters between the CTC and Member
States are very useful tools in promoting international
counter-terrorism capacity-building and we welcome
the current 90-day work programme of the CTC,
expressing its intention to further strengthen such
efforts.

Japan more than once has stressed that, in
combating terrorism, it is essential, first, to deny
terrorists the means to commit terrorist acts by
preventing the financing of terrorism and denying
access to false documents, such as passports, and to
weapons; secondly, to deny terrorists safe haven and
ensure that they are prosecuted or extradited for
prosecution; and thirdly, to overcome vulnerability to
terrorism by enhancing domestic security measures and
crisis - and consequence-management capabilities.
The importance of these measures was confirmed in the
G8 action plan adopted on the occasion of the G8
Evian summit held in June. The G8 countries have
established the Counter-Terrorism Action Group
(CTAG) in order to assist the CTC pursuant to the
action plan, and the Group has already embarked on its
activities. Japan, as a member of the G8 and CTAG,
continues to cooperate in the activities of the CTC.

Japan is also accelerating efforts at bilateral
cooperation in combating terrorism. The Russian
Federation-Japan Consultation on Counter-Terrorism,
held on June 23 and 24 in Moscow; the Indonesia-
Japan Joint Announcement on Fighting against
International Terrorism, issued on June 24; and the
Australia-Japan Joint Statement on Cooperation to
Combat International Terrorism, released last week, are
indicative of such cooperation and we remain
committed to working towards capacity-building in the
Asia-Pacific region, in particular through similar
cooperative efforts.

Combating terrorism is a difficult task involving
an invisible enemy, but "invisible" does not necessarily
mean "invincible". The international community must
continue to make an all-out effort to create a world
order that will preclude all terrorist acts.

