Mr. Al-Ashtal (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like at the outset to express my sincere
congratulations to you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month.
Also, I cannot fail to express our deep appreciation to
Ambassador Kolby for his successful presidency of the
Security Council last month. Allow me to pay tribute to
the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan. His positions
on the deteriorating situation in the Palestinian
territories have been characterized by wisdom, courage
and a sense of responsibility. Ever since he delivered
his now famous statement before the Security Council
on 21 February (see S/PV.4474), he has been placing
before the international community positive views that
contribute to a resolution of the current grave situation.

The explosive situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory is increasingly dangerous. Since
Israel decided to launch an extensive war against the
Palestinians, we have been witnessing a genuine
tragedy. Israeli tanks and warplanes attack Palestinian
cities, while the headquarters compound of the elected
Palestinian President, Yasser Arafat, is under total
siege, and he and his aides are being humiliated
through the cutting of basic electricity and water
services.

The Security Council is meeting today for three
reasons. The first is that Israeli acts of aggression have
expanded. The number of wounded and dead increases
daily, and destruction continues as we speak. Secondly,
Israeli aggression has widened to such an extent that it
now threatens peace and security in the entire region.
Thirdly, the Council is meeting because Israel refuses
to accept resolution 1402 (2002). Even though Israel's
representative today claimed that Israel accepts the
resolution, it refuses to implement it because it calls for
a ceasefire and a simultaneous withdrawal of Israeli
forces from Palestinian cities. Furthermore, the
resolution stresses that withdrawal from Palestinian
cities, including Ramallah, must take place
immediately. More than 96 hours later, the resolution
remains a dead letter.

Instead, Israel has reinvaded other cities in a
broad plan to reoccupy Palestinian territory. Israel is
also attempting to undermine the Palestinian Authority
and to destroy its infrastructure, including leadership
installations, official buildings and other civilian
installations.

Arab public opinion boils over as it watches
television screens showing the criminal acts
perpetrated by the Israeli army. We wish this Council
could View those images in order to see the truth of the
assassinations, the attacks on ambulances and other
inhuman acts. Denunciation has not come just from the
Arab world; it has come from many other world
capitals, including in the form of large demonstrations.

We call on the Security Council to reaffirm
resolution 1402 (2002), which calls for a withdrawal of
Israeli troops from Ramallah and other Palestinian
cities. We call on the Council also to take a decision
reaffirming the need to deploy international
peacekeeping forces and international observers to
supervise the withdrawal and to separate the two
parties, the Palestinians and the Israelis. The
defenceless Palestinian people, under blatant Israeli
attack, cannot defend itself because of the massive
imbalance of military force. How can a Kalashnikov
rifle face Merkava tanks or Apache helicopters?

The Republic of Yemen, through the positions
taken by President Ali Abdullah Saleh as reflected in
his statement at the Beirut Arab summit, has expressed
the Yemeni people's solidarity with and support for the
struggle of the Palestinian people in this dark hour, as
it faces the barbarity of the heavily armed Israeli
forces. As stated by President Saleh, we also stand in
full solidarity with our brother Yasser Arafat, the
elected President of the Palestinian people, who is now
encircled by the Israeli occupation forces, as he stands
steadfast defending his people and its dignity.

We urge the Council to take a strong stand to
compel Israel to abide by resolution 1402 (2002) and
the previous resolution on this matter, resolution 1379
(2001), and to withdraw from Palestinian towns and
cities, including Ramallah, or, if Israel continues its
rejection, to take the necessary measures under Chapter
VII of the Charter.

