Mr. Olguin Cigarroa (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
I commend Jordan's leadership of the work of the
Security Council during the month of April. We also
express our particular gratitude for the compelling and
comprehensive briefings by Valerie Amos, Antonio
Guterres, Angelina Jolie Pitt and Ertharin Cousin.
On behalf of the Chilean Government, I express
my appreciation for their work out in Syria and the
countries of the region, and for that of all agencies,
funds and programmes of the United Nations and their
humanitarian assistance implementing partners.

We welcome the presidential statement that we have
just adopted on the impact of the humanitarian crisis
in Syria and neighbouring countries (S/PRST/2015/10).
However, experience has shown that it alone will not be
enough to end the suffering ofmillions ofpeople. As the
Secretary-General has said, year after year, the world
has watched Syria being torn apart. Syria will continue
to be torn apart if we fail to encourage progress towards
a peaceful settlement of the conflict.

That is why today the Security Council has
a responsibility that goes beyond the political; a
responsibility to call on all actors to do everything
possible to alleviate the suffering of the Syrian people.
It is a moral obligation of the body responsible for
maintaining international peace and security, as derived
from the Charter of the United Nations. The discussion
of the humanitarian impact of the Syrian crisis in
neighbouring countries should lead us to a deeper
reflection on the scope of protection that refugees
require and the challenges that meeting the particular
needs of this vulnerable group poses to host countries.

To address this reality is to uphold an ethical
imperative of solidarity that should be expressly
recognized by the international community, but we
must also bear in mind the resources and humanitarian
coexistence within host societies. This requires support
from public and private institutions alike. The figures
we have heard today are alarming, heartbreaking and
compelling, but no longer surprising. The humanitarian
situation continues to deteriorate, with growing
consequences for the region. In 2013, Mr. Guterres
expressed his concern before the Security Council at
the alarming growth in the number of Syrian refugees,
then approaching 1.8 million people. Less than two
years later, that figure has more than doubled.

Neighbouring countries have shown commendable
solidarity in accepting refugees, a massive test of
their resources and their populations. However, this
is no longer sustainable, even in the short term, and
the effects of the Syrian humanitarian crisis threaten
to damage the economic structures, social fabric and
even political institutions of these countries. It is also
essential to recognize the challenges involved in the
coexistence of host societies and migrant flows.

But this crisis is not affecting only neighbouring
countries. The recent tragedies in the Mediterranean Sea
remind us that many men, women and children fleeing
the Syrian conflict chose to undertake such a journey
given the hopelessness of their homeland. As noted in the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2015/264), in much
of Syria violence has intensified, rather than decreased.
This factor has increased the number of deaths, injured
and displaced as a result of the conflict. We vigorously
condemn the perpetration of such Violence against the
civilian population by any party, which is in violation
of international humanitarian law. Those responsible
must be held accountable before the law, including
the International Criminal Court. We will therefore
continue urging all parties to unequivocally implement
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014)
concerning the humanitarian situation in Syria, and all
other relevant resolutions of the Council.

I must address the situation in Yarmouk, a tragic
example of how the vulnerability and specific protection
needs of the Palestinian community have recently
intensified yet further. We share the assessment of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East that supporting Palestinian
refugees is of humanitarian, political and strategic

importance from a regional perspective. We reiterate
our call on the Council to monitor developments in
Yarmouk carefully.

Finally, it is essential that the international
community support the funding requirements set out
in the strategic response plan for Syria and the regional
refugee and resilience plan, which seek to address
the humanitarian and development needs. However,
while humanitarian assistance can help alleviate the
symptoms, it does not address the root cause of the
disease. That is why we encourage efforts seeking an
inclusive, Syrian-led political solution to the conflict,
based on the Geneva communique (S/2012/523, annex),
recognizing the role entrusted to the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General, who has our full support.

