Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, Mr. President, I would
like to commend you on presiding over the Security
Council.

Bolivia is once again addressing the Council
to vigorously condemn Israel's continued military
occupation of Palestinian territory, which is perpetrated
through violations of international law, the commission
of crimes against humanity and violations of United
Nations resolutions.

The Government of the Plurinational State of
Bolivia believes that, in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations, the Palestinian people has
an absolute right to free self-determination. In that
context, we urge the Secretary-General and the
Security Council, in accordance with the mandates
set out in the Charter and the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, to endeavour to achieve a just, lasting
and peaceful solution in order to ensure a future of
prosperity and progress, as called for by the General
Assembly.

We reiterate our position that a permanent
solution to the Palestinian question will be achieved
only through ending the occupation begun in 1967,
achieving and independent State of Palestine based
on the pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its
capital, and achieving a just and agreed solution to
the Palestinian refugee problem based on the relevant
General Assembly resolutions. We also call on Israel
to comply with Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations and respect the inalienable rights of
the Palestinian people and the right of all States in the
region to live in peace within secure and internationally
recognized borders.

We cannot ignore the direct and indirect alarming
consequences of Israel's closure policy in the West
Bank and its abuses in the Gaza Strip. According
to the report of the Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People of
7 October, (A/68/35), the restrictions imposed by Israel
in the form of a blockade, on the movement of people
and goods since 2007, have continued to undermine the
living conditions of 1.7 million Palestinians.

The international community has the responsibility
to ensure the relevant investigations regarding the
thousands of Palestinians held in Israeli prisons and
detention centres due to more than 2,951 arrest and
detention operations carried out from 7 October 2012 to
6 October 2013. At least 3,583 Palestinians, including
women and children, were arrested during that period
alone. A UNICEF report published in March indicates
that ill-treatment of Palestinian children held in
the Israeli military detention system appears to be
widespread, systematic and institutionalized.

We cannot fail to also mention that in August, the
Palestinian Central Bureau of Statistics reported that
in the year 2012 Israel intensified its illegal settlement
activity in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem,
in view of the fact that in 2012 the number of settlers
in the 144 settlements in the West Bank was 563,546,
representing an increase of 24,765 settlers as compared
to 2011.

On 18 October, the President of the Council
distributed a letter in which the Ambassador of the
Observer State of Palestine to the United Nations
expressed alarm about illegal Israeli activities in
the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, which territory constitutes the State of
Palestine. In that regard, my Government calls for
the solidarity of the entire international community
in view of the persistent provocations and acts of
aggression carried out by the Israeli occupation forces
against the Palestinian people. We especially condemn
the attacks and abuses directed against the sanctity of
Palestinian cemeteries, churches and mosques located
in the occupied Palestinian territory, as such abuses can
lead to serious consequences affecting the entire region
and the broader international community.

I remember that, a few months ago, a Palestinian
representative informed other representatives that there
was no problem in adopting resolutions against Israel,
because they would surely only collect dust in a file
cabinet of the United Nations. We believe that it is
crucial that the United Nations and the Council clearly
signal that Israel's crimes cannot and should not go
unpunished.

Bolivia is of course hopeful about the possibility of
peace talks that may finally achieve the goals so longed
for by the Palestinian people and the international
community. However, we must not allow such
discussions to become a delaying tactic to consolidate
the crimes that have been committed against the
Palestinian people.

Finally, with regard to the situation in the Syrian
Arab Republic, Bolivia naturally supports the problem
being resolved in the context of negotiations, in full
respect for international law and avoiding any unilateral
action that violates it.

