Mr. Al-Kadhe (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to express the gratitude and
appreciation of my delegation to you, Mr. President,
for having convened yet another emergency meeting of
the Security Council at the request of the Arab Group.

The Council is meeting for the third time in less
than 10 days to consider criminal acts perpetrated by
the Zionist entity against the people of Palestine. The
Council has adopted two resolutions calling on the
Zionist entity to halt its military campaigns. That
entity, however, continues its brutal terrorist campaign
against the Palestinians. It persists in killing and
displacing them, destroying their homes, laying siege
to their holy sites and using starvation as means of war.

It continues to besiege the headquarters of
President Yasser Arafat and to bring military pressure
to bear upon him with a view to killing him and his
companions. In brief, the Zionist entity is committing
acts of genocide and crimes against humanity.

As members know very well, under international
law, any of the following acts constitute genocide:
killing members of a group; causing serious bodily
harm to members of a group; or deliberately inflicting
on a group living conditions calculated to bring about,
in whole or in part, its physical destruction. Crimes
against humanity are defined as follows: the deliberate
killing, annihilation, expulsion, forced transfer or
detention of people, or severely depriving them of their
liberty or freedom of movement, all of which run
counter to the basic rules of international law.

The Zionist entity has committed all of those
crimes. The Council is therefore called upon to act
immediately, under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations, and to adopt coercive measures against
that entity. Failure to do so would mean that the
Council is unable to maintain international peace and
security in accordance with its Charter mandate.
Should that happen, the very raison d'etre of the United
Nations would be called into question.

The crimes perpetrated by the Zionist entity
against the Palestinian people are covered by the
provisions of the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court. Should it prove legally impossible to
apply that Statute, the Security Council should consider
the establishment of an ad hoc international criminal
tribunal to prosecute the Zionist entity's criminals.
Sharon and the military Chief of Staff, Mofaz, would
be at the top of that list as a result of the war crimes
and crimes against humanity they have committed in
their brutal campaign in the occupied Palestinian
territories.

Under common article 1 of the Geneva
Conventions of 1949, all States undertake to respect
and to ensure respect for those Conventions. Member
States, collectively and individually, are thus
committed under international humanitarian law to
adopt legal, diplomatic and coercive measures to bring
pressure to bear on the Zionist entity to respect those
Conventions. Furthermore, those States are also duty-
bound, under the 1948 Convention on the Prevention
and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide, which is
part of customary international law, to shoulder their
responsibility in defence of the Palestinian people.

Our respect for the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and for international law prompts
us to call on the Council to abide by its responsibilities
under the Charter. The Zionist entity, however, has not
respected Council resolutions, and the Council has
been unable to ensure respect for the provisions of
those resolutions. That has encouraged the Zionist
entity to continue to violate all the rules of
international law. We believe that the situation in
Palestine will not improve as long as the British and
United States Administrations continue their assistance
to and support for the Zionist entity. That support is an
attempt to crush the morale of the Palestinian people
and to break the will of the Arabs, so that they will be
forced to surrender to the Zionist-American alliance.

It is really unreasonable that compliance by the
Zionist entity with international legitimacy is outside
the abilities of the United States and Great Britain.
While rallying support for this entity, and under these
circumstances, the two Administrations once again
raised the issue of the threat of striking at Iraq. The
objective behind this has become well known; it is an
attempt to divert the world's attention from
condemning the crimes of the Zionist entity against the
Palestinian people. It is also an attempt to terrorize
States so that they will not shoulder their international
commitments in respecting, and guaranteeing respect
for, the rules of international law.

