Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to start by welcoming the presence of the President
of Djibouti, Mr. Ismail Omar Guelleh, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Djibouti and the Permanent
Representative of Eritrea.

The delegation of France listened with a great
deal of interest to the presentations just made. The
conflict that opposes Eritrea to Djibouti has entered
into a less critical phase. The situation at the border
between the two countries remains tense but calm.
There is no more fighting on Ras Doumeira or on
Doumeira Island, and there is no further contact
between the armed forces of the two States. This
progress is attributable solely to Djibouti which, in
accordance with the Security Council's presidential
statement of 12 June (S/PRST/2008/20), withdrew its
forces to the status quo ante, ensuring that the two
armies were no longer in contact with each other.

Our Security Council should not lose sight of
what is important: deadly clashes took place at
Doumeira in June, for which Eritrea was responsible,
and the effects of that aggression continue. The
Security Council has unambiguously condemned
Eritrea, in its 12 June presidential statement. The report
of the United Nations fact-finding mission
(S/2008/602) established that, unlike Djibouti, Eritrea
had not withdrawn its troops to the status quo ante. The
top priority, thus, is for Eritrea to meet the very clear
demand of the Security Council.

The resolution of this crisis requires that both
countries settle the issue of the delimitation of their
common border. It is a complex issue, especially
because the agreement that still regulates the border is
from a time when neither of the parties existed as a
sovereign State. The border has never been
demarcated, and this uncertainty twice led to tensions
between the two countries in the 1990s.

It is thus incumbent upon both parties to
determine the framework within which they will ease
their differences. France, like others, has on a number
of occasions offered its expertise if that could be of
assistance. The reference agreements were a Franco-
Ethiopian treaty of 1897 and two Franco-Italian
protocols of 1900 and 1901 respectively. This,
however, requires dialogue between both parties, which
is currently non-existent.

At this stage, the Eritrean authorities have
rejected all proposals for dialogue. Eritrea has not
issued visas to the United Nations fact-finding mission,
even when the President of the Security Council called
upon the parties to facilitate the mission. Eritrea
refused to admit similar missions proposed by the
League of Arab States and the African Union. Nor did
it respond positively to the Secretary-General's offer of
good offices or to the various proposals for dialogue on
this issue by multilateral organizations and various
United Nations Member States.

The second priority is that Eritrean authorities
recognize that a crisis exists in Doumeira and that they
be willing to talk about it. Last Friday's visit to Asmara
by the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
gives us reason to hope that Eritrea will finally agree to
resume dialogue with the international community.
France would like to convey its gratitude to Mr. Jean
Ping for his efforts and encourages the African Union
to make progress in this field to ensure that a genuine
channel of communication be established, which would
make it possible to finally discuss the crisis between
Djibouti and Eritrea.

France is also convinced that the United Nations
Secretariat has a very positive role to play. It hopes that
the Secretary-General be able to formalize his proposal
of good offices to Eritrea and dispatch a mission to the
area.

France considers that the continuation of this
crisis and Eritrea's rejection of all dialogue represent a
serious threat to Djibouti and the entire region.
Djibouti and France are linked by long-standing
relations of friendship and cooperation, based on trust.
In this framework, France intends to comply fully with
all the obligations that link it to Djibouti.

The parties will be able to resolve their border
dispute only through dialogue. It is unacceptable,
therefore, for one of the parties to be able to
indefinitely prolong the crisis, which is dangerous both
for Djibouti and for the whole of the Horn ofAfrica.

As President Guelleh underscored a few minutes
ago, that region, which has already been racked by war
and affected by the ongoing humanitarian tragedy in
Somalia, has experienced its share of conflict. France
stresses that no preconditions can be placed on
resolving the border dispute between Djibouti and
Eritrea.

France would like the Council to return to this
issue in the near future. My delegation therefore
proposes to rapidly engage in bilateral consultations so
that, when the time comes, a draft text can be proposed
to the Council. This would firmly reiterate the
Council's demands on Eritrea, in particular regarding
the withdrawal of its forces; it would condemn Eritrea
if it continues to reject any dialogue on the subject; and
it would encourage the efforts of the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission and the Secretary-General
of the United Nations. These demands should be
accompanied by a clear timeline. It is our
responsibility and the responsibility of the Council to
closely follow this issue.

