Ms. Arystanbekova (Kazakstan) (interpretation from Russian): On behalf of the delegation of the
Republic of Kazakstan, I congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of October. I am confident that under your

 

wise guidance the Council will arrive at mutually
acceptable decisions.

I also wish to take this opportunity to express
appreciation to your predecessor, the Ambassador of
Guinea-Bissau, for his able guidance of the Council last
month.

The Government of my country is seriously concerned
over developments in Afghanistan. Of particular concern to
us are the recent events in that country that have led to an
intensification of military confrontation, ethnic division and
a tendency to separatism, all of which are fraught with the
dangers of a disintegration of Afghanistan and a
deterioration in the relations among States in the region,
making them more difficult.

In this connection, I should like to express
appreciation to the Security Council for its constant focus
on the situation in the country, as can be seen, inter alia,
from the statement made by the President of the Security
Council on 28 September 1996, which is of great
significance in respect of a halt to all military hostilities and
the opening of political dialogue designed to achieve
national conciliation.

The worsening of the situation in Afghanistan and its
possible implications for the destabilization of the situation
in the Central Asian region led to the convening on 4
October 1996 of a meeting at Almaty, which was attended
by the leaders of Kazakstan, Kyrgyzstan, the Russian
Federation, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan. Invited by the
President of Kazakstan, Mr. Nursultan Nazarbaev, and
participating in the meeting were the Presidents of
Uzbekistan, Mr. Islam Karimov; of Kyrgyzstan, Mr. Askar
Akayev; of Tajikistan, Mr. Emomali Rakhmonov; and the
Prime Minister of the Russian Federation, Mr. Victor
Chernomyrdin.

A thorough discussion was held, at the end of which
a joint declaration was made by the leaders of Kazakstan,
Kyrgyzstan, the Russian Federation, Tajikistan and
Uzbekistan concerning developments in Afghanistan, the
text of which has been issued as a document of the General
Assembly under agenda items 21 and 39 and as a document
of the Security Council.

The declaration states, in part, that the participants at
the Almaty meeting expressed:

"serious concern at the expansion and intensification
of the armed confrontation in Afghanistan, which has

 

claimed countless victims among the civilian
population and caused a new wave of refugees and
displaced persons. The executions and the brutal
murder of former President Najibullah have
increased tension and brought Afghanistan to the
brink of a national disaster and the collapse of the
Afghan State." (S/1996/838, annex, p. 3)

The declaration continues:

"The flames of war are coming nearer to the
borders of countries members of the
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), posing
a direct threat to the national interests and security
of these States and the Commonwealth as a whole,
and destabilizing the situation in the region and the
world." (ibid)

The participants in the meeting went on to declare
that any actions undermining stability on the borders
between Afghanistan and the CIS States were
inadmissible. Such actions, regardless of their
perpetrators, were deemed a threat to the common
interests of CIS States and, on the basis of the Treaty on
Collective Security signed at Tashkent on 15 May 1992,
would be met with an appropriate response.

The leaders of the States of Central Asia and Russia
appealed to the Afghan parties to the conflict, first of all
the Taliban, to call an immediate halt to hostilities and to
begin to seek ways of achieving national accord. We
emphasized that an obligatory condition must be the non-
interference by foreign elements in the internal affairs of
sovereign Afghanistan and the preservation of the
country's territorial integrity.

The participants at the Almaty meeting proposed that
a special meeting of the United Nations Security Council
be convened without delay, with the participation of
interested countries, with a View to adopting urgent
measures to halt the fighting and to achieve a
comprehensive political settlement of the Afghan conflict,
and also to arrange for the provision by the international
community of humanitarian assistance to the civilian
population and refugees.

We regard today's meeting of the Council on the
situation in Afghanistan as a response by the Council's
membership to the appeal contained in the joint
declaration issued by the leaders of Kazakstan,
Kyrgyzstan, the Russian Federation, Tajikistan and
Uzbekistan.

 

On behalf of the Government of Kazakstan, I would
like to express appreciation to the Secretary-General, Mr.
Boutros Boutros-Ghali, and to Under-Secretary-General
Goulding for the efforts they have made to achieve peace
and national accord in Afghanistan. We share the Secretary-
General's concern over the situation of women and girls, as
expressed in his statement on 7 October this year. We
express our support for the important work being done by
the United Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan, which
is headed by the Secretary-General's Special Representative
in Afghanistan, Mr. Norbert Holl.
At the same time, we believe that the United Nations
and the Security Council must intensify their activities to
arrive at the measures necessary to bring a halt to the
conflict. The United Nations must take specific action to
protect the rights and freedoms of the Afghan population,
primarily its women. Kazakstan supports the steps taken
towards a settlement of the dispute between the Afghan
parties exclusively by peaceful means, and we support the
preservation of Afghanistan as a single friendly country.
We believe that the United Nations must play a
fundamental role in that process, with cooperation from
interested States, and we welcome the intensification of the
efforts of the world community to provide humanitarian
assistance to Afghanistan.

Kazakstan, along with other Members of the United
Nations, is prepared to do its utmost to promote a speedy,
peaceful settlement of the Afghan conflict. As we see it, the
stability of that State, as its history has taught us, can be
ensured only through respect for the interests of the various
ethnic and religious groups in the Afghan population. I
should like to express the hope that today's debate in the
Security Council on the situation in Afghanistan will yield
positive results in respect of a settlement to the conflict and
help put an end to the war in that country, which has gone
on for so many years.

