Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): In my
capacity as Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2048 (2012), on
Guinea-Bissau, I have the honour of briefing the
members of the Council on the visit that I conducted to
Guinea-Bissau from 13 to 15 June of this year.

The purpose of the visit was to collect first-hand
information on the effective implementation of the
sanctions imposed under resolution 2048 (2012) and
assess the political developments in Guinea-Bissau.
I was accompanied by the Political Coordinator of
Senegal and the Secretary of the Committee, who took
part in all the meetings we had in Bissau.

In the five years since sanctions were adopted, this
was the first time that a Chair of the Committee visited
the country. Accordingly, I had the impression that
the political actors and civil society were interested in
engaging in dialogue and presenting their Views to the
Committee. That is why I believe that it is essential to
have greater dialogue between the Committee - and
the Council - and the citizens of Guinea-Bissau.

I was happy that I was able to get to know all
the interlocutors that were included in the mandate
issued by the Committee and to have been able
hold fruitful discussions with them. During our
conversations, I stressed the importance of pursuing
dialogue and collaboration with the various interested
parties - national and international - with a
View to resolving the political crisis andfinding a
lasting solution. I also stressed that the international
community continued to support Guinea-Bissau but that
it was necessary to take concrete measures to create a
stable political environment and to receive the pledged
funds in Brussels in March 2015. I further highlighted
that the situation in Guinea-Bissau remained of great
importance to the Security Council.

While the situation in Guinea-Bissau remains
stable overall, uncertainty over the resolution of the
current political crisis could easily undermine the calm
in the country. Thus far, the constitutional order does
not seem to be directly challenged, but the ambiguity
in the division of powers between the President and
the Prime Minister continues to foment political strife.
In addition, uncertainty in the political environment
has eroded the confidence of donors and investors, as
the root causes of instability in Guinea-Bissau remain
unresolved. International and regional efforts to find
a durable solution to the political crisis appear to have
no effect on the ground, since none of the provisions
of the Conakry Agreement have yet been implemented,
mainly due to a lack of political will.

The country continues to be affected by the
uncertainty of the political situation without any clear
signs of substantive progress towards a solution in the
near future. However, thus far, the security situation
has remained stable without episodes of violence - the
army has not interfered in political controversies; human
rights, in general, seem to be respected; and
constitutional order is not directly challenged. I think
it is important to emphasize that the current situation
might not be sustainable for much longer and that the
patience of the military and the population could end
at any time. That is why it is urgent to find a political
solution to the crisis.

Many interlocutors pointed out that the political
crisis was generally perceived to have been caused by
the lack of political will to arrive at a solution and was
based on personal interests and ambitions rather than
different religious, ideological, ethnic or philosophical
considerations. In that regard, while all political actors
expressed their readiness to engage in dialogue and
find a solution to the political crisis, they each blamed
some group or person for the stagnation. That shows an
uncompromising attitude, whereas what is needed are
specific concessions.

Almost all the interlocutors pointed out that since
2012 the military had respected the constitutional
order and the laws of the country, including refraining
from interfering in the political life of Guinea-Bissau.
Many speakers believe that it would be appropriate to
remove persons from the sanctions list on the basis of
their commendable conduct. It should be noted that the
persons who are subject to sanctions continue to serve
in the the army and some have been promoted to higher
ranks, which has contributed to the feeling, within
a segment of the population, that there is a climate
of impunity.

The general feeling among most interlocutors
was that sanctions remained effective as a deterrent
to possible disruptive elements, both military and
civilian. However, while the sanctions were considered
to be effective, many pointed out that the measures did
not appropriately target those who merited sanctions
and called, in turn, for sanctions against civilians,
particularly politicians. Those who were not part of the
Government indicated clearly that the responsibility for
the political crisis lay with the political class, political
parties and, in general, civilians driven by personal
interests rather than the interests of the entire country.

Since last year, two designated persons have
travelled outside of Guinea-Bissau. However, they were
detained at the destination airport and repatriated to
Guinea-Bissau. No other report has indicated that other
persons have violated the travel ban. That is a positive
sign that Member States are increasingly vigilant and
are striving to implement sanctions. There is still
some confusion as to the scope of the restriction on
the travel ban. In that regard, I made sure to explain
the procedures to the authorities during the visit and
also provided them with a copy of the guidelines for
carrying out the work of the Committee.

In a number of meetings, many emphasized the
positive role played by the Economic Community
of West African States Mission in Guinea-Bissau
(ECOMIB) in helping to prevent the constitutional
order from being challenged, although it is clear that
the role of ECOMIB is very symbolic and that, in the
event of large-scale armed intervention by military
forces, the Mission would be ill-equipped to match it
due to its limited capacity.
The visit reflects the positive momentum of
the cooperation between the Committee and the
Government, which should be maintained and increased.
I submitted a report to the Committee on 17 July and
made recommendations. In particular, I focused on the
need to review the list of sanctions, taking into account
the current situation and developments in Guinea-
Bissau, as well as the views expressed by those I spoke
with during my visit. I also believe that we should
exercise caution during the review process.

I would like to thank the authorities of Guinea-
Bissau for their warm welcome and the fruitful meetings.
I also wish to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Modibo Toure, and the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-
Bissau for the excellent support provided during
the visit.

