Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I welcome you to the
Chamber, Mr. President. I would also like to thank
Equatorial Guinea for convening this timely and
important meeting.

I also thank our briefers, Mr. Yury Fedotov and
Mrs. Florentina Adenike Ukonga, for their insightful
interventions, in particular on the practical steps to
tackle the threats arising from transnational organized
crime at sea.

Poland recognizes the importance of the seas and
oceans for our planet. We stress the need for their
sustainable use and we call for respect or, where
appropriate, the development of regulatory frameworks,
for instance on biodiversity beyond national jurisdiction.

Transnational organized crime at sea is recognized
as being among the most serious threats to the
security, stability and economic activity of numerous
coastal States. Maritime threats, which include illegal
activities such as piracy and human trafficking, may
also impact international peace and security. Moreover,
linkages have been identified between criminal groups
operating at sea and terrorist groups. We strongly
condemn the activity of all such groups and stress the
need for a comprehensive response and a concerted
effort, both at sea and on land, to tackle them and their
root causes. It is to be recognized that they require both
building maritime security, relevant legal frameworks
and law enforcement capacities and creating conditions
for sustainable prosperity.

We welcome the national, regional and
international initiatives to these aims, including those
taken, for example, by the United Nations Development
Programme, the International Maritime Organization
and Interpol, and in the framework of the Global
Maritime Crime Programme of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC). We also
commend the involvement of the private sector and
civil society, and encourage all stakeholders to develop
their cooperation and raise its efficiency further.

Poland actively contributes to maritime
safety and security, including to the fight against
transnational organized crime, which corresponds
with one of the priorities of Poland's Security Council
membership - namely, the strengthening of respect
for international law and the guiding principles of our
term: solidarity, responsibility and commitment. We do
so not only in the Baltic Sea to our north. Recognizing
the challenges and the role that regional organizations,
including the European Union (EU), have to play in the
Mediterranean Sea, we contribute, for instance, assets
to the EUNAVFOR Med Operation Sophia.

Poland notes with satisfaction the EU Naval Force
Operation ATALANTA and Combined Maritime Forces
operations, as well as the contributions of individual
States and regional actors to maritime security in
the Horn of Africa region. Additionally, the relevant
activities of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia, the EU capacity-building mission Somalia, the
African Union Mission in Somalia and particularly the
UNODC Maritime Crime Programme for the Horn of
Africa should be recognized. Welcoming all endeavours
aimed at strengthening security in the region, we
encourage their even closer coordination, including
through information exchange, joint operations and
increased legal cooperation.

The collective and coordinated efforts of the
countries of the Gulf of Guinea region, the Economic
Community of West African States and the Economic
Community of Central African States under the
regional maritime architecture, as well as their
cooperation with other partners, including UNODC,
also merit recognition and continuation. Developing
legal instruments and institutions and maritime law
enforcement operational capabilities, and strengthening
international cooperation in other regions, including
in the Indian and Pacific Oceans, as well as in the
Caribbean, should be continued as well.

Poland encourages States that are not parties to
relevant international instruments on combatting piracy
and organized crime at sea to consider acceding to them.
In this regard, the special role of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea, also known as the
"Constitution of the Oceans", should be highlighted.
We stress that all efforts in fighting maritime crime
should be consistent with applicable international law,
including the law of the sea, international human rights
law and relevant Security Council resolutions.
Poland also endorses the wider use of tools and
assistance in combatting maritime crime, available from
UNODC, among others. The mobilization of efforts
in preventing and disrupting such crime is crucial to
ensuring freedom of navigation, the rule of law and the
sustainable use of the seas and oceans. We encourage
and look forward to their further advancement and
remain committed to contributing to it.

