Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in French): In response to your appeal, Madam President,
I shall try to summarize my statement; the complete
text has been made available in the Council Chamber.

My country is particularly grateful to the
Committees established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004) not only for the
briefings that their Chairs regularly give the Security
Council on their activities, but also for the technical
assistance they provide our States in the subregional,
regional and international fight against terrorism.
Gabon firmly condemns terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations. Recent events right here in New
York confirm the persistence of the terrorist threat. Our
response to the scourge must be strong and
unambiguous. It should also reflect a front of
international solidarity whose only goal is to contain
and ultimately eliminate the terrorist threat in the
world.

It should be acknowledged that, thanks to the
work of the three Committees, the Security Council has
made real tools available to States that make it possible
for them to more effectively combat international
terrorism. My delegation would like to say a few words
about the functioning of the three Committees, as well
as to make some proposals aimed at improving their
effectiveness.

With regard to the 1267 Committee, my
delegation welcomes the excellent work it has done in
identifying individuals and entities associated with
Al-Qaida and the Taliban. We also appreciate the
enormous expertise that the Committee provides to
States in combating terrorism, in particular in such
diverse areas as terrorism-financing networks,
international transactions by suspected entities and
individuals, border, export and drug trafficking
controls and port security. The initiatives of the
Council and the Committee are very useful to the
international community, insofar as Al-Qaida's
activities are no longer limited to certain parts of the
world, but instead affect other countries and other
continents, including Africa.

With regard to the 1540 Committee, my
delegation duly appreciates its excellent work in the
area of nuclear non-proliferation. It seems that the
international community has made great progress in
deterring non-State actors from manufacturing,
acquiring, possessing, developing, transporting or
transferring nuclear, chemical and biological weapons.
In addition, thanks to the close cooperation it has
developed with numerous States, the 1540 Committee
has succeeded in gathering significant information on
the measures States have taken to that end. That has
been possible thanks to the frank and transparent
dialogue that the Committee has succeeded in
establishing with Member States. My delegation
encourages the Committee to continue that approach,
which facilitates greater participation by all actors
concerned on this issue, including non-governmental
organizations.

With regard to the 1373 Committee, my
delegation is pleased to note that, in January, the
Committee's members succeeded in streamlining
certain aspects of the Committee's working methods.
We welcome the idea of increasing the number of
thematic debates. That approach will make it possible
to consider important issues brought to the attention of
the Committee, and thereby address two objectives,
namely, heightening awareness among Member States
and increasing their participation in the consideration
of issues on the agenda. It is therefore the
responsibility of every Member State to ensure that
Security Council decisions enjoy all the necessary
support, to ensure that their impact is of a genuinely
transformative nature.

In that regard, strengthening the cooperation
between the 1540 Committee and regional and
subregional organizations is essential. For instance,
such cooperation could facilitate interaction between
regional and subregional organizations in the areas of
information exchange and harmonization of their
approaches and their needs in this area.

Beyond their specific nature, the tasks assigned to
these Committees are very closely linked. In that
regard, greater cooperation and exchanges of
information, both between them as well as with the
relevant United Nations entities, is absolutely
necessary to face the threats posed by international
terrorism. The three Committees should continually
carry out critical assessments of their respective efforts
in order to improve their effectiveness, thereby making
it possible for the Security Council to take more robust
measures in combating international terrorism.

For our part, Gabon will continue to support the
efforts of the Committees. We shall endeavour to
submit, in a timely manner, our reports on the
implementation of the Council's relevant resolutions in
the area of counter-terrorism, and of the related
guidelines.

