Mr. Brito (Portugal): Portugal fully supports the
statement to be delivered by Ambassador Jean de Ruyt
of Belgium on behalf of the European Union.
I would like at the outset to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Sergio
Vieira de Mello, and the Cabinet member for foreign
affairs of the Transitional Administration in East
Timor, Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta, for their comprehensive
briefings. It is particularly useful for us here in New
York to hear the latest developments in the transition of
East Timor to independence from those whose
everyday work is to ensure the thorough and smooth
implementation of this process. It is a process that, I
might add, should be led by the Security Council on the
basis of an objective assessment of the evolving
situation on the ground.

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his report and to welcome the progress achieved in
all areas by the activities of the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET)
since the last briefing to the Council. We note, in
particular, the progress in the recruitment of civil
servants and the transfer of authority to Timorese
people at all levels of administration. We strongly
believe that Timorization is not just a method for the
transfer of responsibility but also a matter of a transfer
of skills. It is not just a matter of recruiting people into
positions but mainly ensuring they have the minimum
capacity to perform their functions. We encourage
UNTAET to continue its efforts in this respect.

Portugal shares fully the Secretary-General's
view that after independence, East Timor will still
require

"substantial international support to be provided
through an integrated mission mandated by the
Security Council and funded from assessed
contributions." (S/2001/719, paragraph 52)

In that regard, we welcome the Secretary-
General's recommendations for a follow-up United
Nations presence in East Timor after independence,
comprising both security and civilian components. We
believe this is the only way to ensure continuity in
UNTAET's work as it becomes clear that the broad and
complex mandate handed down by the Security
Council will not be fully achieved by the time of
independence. Political and initiative stability are not
just something desirable for East Timor; they are vital
elements for guaranteeing the long-term security of the
country. It will therefore continue to be a responsibility
of the United Nations to ensure the establishment of a
democratic and viable State in East Timor. This would
be the best legacy that the United Nations, and this
Council in particular, could give to the people of East
Timor.
Portugal notes with particular interest the
involvement of the United Nations agencies and
international financial institutions in the work of
UNTAET, as well as in the planning process for the
post-independence presence of the United Nations.
However, useful and desirable further involvement of
United Nations agencies and other institutions in East
Timor has to be seen in a gradual and pragmatic way,
and not as an instant recipe to solve the complex
problems that East Timor has faced and will continue
to face for years after its independence. In this context,
we believe a number of core functions that emanate
directly from the Security Council mandate, contained
in resolutions 1272 (1999) and 1338 (2001), will still
be the responsibility of this Council.

We would also like to underline the Secretary-
General's remarks on both the progress achieved and
the plans for future training and the full deployment of
the Timorese police service. Success in this endeavour
is essential to ensuring an independent police force that
respects human rights and guarantees the
implementation of law and order in the framework of a
democratic system.

Portugal very much appreciates the Secretary-
General's objective analysis of and recommendations
on the military component of UNTAET. Despite some
improvements in the security situation, we note with
concern the remarks of the Secretary-General that

"The ability of militias to operate and train
unhindered in some areas continues to be of
concern." (S/2001/719, para. 50)

The Secretary-General also points out that the light
sentences handed out to suspects in the murder of three
workers of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees in Atambua

"have encouraged some hard-line militia elements
to plan the resumption of offensive operations
designed to destabilize the situation in East Timor
in the lead-up to the elections and independence".
(ibid., para. 49)

In this regard, Portugal welcomes the efforts of
the Government of Indonesia to address the problem of
the East Timorese refugees remaining in West Timor.
We encourage the Government of Indonesia to continue
such efforts and to find a comprehensive solution to
this problem. We welcome the commitment already
publicly expressed by the Indonesian Government to
allowing the return of the refugees at any given
moment, independently of the wish expressed by the
refugee population on the day of the registration
exercise that took place in June.

A careful approach to the planning for the future
readjustment of the military component of UNTAET is
particularly important at this point in time. As we are
meeting, the East Timorese political parties are in the
middle of their electoral campaign. It is their first free
and democratic campaign for the election of an
Assembly that will be charged with the most important
task in any newborn country: the writing of its
constitution. It is fundamental at this point that no
positions be taken by or signals sent from this Council
that could have a destabilizing effect on the electoral
environment. We should keep in mind the trauma and
fears that the Timorese generally associate with
elections and which are still very vivid in their
collective memory. The coming years, as well as the
writing of the constitution, are absolutely fundamental
not only to the consolidation of democracy and self-
government, but also to any decisions to be taken on
the future presence of the United Nations in the
country.

These are really the processes that we should be
focusing on at this point, as so much in future debates
depends on their outcome. It is never too much to
highlight the need for the constitutional process to go
smoothly. Sufficient time will need to be allowed for
discussions and consultations in order to ensure full
ownership of the process by the Timorese. We have
seen enough cases of virtually perfect constitutions,
drafted with the help of international experts, being
adopted but not actually working for the lack of local
ownership. It is too fundamental a debate to be rushed.

In conclusion, I would like to stress that we all
know that the United Nations is not going to stay in
East Timor indefinitely. We do not want that. The
Council does not want that and the Timorese, I believe,
do not want that either. UNTAET's mandate, however,
must be fully implemented and if that does not occur
before independence, then the United Nations and this
Council will need to carry on their engagement beyond
that time. This is not only a matter of moral debt to the
Timorese; what is at stake is the very responsibility and
credibility of the United Nations. Let us not forget for a
moment the starting point of this process. As someone
once noted, those who cannot remember the past are
condemned to repeat it.

Let me finally underline that, from our
perspective, UNTAET has done an outstanding job to
date. It has been a successful mission. Let us keep it
that way. I am sure that we all share the same purpose
and I can assure the Council that Portugal will continue
to do its utmost to support all the efforts to bring East
Timor to independence and to a lasting peace.

