Mr. Verbeke (Belgium): It is the usual practice
that, shortly after a Security Council mission returns to
New York, the head of the mission briefs the Council. I
will keep this briefing short. I will not give a
comprehensive overview of all the meetings and field
trips, but I will focus on some highlights of the
mission's visit to the region and share some
preliminary observations. Before I start, however, I
would like to thank all my colleagues for their
cooperation and valuable contribution to the mission. I
also would like to extend my gratitude to the members
of the Secretariat who accompanied us and played a
2
crucial role both in the preparation and in the execution
of the mission.

Let me first of all recall the nature of the mission.
As members know, the Security Council, following a
suggestion made by our Russian colleague, decided to
undertake a mission on the Kosovo issue. The mission
was essentially an information mission. As the terms of
reference pointed out, "in the light of the recent
submission of the United Nations Special Envoy's set
of proposals to the Security Council, the Council has
decided to give its members the opportunity to inform
themselves on the situation on the ground"; the
purpose of the mission was "to allow the Security
Council to have an informed understanding of the
political, social and economic situation in Kosovo",
and that through a balanced and comprehensive
programme of meetings and field trips.

The mission started with meetings in Brussels on
Wednesday, 25 April with the Secretary General of
NATO, Jaap de Hoop Scheffer; the European Union's
Special Envoy for Status Talks, Stephan Lehne; and
European Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn. Their
messages were quite similar. For them, the status quo is
untenable, expectations are high, and delay in the
determination of Kosovo's status could put Kosovo and
the region at risk. They also stated their full support for
Ahtisaari's recommendations and settlement proposal.
From the briefings, it appeared that the both the
European Union and NATO are prepared to assume
their responsibilities in the framework of Kosovo's
future status. Planning is ongoing, but such planning,
they insisted, does not prejudge the final outcome of
the future status process. During the lunch hosted by
the European Union in Pristina, details of that planning
process were provided. Finally, the representatives of
both organizations stressed that the final decision on
the status of Kosovo should be endorsed by a Security
Council resolution under Chapter VII.

In Belgrade on Thursday, 26 April, the mission's
main interlocutors - President Tadie, Prime Minister
Kostunica, members of the negotiating team, the
President of the Coordination Centre for Kosovo, and
almost all members of the party caucuses - firmly
rejected the Kosovo settlement proposal and any
solution that would entail any form of independence
for Kosovo. Instead, they argued for substantial
autonomy of Kosovo within Serbia and under
international supervision. They also called for further
negotiations. Another recurring theme in our meetings
07-32817
in Belgrade was the lack of full implementation of
resolution 1244 (1999), in particular with regard to the
return of internally displaced persons. According to
Belgrade's authorities, only 2-5 per cent of internally
displaced persons have been able to return since 1999.

The issue of return was also regularly raised
during the mission's visit to Kosovo. Its complex
nature was further illustrated by field trips to Svinjare
and Brestovik. Several reasons were given to explain
the limited number of returnees: security concerns, the
poor economic situation, the lack of access to social
services, as well as procedural obstacles.

In Pristina on Friday, 27 and Saturday, 28 April,
the mission had the opportunity to meet with a broad
spectrum of actors, both international and local. The
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Riicker, underlined that the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) had
achieved everything that was achievable. It had
established Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government, rule of law structures and institutions
required for a market economy. According to the
Special Representative, further progress was dependent
on a resolution of Kosovo's status.

That assessment was echoed by the
representatives of the Kosovo Unity Team, including
President Sejdiu and Prime Minister Ceku. They
expressed their unanimous support for the Kosovo
settlement proposal and status recommendation, and
stressed their commitment to implement the settlement
proposal in its entirety. They underlined that Kosovo
was committed to a multiethnic State whose goal
would be integration into Euro-Atlantic structures. A
similar message was expressed by the ministers of the
Kosovo Government, Assembly leaders and leaders
from minority communities. For Kosovo Serb
representatives, however, including Bishop Artemije of
the Serbian Orthodox Church and Kosovo Serbs we
met with in northern Mitrovica, independence was
clearly not an option.

The mission concluded its visit with a meeting
with Special Envoy Ahtisaari in Vienna, which gave
mission participants the opportunity to have an
informal exchange on various aspects of his settlement
proposal.

I would like to end with some provisional
observations.
07-32817
First, I think, the mission lived up to its
expectations. It did indeed provide its participants with
an opportunity to obtain first-hand information on the
situation in Kosovo. As a result, the concrete reality of
the Kosovo issue has become clear - more than
before - instead of being a rather abstract problem.

Secondly, Kosovo's society is still recovering
from the wounds inflicted by the conflict. To a large
extent, Kosovo Albanian and Kosovo Serb
communities live separately from each other. There are
also differences in the way both communities look to
the future. While the Kosovo Albanian community is
confident, the Kosovo Serb community is more
apprehensive about its prospects for the future.

Thirdly, the commitment and readiness conveyed
by Kosovo's political leaders to build a multi-ethnic
Kosovo for all its communities was encouraging. The
creation of such a multi-ethnic society will, however,
require substantial effort.

Fourthly, over the years the Provisional
Institutions and UNMIK have made significant
progress in the implementation of the standards for
Kosovo, for example, in establishing Provisional
Institutions that are functional and that are founded on
the principles of ownership and accountability. The
Provisional Institutions expressed their commitment to
continue and strengthen the implementation of the
standards, in particular those relating to the conditions
of life of Kosovo's minority communities.

Fifthly, as regards the critical issue of the return
of internally displaced persons, the numbers of
sustainable returns continue to be very low. Although
structures for return are in place, the lack of economic
prospects, difficulties associated with freedom of
movement and security-related concerns were
mentioned as defining reasons why returns remain
limited. Opposing points of view exist on whether a
definition of the status of Kosovo would facilitate or
hinder the returns process.

Sixthly, with regard to status, the positions of the
sides on the Kosovo settlement proposal remain far
apart. While the Belgrade authorities and all Kosovo
Serb interlocutors remained firmly opposed to the
Kosovo settlement proposal and rejected a solution that
would entail any form of independence, Kosovo
Albanian representatives expressed clear and
unambiguous support for the Kosovo settlement
proposal and recommendation on Kosovo's future
3
status. Expectations among the majority Kosovo
Albanian population for an early resolution of
Kosovo's future status are very high.

Finally, the mission noted the importance stressed
by many of promoting a European perspective for the
region, including for Kosovo. These European
prospects can provide direction for future political and
economic development and thus contribute to
consolidating stability in Kosovo and, by extension, in
the region as a whole.
