Mr. Henze (Germany): Germany is a sponsor of the
draft before the Council. We welcome the fact that recent
developments have made it possible to suspend certain
sanctions against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
(FRY), not for 75 or 100, but for 180 days.

The latest report of the Mission of the International
Conference on the Former Yugoslavia (ICFY) finds that
the FRY is continuing to meet its commitment to close
the border between its territory and the areas of the
Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina under the control of
the Bosnian Serb forces. This is the prerequisite for
further suspension of the sanctions. Today's significant
prolongation of the suspension period constitutes the
Council's acknowledgment that the FRY leadership has
recently taken some important steps that may have helped
to bring us closer to a comprehensive political solution of
the conflict in the Balkans.

Let us be clear that today's decision, favorable as it
is, does entail expectations as to the FRY's future
conduct. As the FRY continues to bear a heavy
responsibility for the conflict in the former Yugoslavia, it
is only logical that it must help to solve the ongoing
conflict. It is therefore crucial that the FRY should stick
to its present course. That means, firstly, that it should
refrain completely from military assistance to the Bosnian
Serbs, be this assistance overt or covert, direct or indirect.
Secondly, it means that the FRY should lend firm,
constructive and sustained support for the promising

 

peace effort currently under way. It should not be ignored
that today's decision is still a temporary one.

The border closure constitutes an essential element of
the ongoing peace effort and, consequently, Germany
attaches great political importance to it. As an expression
of this position, we have just decided to strengthen our
contribution to the ICFY Mission by making available an
additional group of 10 observers.

Let me conclude by recalling how gloomy the
situation was when we came together on 5 July this year to
adopt resolution 1003 (1995), today's predecessor text. At
that time, the suspension period could be no more than 75
days. Only against this background does one realize fully
the progress that has been made, and which makes a 180-
day suspension possible. We are under no illusion about the
difficulties still lying ahead on the way to a comprehensive
political solution, a solution that would include the lifting
of all sanctions imposed on the FRY. But we must finally
succeed in helping to bring about a situation where Serbs,
Croats and Bosniaks will again be able to live together in
peace. We are looking forward to such a time when the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro)
will again find a respected place in the international
community.

