Mr. Bencosme Castafios (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Mr. Voronkov, Under- Secretary-General, United Nations Office of Counter- Terrorism, and Ms. Coninsx, Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, for their briefings on the tenth report of the Secretary- General (S/2020/95). We also thank Ms. Freij for her moving testimony. While there has been significant progress in the fight against terrorism, in particular the loss of territorial control previously held by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh) in the Syrian Arab Republic and the impact on its leadership from various operations, we remain extremely concerned about the ability of those groups to mutate into new modalities for inflicting pain and fear, in their zeal to demonstrate their relevance through inspired attacks and regional affiliates, becoming a covert network with aspirations of carrying out large-scale attacks. We continue to pay special attention to the threat posed by the number of foreign terrorist fighters at the disposal of terrorist groups, which take advantage of porous borders to carry out insurgent attacks on officials, infrastructure and checkpoints. Such attacks have claimed the lives of hundreds of soldiers and innocent civilians. Weapons and funding continue to be provided to those groups, which seek to consolidate their actions and cooperate with transnational organized crime networks. The Dominican Republic again strongly condemns all terrorist acts as unjustifiable, barbaric and cowardly. We therefore extend our sincere condolences to the families and the countries affected by the attacks. We have recently noted with astonishment the increase in the number and scale of attacks perpetrated against members of the security and defence forces of Mali, the Niger and Burkina Faso. As we have previously stated in the Council, we agree on the need to urgently and holistically address, on the basis of experience and best practices and with greater collaboration among Member States, the issues of protection, repatriation, prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration of the most vulnerable, in particular women and children with ties to those terrorist groups, who are stranded in conflict zones, crowded camps and detention centres. In that regard, we are concerned about the deterioration of the humanitarian situation in the camps and detention centres, such as in Al-Hol camp in Syria, whose population, which is more than 70 per cent women and children, is exposed to deplorable conditions and a lack not only of basic food, water, medical care and education services but also of adequate support programmes to counter the risk of exploitation and radicalization. We acknowledge the challenges Member States face in conducting comprehensive risk assessments, minimizing stigmatization and determining possible criminal responsibility, while safeguarding and adhering to international law, including international human rights, humanitarian and refugee law. Consequently, we agree on the importance, in implementing repatriation, rehabilitation and reintegration strategies, of continuing to improve the design of policies that are focused on the needs of the individual, as well as evidence-based, gender-sensitive and age-sensitive, with particular emphasis on the condition of victims, which should take precedence in the treatment of children, as stipulated in the Madrid Guiding Principles and other protocols, . Finally, we commend the Office of Counter- Terrorism, the Office on Drugs and Crime and the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate for their work with Member States to strengthen their counter-terrorism policies and measures, as well as the processes for the repatriation, prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration of foreign terrorist fighters and their dependants, in order to reverse the cycle of violence and victimization that makes it impossible for societies to function effectively and to prevent the spread of violent extremism that leads to terrorism.
