I would like to thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, Mr. Olof Skoog, Head of the Delegation of the European Union, and Mr. Philippe Kridelka, Permanent Representative of Belgium and Security Council Facilitator for the format under resolution 2231 format (2015), for their briefings. The past year has not been easy for any of us, and not only because of the coronavirus. Beginning in June, attempts by the United States to punish Iran at any cost - or rather, to punish a regime that is inconvenient for the United States - have become reckless and increasingly irrational. Our partners in Washington, D.C., first tried to force Security Council members to impose an unprecedented harsh arms embargo against Iran by means of a new draft resolution (S/2020/797), without any convincing grounds. Then they claimed that they had the right to unilaterally reinstate the United Nations sanctions against Iran, which had been in effect until 2015, through a so-called snapback. Our American partners have been tightening the screws against Tehran almost daily, seeking to convince themselves and the rest of the world that a policy of maximum pressure on Iran was the only way to solve all the issues that had arisen. All those attempts failed. I would like to stress that this file was the rare case in the Security Council where its members were overwhelmingly unanimous in opposing the United States. That is a very telling point. There are certainly varying and nuanced positions among Council members in their assessments of the Iranian dossier, including among our colleagues with regard to the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA), but all of them objectively pale in comparison to the degree of absurdity and destructiveness that the United States has shown over the past six months in effectively opposing all the other members of the Council. To its credit, the Council did not succumb to provocation by Washington, and acted exactly as it should by remaining committed to international law and its obligations to strengthen international peace and security, strictly following the letter and spirit of resolution 2231 (2015) and employing common sense. We are proud to note that, in those six months, the authority of the Security Council in relation to the Iranian case has only increased. Since there has been no snapback, the international legal regime established by resolution 2231 (2015) remains fully in place and the document itself continues to be implemented in accordance with the previously agreed parameters and time frames. The illegitimacy of the claim of the United States to launch the snapback process has been confirmed by 13 Council members. The Presidents of the Council for August and September clearly indicated that they were not authorized to take any follow-up action. The Secretary-General unequivocally took the same position. The Russian Federation, which assumed the presidency of the Council on 1 October, also publicly stated that the snapback would not take place. The Foreign Ministers of the countries participating in the JCPOA put the matter to rest just yesterday - 21 December - in their joint statement at the end of their meeting. Those are the facts. Whether our American colleagues like them or not is another story. But they will still have to accept the reality determined by the collective political will of the majority of the members of the Security Council. Another uncomfortable reality for our American colleagues is the fact that the special regime for arms transfers to or from the Islamic Republic of Iran expired on 18 October. We regret that the process of "psychological adaptation" by our colleagues to this reality is taking too long. We see those phantom pains in the Fifth Committee of the General Assembly, where the United States delegation is trying to secure in the draft United Nations budget for next year financing for a sanctions committee that exists only in its imagination. We hope that a majority of General Assembly members will be just as reasonable as Council members and reject those absurd attempts. The tenth report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/1177) on the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) provides yet further confirmation that the snapback does not exist in reality. The report makes it abundantly clear that the only State that claims otherwise is the United States. The others regard those claims as devoid of any legal basis, and therefore without any political, legal or practical consequences. In particular, we welcome the call to fully support and use the procurement channel, which continues to be a key confidence-building measure in the context of the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015). We note with satisfaction that, in his report, the Secretary-General regrets the withdrawal of the United States from the JCPOA and the subsequent steps that followed those actions as contrary to the objectives of resolution 2231 (2015). Equally important is the Secretary-General's conclusion that such actions could have a negative impact on the implementation of the resolution by other parties. Nevertheless, the Secretary-General's report still cannot be called fully balanced. The problem is the same as before: one side cannot be called to return to full implementation of an agreement without the other, especially since it is clear to all of us that Iran's retreat from its commitments is a direct response to the destructive and provocative actions of the United States. Moreover, the Iranian side warned about those consequences in advance, as stipulated in annex A, paragraph 26, of the JCPOA. We regret that the United Nations leadership again lacked the courage to clearly issue a call for the United States to return to full and unconditional compliance with resolution 2231 (2015) and the JCPOA, as well as to rescind the steps the United States has taken that run counter to them. For the second time, we are struck by the cynical language of the Secretary- General's report on the assassination of the Iranian representatives. The report contains not a word of condemnation of those acts or any mention of their potential negative consequences. Just as in the case of Qasem Soleimani, there is not a word of regret about the death of Mohsen Fakhrizadeh, save the mention that he was on the sanctions list. It is hard to call it anything but cowardice. It is also difficult for us to find an explanation for the Secretary-General's sudden increased interest in the activities of the International Atomic Energy Agency on the Iran dossier, in particular with regard to monitoring the implementation of the Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement. We have not seen that mentioned in previous reports, and there has generally been an understanding - as far as we know - that the Vienna platform is being discussed in Vienna alone, as New York lacks the expertise for that. As the Council is well aware, for a year now Russia has been calling on the Secretariat to strictly follow its administrative and technical mandate regarding the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015). We do not support any investigations under its auspices, or any other non-transparent activity by the Secretariat behind the backs of Security Council member States. The staff of the Secretariat simply do not have the authority to carry out such activities. We would ask our United States colleagues, who are trying to ignore that fact, to duly consider it. The Secretary-General's report has further illuminated the futility of attempts to expose Iran's violations of annex B of resolution 2231 (2015) on the special procedure for arms transfers to and from Iran, as well as of the section on missiles. In that regard, we would like to emphasize once again that attempts to portray Iran as the source of all troubles in the region and a threat to its security lack any clear justification. If we do not provoke Iran and do not exacerbate the situation, then the problems in the region would be considerably fewer. We are grateful to the Belgian Facilitator for his efforts to organize the work of the 2231 format. The period of his mandate has been extremely turbulent. However, Belgian diplomacy has proved effective in taking very seriously its responsibilities as Facilitator. That is what led to the strict factual reporting of the work of the format. We know that compromise on the Facilitator's most recent report (see S/2020/1244) was not easy. We cannot say that the final version can be considered fully balanced, as the text would have needed to reflect Tehran's position more fully and fairly. We hope that the future Facilitator will consider those shortcomings and serve as an honest broker by giving the parties equal opportunity to express their views in the report. In Russia there is a saying: "it is much easier to break than to build". Over the past six months, we have seen with our own eyes the fragile balance of interests and checks and balances that underpin the 2015 nuclear deal. So far, we have been able to preserve the deal through our joint efforts. We hope that the United States side will eventually reach the right conclusions for itself. No one asked the United States to take on the role of world policeman. Today attempts to conform to it look anachronistic. So does an irresponsible and arrogant policy of unilateral pressure that will ultimately backfire on its practitioner. That is why the most logical step for the United States would be to fully and unconditionally return to the agreements previously reached under the JCPOA, without preconditions. We trust that the new United States Administration will realize that and take the right steps in the near future. The whole world would benefit from that. We also pay tribute to the statement of the Iranian leadership that it is ready to return immediately to the full implementation of the JCPOA as soon as the United States does so. Of course, the situation in the Persian Gulf cannot be seen only through the prism of the JCPOA. Steps are needed to strengthen mutual trust among neighbours of the region, prevent crises and mitigate the risk of military clashes. To that end, Russia proposes a regional dialogue on security issues in the Persian Gulf. In October, under our presidency, the Security Council held a separate open meeting on this topic (see S/2020/1037), which allowed us to ascertain that there is a demand from virtually all players for finding real ways to stabilize the situation in the Persian Gulf. Once again, I would like to emphasize that regional security issues are a separate topic, above and beyond the JCPOA situation. However, that does not diminish its importance. We hope that we will be able to continue that discussion in the near future - not in general terms but with a view to reaching concrete solutions. The Gulf region, it seems to us, is ripe for a pragmatic and reasonable conversation among all interested parties. For our part, we are ready to do everything we can to start such a dialogue as soon as possible. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the delegations of all five countries leaving the Council on 1 January for working together. We are grateful for their contribution to the work of the subsidiary bodies of the Security Council that they chaired. It is a pity that we were not able to meet in person, because the occasion undoubtedly warranted it. I wish our colleagues good luck in all of their endeavours. We will continue our work together in the General Assembly and other United Nations organs. Second statement by the First Deputy Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation to the United Nations, Dmitry Polyanskiy [Original: Russian] I am compelled to take the floor once again, although I had not planned to do so, to respond to my German colleague, Mr. Christoph Heusgen. During his time on the Security Council, he seems to have developed a peculiar addiction to criticizing Russia at every meeting, even if it is not relevant to the topic at hand. I hope that unhealthy symptom will disappear after | January. Mr. Heusgen quite inappropriately mentioned the Navalny blogger story a few minutes ago and recommended that we read the recent piece in Der Spiegel. We read the press, of course, but we do not take journalists' claims as the absolute truth, especially when they rely on sources long known to be a kind of journalistic arm of Western intelligence services. We trust only facts that are not in doubt. In this case, however, the degree of absurdity of the journalistic assertions he mentions is simply off the scale. It is even embarrassing that Mr. Heusgen, a political diplomat with a reputation as a serious, yet very emotional, man, would promote such base and unprofessional nonsense. Perhaps the many years of intensive reading of The New York Times is taking its toll. Not everyone's sanity can handle the strain of fake news. We warned him about that. As for the so-called Navalny poisoning case, I should like to remind our German colleagues that both our numerous specific questions to the German side as well as the five official requests for legal assistance from the Prosecutor General's Office of the Russian Federation remain unanswered. It is therefore ridiculous to say that the German side is taking that story seriously. I ask him to please keep that in mind as he plays along with Mr. Navalny's new phantasmagorical revelations. Sooner or later, that smear campaign unleashed by Berlin at his behest will have to be answered for. Finally, I would like to leave Mr. Heusgen with an aphorism from recently departed writer Mikhail Zhvanetsky: "What a pity that you are finally leaving." We will honestly miss him. I wish him good luck in whatever career he decides to pursue and all the best.
