The President: I will now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of the United States.

I want to begin especially by thanking Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Annabi for his
dedication to Haiti and his very capable leadership of
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH). I am also very delighted that Prime
Minister Pierre-Louis of Haiti is here with us today. We
look forward to deepening our partnership with her and
our work together.

I want to warmly again thank President Clinton
for coming to the Council today. The United States is
deeply honoured by his appointment as United Nations
Special Envoy for Haiti, and we are proud that he is
taking up this important mission to extend and expand
our common efforts to help the people of Haiti.

Last year's hurricanes and food crisis have meant
major challenges and serious setbacks, but real
progress is still being made in Haiti. The United States
is pleased to see increased political cooperation, which
allowed for senatorial elections and the passage of
several key pieces of legislation. We continue to urge
the Government of Haiti to deepen its efforts to foster
an all-inclusive political dialogue, and we thank
MINUSTAH for its ongoing support of the electoral
process in Haiti.

The United States also congratulates the
Inter-American Development Bank and Prime Minister
Pierre-Louis on the successful conclusion of the
14 April donors conference in Washington, D.C., which
the Bank reports has resulted in $353 million in new
pledges for Haiti. The United States pledged
$57 million in new funding, including $20 million in
indirect budget support.

Let me again stress the need for the Government
of Haiti and its partners to continue their good efforts
to advance economic growth and development in the
country, including by supporting the country's plan for
reconstruction and economic recovery. At the
conference in Washington, D.C., the United States
welcomed donor commitments to help the Government
of Haiti address the difficult and demanding conditions
that dominate the daily lives of far too many Haitians.
We thank our partners for their commitment to tackling
these problems, even as we call upon them to keep up
the momentum to alleviate ongoing suffering.

For our part, my Government again underscores
its own commitment to partnering more closely with
the Government of Haiti and other donors to better
respond to the urgent needs of the Haitian people. Real
gains have been made in improving security in Haiti,
but we are acutely aware of the potential threats to
Haiti's stability, including transnational crime, gang
violence, drugs and civil unrest. In Haiti, as elsewhere,
as we have heard more than once today, there can be no
security without development and there can be no
sustained development without security.

The United States remains optimistic about the
gradual improvements in the capabilities of the Haitian
National Police (HNP) to meet these security
challenges, but the HNP still lacks the capacity,
training and equipment to respond independently to the
full range of threats that Haiti now confronts. So we
again commend MINUSTAH, as well as bilateral
donors, for their ongoing role in maintaining stability
and providing technical support and contributions to
build up the HNP. We have also renewed our efforts to
respond to the security priorities of the Government of
Haiti to help foster the security and stability that the
people of Haiti need and deserve.

To complement these efforts on the security front,
we are also looking closely at our investments on the
development front. Guided by development priorities
set out by the Government of Haiti at the donors
conference, we are looking at ways to make the United
States a more effective donor, investor and bilateral
partner with Haiti. We continue to work with the
Haitian people to strengthen the rule of law and the
security sector, expand human security, extend
economic development, deepen good governance and
reinforce the stability required for the eventual
drawdown of peacekeeping forces.

The United States therefore firmly backs the
Secretary-General's recommendation that
MINUSTAH's mandate be extended for another year,
including the adjustments he proposes to its force
configuration. We remain optimistic about the
advances that have been made to the consolidation plan
over the past year and we remain committed both to the
Mission and to Haiti itself. We urge our partners again
to maintain their own commitments and to deepen our
common efforts to stabilize the country.

As the Secretary-General rightly notes, the
Haitian people have the primary responsibility for their
own country's future and fortunes. But the continued
engagement of the wider international community is
essential if we are to seize this historic opportunity for
progress and bring a brighter future to Haiti.

Finally, on behalf of the United States, let me
again convey my appreciation to the Special
Representative and let me again salute the men and
women of MINUSTAH for their bravery and
dedication under the admirable leadership of Brazil and
with the steady support of all of the troop- and police-
contributing countries. Haiti is our neighbour and
friend. We look forward to working together as a team
with Haiti at the helm to produce results that will better
the lives of the people of Haiti and to spur on progress
that will endure.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of
Guatemala.

