Mr. Ipo (Cote D'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the convening ofthis meeting on the
humanitarian situation in Yemen and thanks Mr. Mark
Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, for his very
thorough briefing on the latest developments in the
country's humanitarian situation.

According to United Nations reports, Yemen is
now facing the worst humanitarian crisis in the world.
Millions of children and families across Yemen may
soon find themselves without food, clean drinking
water and sanitation due to the continued conflict,
particularly the fighting around the port city of
Al-Hudaydah and the worsening economic crisis. An
additional 1.2 million people might soon need basic
water and sanitation assistance, according to estimates
by humanitarian agencies. Families who can no longer
afford basic staples could soon join the 18.5 million
people already affected by food insecurity.

Cote d'Ivoire remains particularly concerned about
continued fighting, particularly around the port of
Al-Hudaydah, the main gateway to approximately 90 per
cent of humanitarian aid and 70 per cent of the country's
imports. The clashes over control of that strategic port
are hampering the delivery of humanitarian aid and
causing the prices of basic necessities to soar.

Given the serious deterioration of the humanitarian
situation in Yemen, Cote d'Ivoire calls on all the parties
to cease hostilities immediately. Convinced that there
is no alternative to a political settlement of the crisis in
Yemen, my country urges the warring parties to resume
negotiations under the Special Envoy's peace plan. My
country also calls on conflicting parties to remove all
obstacles to the delivery of humanitarian aid to people
in need.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire encourages the parties
to the conflict to take ownership of the peace plan
proposed by Mr. Griffiths. We welcome the work he
has done and call on him to continue his mediation for
an effective resumption of inter-Yemeni dialogue.

