Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Mr. Griffiths and Mr. Lowcock
for keeping us informed about the situation in Yemen,
particularly with regard to the implementation of
the Stockholm Agreement and Yemen's difficult
humanitarian situation. We have taken note of the
progress on the political front that Mr. Griffiths has
described, and we commend his efforts to advance the
implementation of the Agreement.

We firmly condemn the violent acts committed by
both parties and call for an end to the hostilities and
provocations that are jeopardizing the achievements
that have been made, especially the ceasefire, which
requires an absolute commitment on both sides. We
are pleased with the efforts that the parties have made
to participate in and agree on the first phase of the
withdrawal of fighters from Al-Hudaydah governorate,
which will enable the United Nations to monitor the
ceasefire more effectively. We thank the parties for the
progress they have made in finalizing a list ofprisoners,
which is a step forward in the implementation of the
prisoner exchange agreement signed in Stockholm.
We believe those actions will have a positive effect
on the efforts to create trust between the parties, and
we congratulate Mr. Griffiths and the International
Committee of the Red Cross for their excellent work in
that regard.

We should not forget that the ultimate goal of all
the diplomatic efforts being made with regard to this
conflict is to reach a political solution that will promote a
sustainable ceasefire throughout the country. And while
we understand that all the attention has been focused on
implementing the Al-Hudaydah agreement, owing to the
importance of the city's port, it is important to ensure
that we do not lose sight of other parts of the country
where the war has given the populations affected no let-
up. In that regard, we emphatically urge the parties to
the conflict to respect international humanitarian law
and refrain from jeopardizing the lives and safety of
civilians whose hopes ofliving in peace and rebuilding
their lives are little by little being restored, thanks to
the agreements that have been reached.

In his statement Mr. Lowcock discussed the
most worrying aspect of this conflict, the terrible
humanitarian situation, which after so many years of
war and economic and institutional collapse is affecting
millions of people. This must be the main point of
reference for all of our actions. The parties must
guarantee immediate access for humanitarian workers
to the Red Sea Mills in Al-Hudaydah, for the lives of
thousands depend on it. We cannot allow starvation
to be used as a weapon of war, and we hope that the
agreements arrived at this weekend can finally ensure
that the people affected receive the food they need.

We have listened to Mr. Lowcock's call to secure
sufficient funds for the humanitarian assistance and
protection that Yemenis so desperately need, and in that
regard, we echo his call to the donor conference to raise
funds to be held in Geneva on 26 February. We hope
the conference will meet expectations and enable us to
finance the national response plan for 2019 designed
to supply assistance based on humanitarian principles
and thereby mitigate the disastrous situation of the
people of Yemen. We reiterate that the Dominican
Republic remains committed to contributing to
the Council's efforts to implement the Stockholm
Agreement through the Redeployment Coordination
Committee and the United Nations Mission to support
the Hudaydah Agreement.

Lastly, after the signing of the Agreement, the
Council has remained united with regard to the
situation afflicting the people of Yemen. Only the
express political will of the parties can enable us to put
an end to this scourge, and the international community
is waiting for it.

