Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, I would like to thank Mr. Tomislav Nikolic',
President ofthe Republic of Serbia, for his presence and
participation here today. At the same time, I would like
to thank Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
for his informative briefing.

One of the main principles of the foreign policy of
Uruguay is respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of States. In exercising their sovereignty,
States are free to alter their borders, provided that it
is in keeping with international law and done through
peaceful means and agreements that have been freely
consented to. Uruguay takes this opportunity to
reaffirm compliance with resolution 1244 (1999),
adopted by the Security Council.

We express our concern about reference in the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/95/Rev.1) to
the fact that tensions between Belgrade and Pristina
have reached worrying levels. Uruguay calls for a
committed dialogue that would lead to stability in the
region, as well as progress and an improvement in the
situation of the people living in the area. I hope that
the high-level meetings that took place in January and
early February within the framework of the Belgrade
dialogue, facilitated by the European Union, will yield
positive results in order to reduce the tension that arose
during the period covered by the report.

The topic of human rights should be at the centre of
any reconciliation process. In order to lay the foundation
for the future, we must heal the wounds of the past.
In that respect, it is crucial to clarify the situation of
all missing persons. Also crucial to the reconciliation
process is resolving the situation of the internally
displaced persons and guaranteeing conditions for their
safe return.

Another fundamental aspect that I would like to
point out is the question of migrants. In that respect,
considering the special circumstances in the Balkans as
a route for migrants, I would like to stress the necessity
of protecting the rights of migrants and refugees. We
therefore welcome the statement by the Secretary-
General that asylum seekers in the zone have been dealt
with in accordance with international humanitarian law.

I would like to acknowledge the important work
that is done on the ground by UNMIK, the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo and the Kosovo
Force, which are acting in accordance with resolution
1244 (1999). I would also like to highlight the recent
campaign carried out by the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe on the protection of
journalists in Kosovo with a View to promoting the
freedom of the press and ending the insecurity those
professionals often face, as well as the impunity enjoyed
by their attackers.

There are many areas where we are seeing progress,
and there are many that still require work. However,
with the commitment of political leaders and both
communities and with the support of the Council and
the international system, it will be possible to achieve
peace and security in a stable environment in which the
communities can coexist peacefully.

