Mr. Haidara (Nigeria): We thank you, Madam, for
convening today's meeting, which provides us with an
opportunity to reflect on recent developments in the
Middle East. We thank Assistant Secretary-General
Jenea for his informative briefing.

Nigeria aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Venezuela on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

After years of tension, we welcome the decision
of Hamas to accept the conditions of the Ramallah
Government to reunite the West Bank and Gaza into
one entity, under one law and one Government. In
that regard, Nigeria welcomes the signing of the
intra-Palestinian agreement in Cairo on 12 October.
We commend the President of the State of Palestine and
all other concerned stakeholders on that achievement.
We particularly express our deep appreciation to the
Government of Egypt for its crucial role in facilitating
the agreement. We believe that the development will
facilitate in lifting the closures of the crossings, while
addressing Israel's legitimate security concerns,
and unlock international support for Gaza's growth,
stability and prosperity, which is critical to efforts to
achieve lasting peace.

It is essential to continue to engage with Israel,
the Palestinian authorities and the region in support of
that process. In the meantime, it is essential to address
the humanitarian situation in Gaza, which has had an
impact on the health and the social and economic well-
being of the population. In that regard, we encourage
the international community to act accordingly. We
seize the opportunity of this debate to underline that
continued settlement activity on the part of Israel,
which is illegal under international law, is undermining
the two-State solution. It is a matter of great concern
to us. The two-State solution lies at the heart of the
Middle East peace process. It has the support of the
international community and is widely acknowledged
as the path to lasting peace between the two sides. We
urge the Israeli political leadership to demonstrate its
commitment to the two-State solution.

We call on States with influence over the parties to
encourage them to re-engage in dialogue on the basis
of relevant Security Council resolutions, the Madrid
principles, the Middle East Quartet road map, the Arab
Peace Initiative and existing agreements between the
parties. Nigeria reaffirms its unwavering support for a
two-State solution, with Israel and Palestine existing
side by side in peace and security.

