Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation is pleased to see you, Sir, presiding over our
work for the month of December. We are sure that your
skills, experience and leadership and the support of
your delegation will contribute to the success of our
work. I would also like to thank the Austrian
delegation and Ambassador Mayr-Harting for their
excellent work in November, which enabled us to
successfully complete the Council's work.

I wish to begin by thanking the Presidents and
Prosecutors of the International Tribunals for Rwanda
and the Former Yugoslavia for their briefings. Costa
Rica acknowledges, and thanks them for, their efforts
to pursue the completion strategies set in resolutions
1503 (2003) and 1534 (2004).

Based on the conviction that lasting peace is
inseparable from justice, Costa Rica has supported all
efforts of the international community to strengthen the
international criminal justice system. We have thus
contributed to the development and consolidation of a
cluster of institutions, one that is new in international
law, to prevent the most serious crimes, stop impunity
and guarantee redress.

The Security Council Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals has achieved significant
progress in its debate on the essential functions which
should remain active once the Tribunals complete their
pending cases. Costa Rica stresses the importance of
the agreements reached on the need for the Tribunals to
transfer new cases to national tribunals where
appropriate and on the need to continue to strengthen
capacity in the affected countries. There is no doubt
that an important part of the legacy of both Tribunals
will be their achievements in transferring skills and
building capacity in the judicial systems of countries
under their jurisdiction.

Despite this progress, Costa Rica regrets that the
necessary consensus has not been reached on the
elements of a new resolution which should provide
greater precision on the closure of both Tribunals and
agreement on the functions of the residual mechanism
or mechanisms.

Costa Rica appreciates and is grateful for the
Secretariat's report on the administrative and budgetary
aspects of the options for possible locations for the
archives of the Tribunals and the seat of the residual
mechanism(s) for the Tribunals (S/2009/258). We
acknowledge that the archives are the property of the
United Nations, but we would like to stress their
condition as historical memory and instruments of
reconciliation and peace, which belong fundamentally
to the countries under the jurisdiction of the Tribunals.

Before closing, I would like to draw attention to
the priority nature of the arrest of fugitives for the
completion of the work of the Tribunals. Without the
prosecution of these fugitives, particularly Kabuga,
Mladic and Hadzic, the implementation of the
Tribunals' mandates would be incomplete. Costa Rica
calls on all States to cooperate with the Tribunals and
to comply with Council resolutions and provide any
information that would indicate the whereabouts of the
fugitives.

On taking stock of the work of the two
international Tribunals, we would like to acknowledge
the steps taken by Croatia to improve its cooperation
with the ICTY, and we hope that they will be
successful. Costa Rica acknowledges and thanks the
judges, Prosecutors and staff for their contributions and
supports them in their efforts to implement the
completion strategies in the most efficient way
possible. We also call for the consideration of measures
to curb the turnover of technical staff of the Tribunals,
in the hope that its staff will obtain the same
contractual terms and conditions as other United
Nations officials.

