Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
should like at the outset to express our appreciation to
South Africa for having requested, on behalf of the
countries of the Non-Aligned Movement, that the
Council hold this emergency open debate. I should like
also to thank you, Mr. President, for having made
prompt arrangements in this respect.

The absence for so long of a solution to the
question of Iraq has not served peace and stability in
the Gulf region or the authority and credibility of the
Security Council, nor has it been conducive to
improving the humanitarian situation in Iraq. An early
and appropriate settlement of the Iraqi question is the
important and urgent task facing the international
community and the United Nations in particular.

To hold an open debate and earnestly heed the
views of a large number of Member States under such
circumstances will undoubtedly enable the Council
better to handle the Iraqi question. The Chinese
Government has consistently maintained that Iraq
should unconditionally and strictly implement the
relevant Security Council at an early date and fully
cooperate with the United Nations on questions of
weapons inspections and other questions.

We believe also that the international community
should work tirelessly to seek a comprehensive
settlement of the Iraqi question through political and
diplomatic means on the basis of the relevant Council
resolutions. Over the past few days, dozens of
countries have participated in this open debate, which
clearly attests to the importance that a large number of
Member States attach to the question of Iraq, and to
their concerns about the possible implications of this
question for international relations.

The overwhelming majority of States have
emphasized during the debate that the question of Iraq
should be settled within the framework of the United
Nations, that the Security Council should play a central
role in the process and that the unity of the Security
Council is of paramount importance.

A number of countries, especially the Arab
States, have also expressed their strong for wish for
peace, not war. They have pointed out that war can
only further exacerbate the already tense situation in
the Middle East. The independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Iraq, Kuwait and other countries
of the region should be respected. These views and
positions are very important, and we agree with them.
We hope that the Security Council will give them
serious consideration.

The question of disarmament is at the core of the
Iraqi question. On the basis of resolution 687 (1991),
Iraq must destroy all weapons of mass destruction in its
possession and refrain from developing or using such
weapons. But since the end of 1998, the United Nations
disarmament process in Iraq has been suspended. Only
when the United Nations weapons inspectors return to
Iraq and conduct effective inspections can the truth
ultimately emerge.

We are pleased to note that, thanks to the positive
endeavours of Secretary-General Kofi Annan,
Secretary-General Moussa of the Arab League and
other concerned parties, the Iraqi side announced last
September that it would unconditionally accept the
return of weapons inspectors. The United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
(UNMOVIC) and the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) then engaged in a dialogue with the
Iraqi side on practical arrangements for the inspection
and achieved positive results. We hope that Iraq will
honour its commitments and translate them into actual
deeds.

We believe that the United Nations weapons
inspectors should return to Iraq as soon as possible to
conduct independent, fair and professional inspections
and report truthfully and in a timely manner to the
Council the results of such inspections, so that the
Council can draw objective, fair and realistic
conclusions on that basis.

Under such circumstances, it is not that we
cannot consider the adoption by the Council of a new
resolution on the question of the inspection. Such a
draft resolution, however, should call for support for
UNMOVIC and the IAEA. Its contents should be
practical and feasible, in the interests of an appropriate
settlement of the Iraqi question.

The Iraqi question involves many elements in
addition to disarmament, including the humanitarian
situation in Iraq and the missing Kuwaiti nationals and
property. We call on all the parties concerned to
continue to earnestly implement the oil-for-food
programme and make further efforts to improve the
humanitarian situation in Iraq. We would also like to
urge the Iraqi side to implement, as soon as possible,
its obligations in accordance with relevant Security
Council resolutions and to take concrete steps for an
early settlement of the question of the missing
Kuwaitis and third country nationals.

The Iraqi question has reached a crucial juncture.
The international community in general has high hopes
of the Security Council. It hopes that the Council will
be able to effectively undertake its responsibility to
maintain international peace and security and take
action to safeguard the purposes and principles of the
Charter. The Chinese Government is ready to join other
countries in promoting an appropriate settlement of the
Iraqi question within the Security Council.

