Mr. Fulci (Italy): Great concern has been aroused in
my country by the dispute between Ethiopia and Sudan
over the case of the terrorist assassination attempt, on
26 June of last year, in the peaceful city of Addis Ababa,
against one of the great leaders of our time:
His Excellency Mr. Hosni Mubarak, President of the Arab
Republic of Egypt.
We have followed closely the developments in this
case, both in its bilateral aspects - between Ethiopia and
Sudan - and in its multilateral ones - within the
framework of the Organization of African Unity
(OAU) - and, in the last three weeks, within the
Security Council.

The Italian Government and people very forcefully
condemn terrorism in every form.Italy knows, through
direct and very bitter experience indeed the grave danger
that this plague poses to individual States and to the
international community as a whole. We are also well
aware of how difficult it is to root out this scourge once
it has spread.

Thus, we sincerely hope that Ethiopia will soon be
able to conclude successfully the judicial process with an
exemplary condemnation of the culprits once their guilt
has been proved.

Italy voted in favour of the resolution just adopted
by the Security Council giving full support to the requests
of the Organization of African Unity.

The resolution, recalling the statements of the
Central Organ of the OAU Mechanism, is meant to send
a very precise and very strong signal to Sudan to comply
with those requests without further delay. Sudan must
show - with facts, now - the OAU and the
international community its political will to strengthen
cooperation with the States in the region. It must show its
commitment to the common efforts to maintain
international peace and security, which are clearly an
essential prerequisite for economic development and
stability.

Italy is confident that the Government of Sudan will
take this signal into account, thereby preventing an
escalation of the dispute which would lead the country
into isolation from Africa and from the rest of the world.
The message that we have just heard from the

 

representative of Sudan, his solemn promise of full and
unconditional cooperation of his authorities - a promise
made here, in front of the world, a promise to solve the
problem - gives us some hope that the solution will soon
come.

