Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I express our
thanks to the High Representative for his frank and
dispassionate report. The United Kingdom strongly
supports his ongoing work in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and shares his deep concerns about the situation there
and its deterioration over the past few months.

Seven months after elections, there is still no new
State-level Government. This has blocked progress on
reforms that are essential if Bosnia and Herzegovina is
to function properly and move towards a future in the
European Union (EU) and NATO. Nationalist rhetoric
across the Federation continues to challenge the
institutions and integrity of the State. Political leaders
must urgently engage in negotiations to create a new
State-level Government that is focused on, and able to
deliver, crucial reforms. The Dayton framework
requires political representation from all constituent
peoples. Without flexibility and concerted effort,
Bosnia and Herzegovina will remain stuck on the
European Union accession track while its neighbours
continue to move ahead.

We are concerned in particular by conclusions
adopted by the Republika Srpska National Assembly
on 13 April. Those conclusions, including the proposal
to hold a referendum on the authority of State-level
judicial institutions and the decisions of the High
Representative, represent a clear breach of the Dayton
Agreement. The conclusions are a direct attack on the
High Representative, whose authority has been
endorsed in numerous Security Council resolutions,
most recently last November (resolution 1948 (2010)).
The Republika Srpska's actions threaten Bosnia
and Herzegovina's overall stability. The Security
Council cannot ignore or downplay the current

challenge. This is not a technical issue. As the report of
the High Representative (see S/2011/283) highlights,
these decisions must also be seen in the broader
context of repeated rhetorical attacks by the Republika
Srpska on State-level institutions and a policy of
obstructing, undermining and questioning their
authority. Alongside this, President Dodik has
questioned the territorial integrity and sovereignty of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, repeatedly questioned the
sustainability of the country and, on occasions, openly
advocated its dissolution.

We have seen the letter from the Republika
Srpska authorities that Ambassador Churkin
mentioned. We fundamentally disagree with the legal
argumentation of the Republika Srpska authorities and
firmly support the High Representative's analysis. The
United Kingdom's view is clear: the High
Representative derives his authority from the Dayton
Peace Agreement, which has been endorsed by the
Security Council under Chapter VII. It is therefore
clearly inappropriate to make this authority the subject
of a referendum. The Republika Srpska referendum
question explicitly states that the State court and
Prosecutor's Office were unconstitutionally formed.
This fact has been refuted by the Constitutional Court
of Bosnia and Herzegovina in three separate decisions.
As the Republika Srpska acknowledges, the
Constitutional Court's authority is established in the
Dayton Agreement, and is therefore in the Bosnian
Constitution. Its decisions are final and binding, and a
challenge to the Bosnia and Herzegovina State Court
that ignores those decisions represents a challenge to
the Dayton Agreement. Republika Srpska state law
should not touch on matters outside its own
jurisdiction. Legally speaking, the status and powers of
the High Representative are matters arising under the
Dayton Peace Agreement and international law, which
therefore do not fall within the purview of Republika
Srpska.

We therefore welcome all efforts to persuade the
Republika Srpska to withdraw its referendum proposal
and instead engage in constructive dialogue. If,
however, there is no decision of this nature by
Republika Srpska authorities within the clear time
frame set by the High Representative, the United
Kingdom will strongly and firmly support the High
Representative in taking whatever action he deems
necessary to protect and uphold the United Nations-
endorsed Dayton framework.

In this context, I would also draw the attention of
the Security Council to the conclusions of the
European Union Foreign Affairs Council in March,
which expressed clear support for proposals from EU
High Representative Ashton for possible EU restrictive
measures. The EU now has a full range of tools and
measures at its disposal to tackle challenges in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. The March Council decision states
that restrictive measures may be imposed against
persons who undermine the sovereignty, integrity or
security of Bosnia and Herzegovina or undermine the
Dayton Peace Agreement.

Finally, the risk of spillover from the worsening
political climate into the security situation has
increased in recent months. As the High Representative
makes clear in his report, the presence of the European
Union Force in Bosnia and Herzegovina (EUFOR)
continues to reassure citizens that they are safe despite
the tense political situation. EUFOR's executive
military mandate remains a crucial safeguard for
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

