Mr. Acufia Pimentel (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation welcomes the opportunity of this public
debate on a subject that, as we all know, is related to
issues that are a source of deep concern to the
international community, not only in the humanitarian,
security, disarmament and development fields, but also
in the field of prevention of international crime,
including drug trafficking, terrorism and human
security.

I am grateful also to the Secretary-General for his
report on this important question, and we deem the 12
recommendations therein of particular interest.

As has been repeatedly stated with concern in
various specialized reports on small arms and light
weapons - reports with recognized academic
credibility - for many years now the world has been
witness to the phenomenon of the excessive
accumulation and illicit traffic in this type of arms.
This accumulation is destabilizing and to a large extent
the result of illicit trading, to the point where this
category of arms is today considered to be one of the
principal scourges causing the death of civilians
throughout the world, particularly children and women.
It also perpetuates, and is one of the underlying causes
of, poverty and the domestic and international conflicts
that affect or hinder the development of countries.

This was recognized by the Secretary-General in
the report he submitted to the Security Council on the
subject, in which he states that preventing, combating
and eliminating the uncontrolled spread of small arms
and light weapons constitutes one of the key tasks of
the Security Council in discharging its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security.

The United Nations Conference on the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects, which was held in July 2001, and its
conclusions represent an important milestone in the
humanitarian field and in the fields of disarmament and
human security. At that Conference, Chile stressed the
need for the Programme of Action on Small Arms and
Light Weapons to include a set of clear and effective
measures to promote respect for, and the protection of,
human life as a fundamental value, over and above the
commercial interests associated with this category of
arms. This is the approach that Chilean domestic law
has adopted on the subject.

Chile firmly supports the Programme of Action
adopted by the Conference. To that end, it sponsored in
November last year, jointly with the Regional Centre
for Peace, Disarmament and Development in Latin
America and the Caribbean, the first regional expert
workshop to examine and propose measures for the
evaluation of, and follow-up to, the aforementioned
Conference. This initiative is in addition to other
important initiatives taken by our region, such as the
Inter-American Convention against the Illicit
Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms,
Ammunition, Explosives and Other Related Materials,
and the Working Group on this type of arms of
MERCOSUR, Bolivia and Chile. All of these activities
aim to intensify the efforts of our countries to combat
this serious problem in a coordinated manner.

From a global perspective, the Security Council
over the years has put in place a considerable number
of mechanisms to avert, at least to some extent, the
catastrophic consequences of the excessive
accumulation of, and illicit trafficking in, small arms
and light weapons, including the imposition of
embargoes on territories in situations of conflict and, in
cases of conflict prevention, the undertaking of
peacekeeping operations and peace-building activities.

Over time, the efforts made to operationalize the
wide range of measures in these various cases have
created a rich store of specialized knowledge that can
be used to formulate principles, norms and measures to
combat this phenomenon in a more rational and
effective manner, even though - as the Secretary-
General indicated in his report - there are many
regions and cases in which it is not possible to prevent
and eliminate illicit trafficking.

The Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat
and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons contains important provisions falling within
the purview of the Security Council, for example, those
on the effective implementation of embargoes and
those on the inclusion in the activities of peacekeeping
operations of adequate provisions in this respect.

Against this backdrop and based on the
Secretariat's experience, the Secretary-General has
formulated a set of 12 recommendations in his report
which my delegation considers to be a valuable
contribution to the Council's work. Most of these have
already been implemented, at least to some extent, or
are related to initiatives that have been proposed by
experts and Governments, but that are still the subject
of debate and have yet to be translated into action.

The systematic review by the Council of these 12
recommendations, with the assistance of the
Secretariat, could, in our view, be useful in the
formulation of a methodology that could be used to
take up, with the renewed determination that the
situation requires, the task of implementing more
effective measures to overcome the serious problems
posed by small arms and light weapons.

