Mr. Fernandez Revollo (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia welcomes the
Secretary-General and the Commissioner for Peace
and Security of the African Union, Mr. Chergui, and
thanks them for their briefings. We also thank China
for having organized this important debate.

Bolivia believes that the development of African
capabilities in the areas of peace and security should be
framed in the principles of sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity, and in accordance with the
national priorities of each State. The countries of
Africa enjoy a unique history where the plurality of
cultures converges and where biodiversity, ecosystems
and natural resources are the heritage of Africans
and humankind.

It is pertinent to recall that, in the 1960s, Africa
took a major step forward in addressing its problems
by creating the Organization of African Unity, drawing
the foundational outline of the continent's integration
dynamics and setting the stage for the construction of
African conflict-resolution initiatives. Over time, the
Organization of African Unity gave way to the African
Union and a gamut of organizations such as African
Union Commission, the Pan African Parliament, the
Economic, Social and Cultural Council, the African
Court on Human and Peoples' Rights, the African
Union International Law Commission and the Peace and
Security Council, among others. Each step strengthened
the institutionality ofAfrican organizations, deepening
the integration dynamics of the continent. This
institution-building has given us many successful
examples of what we now call "African solutions to
African problems".

In the same way, time has also shown us that
African institutions and organizations can benefit
greatly from the experience and practices of other
international institutions and organizations, such as
the United Nations, provided that the relationship is
one of respect and partnership and does not impose
formulas and alien ways. As an example within the
framework of the collective approach, coordination and
joint work with the United Nations, we must highlight
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur, which has enabled the African Union to do
important work on the protection of civilians, which is
one of the most important peacekeeping tasks in the
world. Similarly, the African Union Mission in Somalia
demonstrates the active participation of the African
Union in the region through the initiative to stabilize
the country through dialogue and reconciliation.

Furthermore, the participation of such subregional
organizations as the Economic Community of Central
African States and the Economic Community of West
African States have proven their importance in the
area of cooperation. Likewise, the role played by the
Group of Five for the Sahel in Mali reinforces the work
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali in areas ofborder security,
the fight against organized crime and the protection of
civilians in the sector. It is extremely important that we
continue to support that regional initiative.

Bolivia reiterates that it is essential to consolidate
the strategic partnership between the United Nations
and the African Union in the political, operational,
tactical and financial spheres. In that regard, the
African Union has acknowledged that it hopes to
receive support from the United Nations for the
development of its capabilities, a sentiment reflected
in the document entitled "Enhancing United Nations-
African Union cooperation: Framework for the lO-year
capacity building programme for the African Union",
agreed in November 2006 - with peace and security as
one of the dimensions of that cooperative framework.

Ten years later, in a qualitatively different African
context from that in 2006, which, despite the notable
progress, is still complex, we have the Joint United
Nations-African Union Framework for an Enhanced
Partnership in Peace and Security, signed on 19 April.
The Framework identifies various activities that could
enhance the strategic partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union. Among those ideas
is the need to develop a shared understanding of the
factors that give rise to conflict, to share early warning
information on potential conflicts, to jointly develop
ways to prevent conflicts, and to coordinate joint
action and mutual support during the various stages of
conflict response - ranging from conflict mediation
and management to peacekeeping and peacebuilding.

We are eagerly looking forward to the Council's
visit to the African Union Peace and Security Council,
which will enable the consolidation of the cooperative
framework between those institutions and the concrete
pursuit of additional steps that will bolster the capacities
of the African Union in the field of peace and security.

Bolivia firmly believes that multilateralism,
preventive diplomacy, mediation, good offices and
inclusive dialogue are key instruments in the promotion
of peace, stability and socioeconomic development
in Africa. Finally, we must note that it is time to
permanently settle our historic debt to Africa. Partner
countries and entities should keep their commitments
to Africa in that regard, so that we can continue on the
path to stability, peace, security and development of the
people of our brother continent.

