Mr. Mantovani (Italy): Allow me at the outset to
express my deep appreciation for the timely
opportunity that this open debate offers to discuss the
role of international organizations in fostering the
implementation of resolutions 1540 (2004) and 1673
(2006).

The importance for international peace and
security of preventing non-State actors from gaining
access to weapons of mass destruction (WMD), their
means of delivery and related materials has been so
Widely recognized that it needs no further explanation.
In line with the 2003 European Union (EU) Strategy on
WMD non-proliferation, Italy is on the forefront in
combating the threat that terrorist organizations might
acquire those deadly weapons, and it lends its
convinced support to resolution 1540 (2004). It is
worth recalling that in June 2006 the EU granted
€195,000 to promote the implementation of the
resolution in the Asia-Pacific region, in Africa and in
Latin America and the Caribbean. The latter was again
included among EU non-proliferation priorities for
2007 to 2009. I shall leave it to the European Union
presidency, with whose remarks Italy fully aligns itself,
to elaborate on cooperation between the Security
Council and the European Union in this field.

Three years after the adoption of resolution 1540
(2004), the danger of the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction has not yet been overcome, and
several States face difficulties in putting in place the
required legislative and technical provisions. Indeed,
the response to the complex nature of proliferation
challenges has to be comprehensive and must
encompass, inter alia, safety and security of dual-use
items, effective export and border controls and
interdiction of illicit trafficking and brokering in these
items.

Against that background, we must make full use
of the expertise of international organizations operating
in the nuclear, chemical, biological and missile-related
sectors. They can provide the assistance States may
need. To that end, consistent with provisions of
resolutions 1540 (2004) and 1673 (2006), a network of
multilateral cooperation has to be envisaged. The
Security Council and its Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) - which you,
Mr. President, so effectively lead - can act as a
catalyst.

We believe that the present discussion should be
institutionalized and made operational. The 1540
Committee should foresee, as it is starting to do,
periodic meetings, in the form of thematic debates duly
prepared in advance, with relevant international
organizations in order to develop synergies, pool
resources and facilitate the matching of assistance
requests from States with cooperation programmes
available in the portfolios of international institutions.

While we welcome the presentations made earlier
by the International Atomic Energy Agency, the
Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
and the World Customs Organization, we deem it
necessary to involve other international organizations
active in areas within the scope of resolution 1540
(2004). In particular, attention should be paid to the
physical protection and safe handling of biological
pathogens, the strengthening of national mechanisms
overseeing transfers of sensitive dual-use items and the
enhancement of law-enforcement efforts to disrupt
illicit networks used to finance proliferation.

Questions of substance often come together with
procedural issues. We therefore believe it might be
useful for the 1540 Committee to agree on a calendar
of meetings with relevant international organizations
and to build with them a list of points of contact in
charge of assistance programmes.

In conclusion, let me once again stress that in the
common endeavour to promote full implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) the Security Council and the
membership can rely on Italy's firm commitment and
steadfast support.
