Mr. Gata Mavita wa Lufuta (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): As your presidency of
the Council is nearing its end, allow me to express the

gratitude of my delegation for the skill with which you,
Mr. President, have steered the Council's work during
the month of June and for the competence and expertise
with which you have carried out your mission. I would
also like to thank you, Mr. President, for giving me
the opportunity to take the floor before the Council
at this meeting devoted to the adoption of resolution
2293 (2016) on the sanctions regime for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

I take this opportunity to convey once again to
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and to all members
of the Security Council the full gratitude of the people
and the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo for their work and the efforts of the United
Nations to safeguard the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of my country and to guarantee peace and
stability there.

My delegation takes note of resolution 2293 (2016),
which has just been adopted by the Council. We thank
the Council for this act, which reflects once again its
desire to see peace in my country further strengthened.
We also thank the Council for clearly expressing in
the resolution that the arms embargo does not apply
to my Government. Allow my delegation, however,
to comment briefly here on some points related to the
resolution to which my country attaches importance,
as stressed in the note verbale addressed to you, Sir, on
20 June.

My delegation does not share the views of the
Council, which has seen fit to model the resolution on
the provisions of resolution 2277 (2016), adopted by the
Council in March. My delegation believes that, given
their different contexts as reflected in their subject
matter, the contents of these two resolutions should
also be different. By renewing certain provisions of
resolution 2277 (2016), resolution 2293 (2016) risks
rekindling latent tensions in my country.

My delegation therefore feels duty-bound to draw
the Council's attention to the fact that it is the United
Nations organ responsible for maintaining international
peace and security. It therefore bears the heavy
responsibility of working for peace and preventing the
outbreak ofall conflicts. Thus, any discourse emanating
from this organ that does not promote trust or that
exacerbates tensions can have serious consequences for
Member States on the ground.

In this context, Council members may not be
aware of the tensions that diverse interpretations of the
provisions of resolution 2277 (2016) have created in my
country, to the point where a handful of politicians,
clinging to those provisions, have called into question
the convening of the political dialogue that we have
all sought to help organize peaceful elections in my
country and thereby to prevent the recurrence of the
violence that marred the 2006 and 2011 elections. That
is why my delegation had hoped that today's resolution,
which has no connection to the elections, would not
refer to that issue. Because our opinion has not been
taken into account and the resolution does touch on
this issue, my delegation should like to say a word in
that regard.

As the presidential elections and respect for the
constitutional timetable for their organization are issues
ofconcern to the Council, it is necessary to clarify that on
18 April the political parties ofthe presidential majority,
torn between various interpretations of article 70 of our
Constitution, turned to the Constitutional Court, which
is vested with the power to interpret legal texts in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, to seek the correct
interpretation of the article, which reads as follows:

"The President of the Republic is elected
by direct universal suffrage for a term of five
years which is renewable only once. At the end
of his term, the President stays in office until the
President-Elect effectively assumes his functions."

After analysing this provision, the Court issued its
opinion that at the end of his mandate, the President of
the Republic holds office until the effective installation
of the President-Elect. This interpretation removes any
ambiguity and dispels any misunderstanding among all
those who had claimed that there would be a vacancy
in the presidency of the Republic in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo if the presidential election were
not held by the end of this year.

My delegation wishes to emphasize that our
insistence on the importance that my country attaches
to the organization of peaceful elections in order to
safeguard peace and stability should not be interpreted
as an excuse to delay the elections. The experience of
the previous two elections requires us to establish the
conditions necessary to organizing proper elections
that are not marred by violence. We are convinced that
the efforts of my Government, the United Nations and
the international community will allow us to overcome
the obstacles we face in organizing proper elections as
soon as possible.

My delegation also finds it useful to note here that
resolution 2293 (2016), which concerns the sanctions
regime, primarily addresses security issues. In this
regard, the situation of Burundian refugees who have
received military training in a neighbouring country
and have infiltrated the Democratic Republic of the
Congo with forged Congolese voter cards, to which
the Group of Experts refers in its report (8/2016466),
is both a serious attack on the security of the States of
the region concerned by this situation and a violation
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region.
This situation deserves the attention of the Council,
which must condemn it. The Council's failure to
condemn such acts, recognized even by its own Group
of Experts, and its resort to a vague formulation calling
on the countries of the region to refrain from activities
capable of destabilizing neighbouring countries, are
unacceptable. As we indicated in March, my country,
which is already suffering from a broad spectrum
of crimes committed by armed groups and negative
forces against its people, cannot agree to become once
again the bastion of a new foreign armed group. My
delegation therefore deplores the Council's passivity in
this respect.

In conclusion, my delegation considers it important
for the Council to treat my Government as a partner
and, as such, to listen to it so as to assist it in achieving
what it considers to be appropriate and right for the
good of its country. That is the kind of respect that
partners owe one another. In other words, to the extent
possible the Council must avoid imposing its views at
every opportunity. We believe that, in so doing, the
United Nations will further strengthen the climate of
cooperation that it has long enjoyed with my country.

The meeting rose at 10.15 a.m.
