Mr. Brammertz: I thank you, Mr. President, for
this opportunity to once again address the Security
Council on the activities ofthe Office ofthe Prosecutor.
My written report provides details about our activities
and results during the reporting period in relation to
our usual three priorities (S/2018/471, annex II).

With regard to the branch in The Hague, we worked
to expeditiously complete our last judicial activities,
with only three cases now remaining. With regard to
the branch in Arusha, my Office undertook intense
efforts to locate and arrest the remaining eight fugitives
indicted by the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR). And at both branches, we continued to
provide full support to national authorities in relation
to the prosecution of serious international crimes
committed in Rwanda and in the former Yugoslavia.

As part of the review of the work of the Mechanism,
the Office of Internal Oversight Services (OIOS)
evaluated my Office's work and methods. OIOS
concluded that my Office operated with a small staff and
tight resources as the Security Council had mandated. It
noted that we were effective in planning, restructuring
and refining our operational methods. It also identified
a number of cost efficiencies that we successfully
implemented, including our one-Office policy. At the
same, OIOS identified that the high workload, together
with organizational downsizing, had an impact on staff
morale, particularly at the branch in The Hague. My
Office will work to address that issue.

The review process established by the Council
is an important exercise. My Office is also very
grateful to all participants for their time, attention
and constructive engagement. Our common goal is
achieving our mandate through efficient and effective
management. As a temporary institution, my Office
regularly develops projections for the completion of
our functions. Looking forward, I would like to briefly
outline anticipated developments for the next few years.

At The Hague branch, we will continue finalizing
our judicial activities. My Office will progressively
reduce our staff and resources as these last cases are
completed. With the appealjudgement in the Seselj' case
issued two months ago, and the scheduled completion
of the Karadeie appeal before the end of the year, there
will only be two remaining cases. The President has
reported that the Stanisic' and Simatovic trial and the
Mladie appeal are expected to be completed by the end
of2020. That would then only leave appeal proceedings,
if any, in the Stanisie and Simatovic' case.

Accordingly, we will be increasingly focused in
The Hague on our remaining continuous functions,
the most significant of which will be responding to
requests for assistance from national jurisdictions in
relation to our quite extensive evidence collection.
As set out in our review report, we anticipate that the
number and complexity of requests for assistance will
further increase in the coming few years. Countries of
the former Yugoslavia have indeed established national
war crimes strategies to intensify prosecutions, and
have requested our support. We also anticipate that
more cases will move forward once challenges in
regional judicial cooperation are overcome. Sufficient
staff and resources will still be needed temporarily for
my Office to address this workload.

At the same time thatjudicial activities are winding
down in The Hague, my Office anticipates that an
increase in judicial activities at the Arusha branch will
take place. In fact, that process has already begun. That
expectation is informed by three main factors.

First, as we outlined in our progress report, at the
Arusha branch there has been an increase in review
and related litigation initiated by the defence. We
expect that there will continue to be a greater workload
in that regard than during the first four years of the
Mechanism's operations.

Secondly, as I have previously reported to the
Council, my Office is significantly increasing our
efforts to locate and arrest the remaining eight fugitives
indicted by the ICTR and ensure those cases are ready
for trial. We restructured our tracking team, and
adopted a more proactive approach to our work. Those
reforms have been matched by a temporary increase
in resources on the clear understanding that we have
a limited amount of time to demonstrate a successful
track record.

While the challenges in tracking fugitives are too
significant to guarantee a positive outcome, my Office
can confirm that we will spare no effort. The victims
of the genocide against the Tutsi in Rwanda deserve
nothing less. In that regard, I call upon all States to
provide full cooperation to my Office. This is an
opportunity, not only an obligation. By successfully
arresting a fugitive in coordination with my Office,
States can clearly demonstrate their commitment to
multilateralism and the rule of law.

Finally, my Office anticipates that over the next
few years, there will be an increase in the volume
of requests for assistance in relation to our ICTR
evidence collection. My Office is strengthening our
cooperation with Rwandan authorities, in particular
with the Prosecutor General's Office. We are also
initiating a project to improve access to our evidence.
My Office is committed to managing all developments
consistent with the Council's mandate for a lean and
cost-effective organization.

The final topic I would like to address today is the
search for missing persons in the former Yugoslavia.
Over the past six months, many stakeholders have taken
the initiative to raise that issue with my Office and seek
our assistance, including the International Committee
of the Red Cross (ICRC), the Presidents of Croatia
and Serbia and missing persons authorities in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

Efforts are urgently needed to strengthen the search
for missing persons. There are 10,000 families - from
all sides of the conflict - that still do not know the fate
of their loved ones. The ICRC is launching a five-year
strategy to further support local mechanisms, which
are also improving their methods and cooperation. My
Office is committed to providing all possible assistance
as requested.

Yet Governments have made many commitments
to support that work that remain only on paper. Long-
standing recommendations have still not yet been
implemented years later. Financial support from
national budgets is limited and insufficient. Political
will is also needed to create the conditions for witnesses
to come forward with information. Glorifying war
criminals surely has the opposite effect. The search for
missing persons is a humanitarian imperative. It is time
for political authorities to be held accountable for their
commitments, and to show the courage to put aside all
other considerations.

My Office is firmly focused on carrying out our
remaining responsibilities efficiently and effectively.
We also remain committed to providing our full support
to national prosecutors and missing persons authorities
in the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda.

