The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Burundi in which he requests to be invited to participate in
the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nsanze
(Burundi) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document S/1997/319, which contains the
text of a letter dated 18 April 1997 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Republic of Tanzania to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council, transmitting a copy of the official communique of
the Fourth Arusha Summit meeting on the Burundi conflict.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council is concerned that, despite
recent positive developments, there is continuing
instability in Burundi. It recalls its resolution 1072
(1996) of 30 August 1996, in which, inter alia, it
demanded that all sides ln Burundi declare a unilateral
cessation of hostilities and initiate unconditional
negotiations with a view to reaching a comprehensive
political settlement.

"The Security Council reiterates its support for
the efforts of the regional leaders and takes note of
the Joint Communique (S/l997/319) of 16 April
1997 issued following the Fourth Arusha Regional
Summit on the Burundi Conflict held in Arusha,
Tanzania. In particular, the Council welcomes the
decision of the regional leaders to ease sanctions in
order to alleviate the suffering of the people of
Burundi.

"The Security Council welcomes the fact that
talks are being held in Rome which are
complementary to the Arusha process. It also
welcomes the commitment of the Government of
Burundi to the comprehensive political dialogue
among all the parties within the framework of the
Arusha process. It urges all the parties in Burundi to
continue to pursue a negotiated settlement and to
refrain from actions which are detrimental to such
dialogue.

"The Security Council expresses its deep
concern at the involuntary resettlement of rural
populations and calls upon the Government of
Burundi to allow the people to return to their homes
without any hindrance.

"The Security Council expresses its support and
appreciation to former President Nyerere as well as
to the Special Representative of the United Nations
and the Organization of African Unity in their
efforts to find a peaceful solution to the crisis in
Burundi.

"The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to continue to keep the Council
informed on the situation in Burundi, especially with
regard to the progress of a negotiated and peaceful
settlement in the country.

"The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/1997/32.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.15 pm.

