Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to Mr. Oh Joon, Permanent
Representative ofthe Republic ofKorea, for his briefing
on the work of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004). In view of the fact that this is
his final briefing as Chairman of the Committee, we
would like to thank the Ambassador and the entire
Korean delegation on their leadership of this subsidiary
body of the Council for the past two years.

We cannot fail to mention the useful work of the
Group of Experts in providing substantive support to
the Committee. A recent milestone was the convening
on 7 May of the Council's high-level open debate on
the theme of non-proliferation (see S/PV.7169). We
held a thorough discussion on a wide range of topics
related to preventing weapons of mass destruction
and their systems of delivery from falling into the
hands of non-State actors. Our agreed presidential
statement S/PRST/2014/7 will serve as a guideline for
the 1540 Committee's work in the period leading to the
comprehensive review in 2016.

All ofus, as responsible members ofthe international
community, have common long-term interests in
non-proliferation. One of the major challenges is to
achieve the full implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) by all countries. We note that in resolution
1540 (2004), all three categories of weapons of mass
destruction - nuclear, chemical and biological - are
integrally linked, confirming the equal danger of any
of them falling into the hands of terrorists. For the
past 10 years, a good deal has been done to implement
that legally binding international document. The
vast majority of United Nations Member States have
submitted their first implementation reports. However,
much remains to be done. The delivery of technical
assistance to States remains apriority ofthe Committee's
work. It is of vital importance that the 1540 Committee
be able to effectively implement its functions as
central coordinator of global implementation efforts
to implement the resolution and to identify goals and
priorities.

Russia, for its part, will continue to participate
actively in that work. In that context, we call for
attention to be directed to countries that have not yet
submitted their first national reports. We look forward
to constructive and productive cooperation with all
partners in the interests of the fuller implementation
of the provisions of resolution 1540 (2004) so as to
prevent weapons of mass destruction and their means of
delivery from falling into the hands of non-State actors,
especially terrorists. In our view, the objectives of the
resolution have never been more relevant.

