Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): The Nigerian delegation
thanks you, Madam President, for convening this
open debate on a topic of considerable contemporary
importance. We also thank you for the concept note
(S/2015/845, annex) provided to guide our discussions
today. We acknowledge the presence of participating
Ministers and welcome them to the Security Council.
Our appreciation goes to the Secretary-General
for his moral voice; the Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission, Ambassador Skoog; and Ms. Ouided
Bouchamaoui for the insightful briefings they provided
on a complex and multifaceted issue.

The interdependence between security and
development is widely acknowledged, and I have heard
every delegation speak about it this morning. One cannot
exist without the other. That point is duly recognized in
resolution 2171 (2014), which underscores the need for a
comprehensive approach to conflict prevention through
the promotion of sustained economic growth and
development, poverty eradication and good governance.
That important underlying message in resolution
2171 (2014) and the principle of conflict prevention
articulated by the report of the Secretary-General on the
future of United Nations peace operations (S/2015/730)
both provide an appropriate point of departure for our
deliberations today.

The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) are a
testament to the global recognition of the interlinkages
between development and security. The reiteration of
the nexus between security and development by both the
Security Council and the General Assembly are clear
indications of the critical need for a holistic approach
by all United Nations entities for the maintenance of
peace and security. To ensure tangible outcomes, there
must be a coordinated approach on the part of United
Nations entities to the implementation of the SDGs. The
multidimensional nature of development implies that
all hands must be on deck. In our view, strengthened
engagements between United Nations entities and
national actors would provide opportunities to evaluate
the implementation of development priorities, which
could strengthen peace and prevent conflict and
instability.

The establishment of credible institutions at the
national level is a prerequisite for sustaining peace and
promoting development. The need to strengthen State
institutions has become more compelling in View of
contemporary challenges to global security. Fragile
States and those recovering from conflict must also
institute accountability mechanisms designed to ensure
good governance and the equitable distribution ofpeace
dividends. As a preventive measure, States should also
adopt a pragmatic and contextualized approach to
address the root causes of conflict.
In societies where young people are the victims of
poverty and exclusion and the opportunities for short-
and medium-term development are diminished, the
propensity for violence and social unrest increases.
That situation is more delicate in conflict-prone
areas, where the risk of the recruitment, coercion and
indoctrination of young people into armed groups and
terrorist organizations is higher. Mitigating that risk
requires a concerted effort on the part of Governments,
communities and other stakeholders to create
opportunities for young people and give them a greater
sense of belonging.

Nigeria would like to see the Security Council adopt
a comprehensive approach that prioritizes renewed and
strengthened partnerships with other United Nations
entities, such as the Peacebuilding Commission, the
Economic and Social Council and the United Nations
Development Programme. That, we believe, would
facilitate access to economic opportunities for young
people.

At the regional level, it is noteworthy that African
economies have attained some measure of growth
over the past few years. Today, Africa should begin
translating those economic gains into social gains for
all members of society. That is why we see merit in
the Council's support for strengthening institutions and
mobilizing resources for inclusive development. States
can be sensitized to the need for the mutual exchange
of information and support with regard to the scope,
sequencing and pace of the reform efforts required to
sustain the long-term development agenda. African
States are already incorporating the SDGs into their
development outlook as outlined by the African Union's
Agenda 2063. We expect that to give impetus to the
objectives of maximizing the use of Africa's resources
for the benefit of its people. Experience has shown that
promoting greater inclusion is a viable path to creating
peaceful societies.

At the national level, the Nigerian Government is
taking concrete steps to meet our security challenges
and foster peace through inclusive development. Our
soft approach to countering violent extremism has
adopted a multidimensional strategy to addressing the
root cause of radicalization and violent extremism,
and is designed to employ practical measures to halt
violent extremism in the short term and prevent future
occurrences in the long term. The programme has
been successfully employed to address some of the key
economic, social, religious, political and cultural issues
that fuel the radicalization upon which the insurgency
feeds. Through that soft approach we have instituted a
wide range of reforms in our educational system. We
have also created greater economic opportunities and
provided life skills to those at risk of radicalization.

Security and development are two sides of the
same coin, in both concept and practice. One aims
to increase freedom of choice, while the other seeks
to ensure that those choices can be made in a secure
environment. The Security Council can provide the
leadership that is so essential to promoting synergy
in the United Nations partnership for peace, security
and development. The Council must accord a more
central role to preventive diplomacy in its policies and
strategies in the maintenance ofinternational peace and
security. The Council should also work more closely
with the Peacebuilding Commission, the United Nations
Development Programme and other key actors within
the United Nations system to promote peace, stability,
security and development in countries emerging from
conflict.

