Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): I, too, want to
begin by congratulating you, Mr. President, on the very
efficient and effective manner in which you and your
team have managed our work during the past month,
which has been a very busy one. I also want to commend
the new members. I was very impressed at the way that
all of them immediately became very active, engaged
and efficient in our work.

It is very good to have this wrap-up session, two
sessions, in fact, as the Ambassador of Japan has
mentioned, as we are having a formal session here
today - and there have been requests from the wider
membership for more of these formal wrap-ups - and,
I am pleased to note, we are also going to continue the
recent tradition of an informal wrap-up, this afternoon.

Here in the Chamber we tend to speak from
prepared texts because we are stating the positions of
our Governments on the important issues of the day.
But I am not using a prepared text, other than a few
scrappy notes, because I want to focus on another
aspect of our work here today. I think that the Council
does very well in stating its positions nationally, but it
does not do so well in what I see as its core business,
which is problem-solving. We need to spend more time
talking to each other about how we solve the problems
on our agenda, and less time stating our positions for
the record. I think that is an issue that New Zealand
will continue to promote for the remainder of our time
here on the Council. Taking that perspective, I want
to address two issues that came up on our agenda this
month.

The first is the issue of Burundi. I would like to
thank France and Egypt for their very accurate reports
and summations (see S/PV.7615) of the conversations
we had in Bujumbura and with the African Union Peace
and Security Council in Ethiopia. It was a great relief
to New Zealand that we finally managed to get the trip
to Burundi under way. It was something we had asked
for over six months ago. It was a disappointing trip
in lots of ways. We found it very difficult to engage
with the Government of Burundi on the issues because,
as we heard from the representative of France, the
perspectives of the Government, on the one side, and
the opposition, on the other, were so very different.
It is hard to have a conversation when you have such
different views of life. On the other hand, it was very
important that we went there. I think that was a very
important demonstration of the Council's concern.

I was very pleased with the conversations in Addis
Ababa, where I think we had a really good engagement
with the African Peace and Security Council - a very
frank discussion with them about the challenges we
face. I came away from that meeting convinced that
the only way we will make progress on this issue is
if the Security Council and the African Peace and
Security Council and the East African Community all
work together. We cannot afford to be divided. I really
welcome that engagement, which I think is something
we should be making more of.

The second issue I want to talk about today is Syria,
which has dominated a lot of our time on the Council.
First I want to pay tribute to Spain, our collaborator
on the Syrian humanitarian file, as well as to welcome
Egypt, which is joining us now on this very difficult set
of issues. In this case we had another example where
the world responded when something really graphically
grim was put in front of us, that is, the starvation in
Madaya - a little like the drowned boy on the Turkish
beach. We all rushed to respond in a very dramatic way.
But we should have been doing that much earlier. Again,
this is a classic failure of the international community
and of the Council in responding to information we
knew was there but we had not grabbed the issue or
acted quickly enough.

I was reminded of being here in the Chamber
20 years ago when we knew what was happening in
Rwanda. But it was only when the cameras got to Goma
and saw the refugee situation there that we actually
got an international response. Again, it was months
too late. We need to be much better at grabbing these
issues, working with them and not just waiting for the
television cameras to spur us into action.

Those are the thoughts that I wanted to contribute
today. I wish to thank the members of the Council for
being such excellent colleagues.

