Mr. He Yafei (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
supports the holding of this high-level Security Council
meeting on countering piracy off the coast of Somalia.
This meeting and the resolution we just adopted fully
demonstrate once again the commitment and
confidence of the international community in coming
together and fighting piracy. The signal sent by the
Security Council is positive, right and timely.

Piracy off the coast of Somalia has become
increasingly rampant, and it is now an international
matter, posing a great threat to international navigation,
maritime trade and security at sea. China is also one of
its victims. So far, a total of six vessels registered in or
rented by China have been hijacked in the waters off
the coast of Somalia. One vessel and 17 Chinese
nationals remain in captivity to this day. This has
aroused utmost concern from the Chinese Government
and the general public. The long-term delay in the
settlement of the Somali issue is posing a serious threat
to international peace and security, while the rampant
piracy off the Somali coast has worsened the security
situation in Somalia.

In fulfilling its primary responsibility of
maintaining international peace and security, the
Security Council has so far this year adopted three
resolutions on this issue. China welcomes international
cooperation in the fight against piracy off the coast of
Somalia and supports the efforts of the countries
concerned to send warships to the region to crack down
on the pirates, pursuant to the relevant Security
Council resolutions. China is seriously considering
sending ships to the Gulf of Aden and the waters off
the Somali coast for escorting operations in the near
future.
To step up the fight against piracy off the Somali
coast, the Chinese delegation would like to make the

following proposals. First, we must give full play to
the important role of the United Nations. Since fighting
piracy in that region involves many different parties,
the problem can only be resolved through concerted
efforts by all the parties concerned. It is therefore
crucial that the United Nations, and the Security
Council in particular, carry out its core function of
maintaining international peace and security and
effectively coordinating the response and efforts of all
the countries concerned.

Secondly, international law and Security Council
resolutions must be strictly adhered to. That is an
important prerequisite for extensive support from the
people of Somalia and the rest of the international
community for the relevant anti-piracy efforts. The
international community should cooperate on the basis
of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea and Security Council resolutions. Any anti-piracy
operation should be carried out in full compliance with
the mandates established by Security Council
resolutions, and in particular while fully respecting the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of littoral countries
and after having secured the prior consent of the
Transitional Federal Government of Somalia.

Thirdly, there is a need to formulate an integrated
strategy. Combating piracy off the coast of Somalia is a
comprehensive and systematic undertaking, for it
involves efforts in the political, military, economic,
diplomatic and judicial spheres. Concerted efforts must
be made on various tracks in order to achieve tangible
results. In addition, priorities for different phases must
be identified, and eventually redefined in the light of
the evolving situation.

Fourthly, Somalia must be assisted in
strengthening its own capacity-building and
participating in regional cooperation. The Government
and people of Somalia hold the key to resolving the
issue of piracy. The international community should
help the Somali Government to improve its capacity-
building in various ways. Successful past practices
have demonstrated that regional cooperation can play
an important role in that regard. China welcomes the
concerted efforts to be made by the littoral countries of
the Red Sea, the Gulf of Aden and the western Indian
Ocean to address the issue of piracy off the coast of
Somalia through regional arrangements.
Piracy off the coast of Somalia is not an isolated
phenomenon. The scourge of piracy is a mere symptom
of the profound political, economic, social and
humanitarian crises confronting Somalia. The
international community must take the fight against
piracy seriously. More important, however, is to
eradicate the root causes of piracy. We call on all
parties concerned to further advance the political
process and promote the implementation of the
Djibouti Agreement in good faith.

The Security Council should heed the strong
desire of the Somali Government and the African
Union, strengthen the African Union Mission in
Somalia and mandate the United Nations to take over
peacekeeping operations in Somalia at an early date. In
the meantime, the international community should
work to prevent the humanitarian situation in Somalia
from deteriorating further. It should also increase
assistance to Somalia for infrastructure and
development projects in order to help it to reinvigorate
its productive capacity. China will continue to make its
contribution in that regard.

