Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): I join other
speakers in thanking you, Sir, for convening this
important meeting. I also thank Under-Secretary-
General John Holmes for his informative briefing and
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA) for its efforts in preparing the updated aide-
memoire on the protection of civilians to be adopted by
the Council later today. I am convinced that the
updated aide-memoire, with its new format and
structure, will provide a useful tool kit for Member
States and United Nations bodies in protecting civilians
in armed conflict.

With armed conflicts spreading and escalating in
many parts of the world, enhancing the protection of
civilians has become more urgent and important than
ever. While recognizing the considerable efforts made
and initial progress achieved in the recent years by the
Council and related United Nations bodies in
protecting civilians in armed conflict, my delegation
remains deeply concerned about the fact that civilians
in many places continue to be the main victims of acts
of violence and the indiscriminate and excessive use of
force, especially those in which civilians are
deliberately targeted in violation of international law,
including international human rights and humanitarian
law.

As we have emphasized at every Council and
other meeting on this subject, Viet Nam is firm in its
position that all indiscriminate attacks against civilians
are unjustifiable under any pretext and that civilians
must be assured of access to humanitarian assistance,
particularly to food, fuel and medical treatment. We
call upon all parties to armed conflicts to minimize
military activities in and around civil locations and to

take effective measures to protect civilians, especially
the most vulnerable groups, such as children and
women.

As this meeting of the Council is taking place,
more and perhaps many more innocent civilians may
be being killed or plunged into desperate conditions by
unjustified military operations and acts of violence in
and from Gaza. We urge the parties concerned to heed
the call of the international community and of this very
Council for an immediate ceasefire, put an end to acts
of violence and implement the measures stipulated in
resolution 1860 (2009), adopted by the Council six
days ago, including the opening of border crossings to
allow and facilitate humanitarian assistance.

As a gesture of solidarity with Palestinian
civilians affected by the ongoing crisis, the Vietnamese
Government has decided to extend $200,000 in
assistance to the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.

My delegation is deeply disturbed by the
displacement resulting from many conflict situations.
We recall the alarming figures for refugees and
internally displaced persons, mostly due to conflict
situations, as stated by High Commissioner Antonio
Guterres in his briefing to the Council last week. We
share the view that displacement as a result of conflict
may become another source of conflict, since it is
likely to cause social tension and all kinds of
difficulties for the host location.

While the primary responsibility for protecting
civilians lies with States, the United Nations system
can and should play its critical role by providing
political mediation and peacekeeping operations, as
well as by coordinating humanitarian and development
assistance. To this end, coordination among United
Nations bodies in the area of protection of civilians
should be further enhanced, particularly between the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict and all United Nations field missions. We
support an expanded and strengthened mandate of
protection of civilians for United Nations peacekeeping
missions on the ground, and hence intensive training in
this connection for them before their deployment.

With regard to humanitarian access, which is one

of the key issues in protecting civilians, we wish to

emphasize again the imperative need to uphold the

principle of neutrality, impartiality and independence
with a view to ensuring effectiveness and efficiency.

Finally, while recognizing the need for further
efforts to protect civilians in armed conflict, we hold
the view that the establishment of any new mechanism
within the Security Council should be carefully
considered and studied in depth before a decision is
made in order to avoid operational and institutional
overlapping, as well as negative financial implications.

