Mr. Gimolieca (Angola): We thank Ms. Fatou
Bensouda for her briefing and for presenting the ninth
report on the implementation of resolution 1970 (2011).
We commend and encourage the work of her team in a
difficult environment, characterized by the continuing
deterioration of the political and security situation in
Libya. The progress achieved in the cooperation between
the Libyan authorities and the International Criminal
Court (ICC) is a positive sign and a prerequisite for the
implementation of the memorandum of understanding,
as well as the ongoing judicial cooperation.

We are deeply concerned by the information
contained in the report of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(A/HRC/28/51) presented at the twenty-eighth session
of the Human Rights Council in March, on the human
rights situation in Libya. The report documents cases
of indiscriminate shelling, violations of international
humanitarian law, summary executions, abductions and
torture and attacks against the justice system, which is
no longer functioning in most parts of the country.

Many of the recent violations and abuses of human
rights fall under the jurisdiction of the ICC, and we
support the investigations carried out by the Court. We
also support the Human Rights Council resolution of
27 March (A/HRC/RES/28/30), on technical assistance
and capacity-building in Libya, which also requests
the High Commissioner to urgently dispatch a mission
to investigate violations and abuses of international
human rights law committed in Libya. It is clear
that only peace and stability in Libya will permit the
proper functioning of judicial institutions and holding
accountable criminals and violators of international
human rights law.

We reiterate our support for the efforts of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Bernardino
Leon to achieve a political solution to the crisis through
an inclusive dialogue. We urge all of the Libyan parties
to the crisis to accept an immediate and comprehensive
ceasefire, so as to allow the political process to move
forward constitutively.

In conclusion, we would like to express Angola's
support for the implementation of resolutions 2213
(2015) and 2214 (2015), in particular the measures
to address threats to peace and security in Libya, as
the country's ability to face future challenges will
ultimately depend upon a political settlement and
stability.

