Mr. Apakan (Turkey): At the outset, I wish to
thank today's briefers for their comprehensive
presentations.
Turkey welcomes the Council's increased
attention to protection issues, including its adoption
last November of resolution 1894 (2009), which was a
significant step in this area. We also attach importance
to recently adopted resolutions on women and peace
and security and children and armed conflict.

There is no doubt that the primary obligation to
protect civilians lies with States. However, the
international community also has a shared
responsibility to help to protect civilians in situations
where States fail to do so. We therefore need to build
collective awareness of the importance of that
responsibility. We must also be able to agree on
fundamental guidelines. The updated aide-memoire,
which has been adopted today, provides a useful guide
for improved analysis of key protection issues.

As mentioned in the report (8/2010/579) of the
Secretary-General, while in the course of the past 11
years a comprehensive framework has been established,
the emphasis must now be on making progress in
enhancing protection on the ground. We must therefore
translate our legal commitments into actions. The real
problem lies with implementation, rather than norm-
setting.

A case in point is Gaza, where tragic
developments have taken place and civilians continue
to suffer. In that regard, we will also follow up the
inquiry process, both in Geneva and New York, on the
Israeli attack against the humanitarian aid convoy to
Gaza, which took place in international waters and
resulted in nine civilian deaths and many wounded.

The protection of civilians during peacekeeping
operations is one of the key challenges before us.
Turkey attaches importance to incorporating that task
in peacekeeping mandates, including effectively
implementing it. Regional ownership and cooperation
are also worth mentioning. Moreover, it is important to
improve predeployment training on the protection of
civilians for peacekeeping personnel, including taking
into consideration cultural differences and sensitivities.

In some situations, civilians become victims in
spite of the fact that parties fully comply with
applicable law. Turkey calls upon parties to armed
conflicts to make amends to the civilians they harm,
with a View to respecting their inherent dignity as
human beings.
Let me underline two issues. The first relates to
dialogue with non-State armed groups. We understand
the rationale of humanitarian access to civilians.
However, Turkey believes that in doing so we should
be extremely careful not to extend any sense of
legitimacy to such organizations. Some terrorist groups
in various parts of the world attempt to exploit such a
humanitarian approach to gain international acceptance
and recognition.

My second point is that we should make a clear
distinction between the counter-terrorism efforts of law
enforcement agencies and armed conflict. We strongly
condemn all acts of terrorism. As indicated in the
Council's presidential statement (S/PRST/2010/19) of
27 September, terrorism continues to pose a serious
threat to the enjoyment of human rights and to social
and economic development. It also undermines global
stability and prosperity. Governments therefore not
only have the legitimate right but also the obligation to
effectively combat terrorism and fully and effectively
cooperate with other States.

The issue of protecting civilians in armed conflict
is a cause that the international community must
pursue with unwavering determination. We believe that,
in order to ensure long-term and lasting protection of
civilians, human rights, the rule of law, democracy and
good governance should be strengthened. We should
also ensure that perpetrators of violence against
civilians are held fully accountable for their actions.
Sustainable prevention and protection will only be
possible if there is no impunity.

