Ms. Laj: I thank you, Madam President, for this
opportunity to present the latest report (8/2015/655) of
the Secretary-General on South Sudan, and to update
the Security Council on events since its finalization.
Followingthepartialsigningofthelntergovernmental
Authority on Development-plus peace agreement, on
17 August, international and regional partners urged
the President to sign the agreement by the end ofthe 15-
day deadline and called on all parties to immediately
cease all hostilities. Upon his return from Addis
Ababa, President Salva Kiir commenced intensive
consultations with various constituencies. Yesterday,
the President chaired a pivotal leadership meeting
attended by senior Government officials, members
of the Sudan People's Liberation Movement (SPLM)
National Liberation Council, its Political Bureau and
its secretariat, ministers, governors, chairpersons of
independent commissions, as well as the Speakers and
Deputy Speakers of the National Legislative Assembly
and the Council of the States. A mini-summit has
been called for tomorrow, where the Government of
the Republic of South Sudan is expected to sign the
proposed agreement - as it stated - "in the interest
of peace".

Despite that hopefully positive development, the
security situation on the ground has been volatile
and tense. Fighting in the Greater Upper Nile region
has remained intense, and a further escalation of
hostilities in southern Unity state has had increasingly
severe consequences for the civilian population.
Major offensives conducted by the Sudan People's
Liberation Army (SPLA) and its allied militias into
Opposition-held areas have led to further deterioration
of the security and humanitarian situations since April,
and have resulted in numerous reports of grave human
rights violations. Most recently, on 19 August, fighting
occurred between SPLA and Opposition forces around
Leer town, with both sides trading accusations of
having initiated the attack.

In Upper Nile state, heavy fighting between the
SPLA and the SPLM/Army in Opposition, along with
its allied Shilluk militias, has centred around the state
capital Malakal, which has changed hands several
times since April. Both sides remain in close proximity
to each other along the banks of the Nile River, with
numerous skirmishes taking place in Malakal and in
the northern town of Melut. I am disappointed that the
parties have not observed the cessation of hostilities or
the ceasefire that they agreed to in Addis Ababa.

The Bahr el-Ghazal and the Equatoria regions also
witnessed further deterioration in the security situation,
with low intensity fighting between armed groups.
Between 29 July and 2 August, tensions escalated in
Yambio county, Western Equatoria state, with the
occurence of clashes involving SPLA, national police,
local youth, a community defence group and Dinka
youth. Over 5,000 civilians were briefly displaced.

On the domestic political front, on 16 August, the
four elected governors of Central Equatoria, Upper Nile,
Warrap and Western Equatoria states were dismissed,
and the caretaker Governor of Northern Bahr el- Ghazal
state was also replaced. On 20 August, the five newly
appointed caretaker Governors were sworn into office
by the President. Shortly after he was relieved of his
position, the Western Equatoria state governor was
arrested at his residence in Juba, but was later released.
On 21 August, the Speaker of the Western Equatoria
state Legislative Assembly was killed in an ambush in
his state; further details ofhis killing are not yet known.

The escalation of fighting has sparked further
displacements. Civilians from conflict-affected counties
in southern Unity State have fled to the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) protection-of-
civilians site in Bentiu, while new internally displaced
persons from the west bank of the Nile have arrived at the
UNMlSS base in Malakal. UNMlSS is now providing
protection to over 200,000 internally displaced persons
at six protection-of-civilians sites. The Bentiu site has
experienced the largest recent increase in internally
displaced persons, up by 140 per cent since late April,
while the population at the Malakal site has grown by
almost 50 per cent just since mid-July. The escalation of
fighting also sparked violent tensions between Dinka,
Nuer and Shilluk internally displaced persons within
the Malakal site.

The large influx of internally displaced persons
into UNMlSS bases during the reporting period and
the resulting rise in political, ethnic and tribal tensions,
as well as criminal activity in the camps, underscores
once again the unsustainability of these protection
sites for the longer term. As mentioned in my previous
briefing to the Council, in May (see S/PV.7444), more
attention must be paid to preventing the sites from
becoming attractions for those looking for the services
available therein, rather than for those in need of
physical protection.

To that end, UNMlSS has further expanded
its reach outside of the sites through short, long and
dynamic air and integrated patrols, in order to increase
security for the local population while also facilitating
conditions for the delivery of humanitarian assistance.
In particular, UNMlSS has scaled up its protection-of-
civilians efforts in Unity xtate by projecting a security
presence in previously inaccessible areas. However,
capacity and resource constraints and deliberate
obstruction by the parties have limited those efforts.
I would like to thank our military and police
personnel for their gallant efforts to protect civilians
in an increasingly difficult environment. I would urge
troop- and police-contributing countries, along with
other Member States, to help equip and accelerate the
deployment of UNMlSS personnel and resources and
give them the additional resources they need.

The humanitarian situation in South Sudan is
dire. Over 2.2 million people remain displaced.
Over 4.6 million people are already facing crisis and
emergency levels of food insecurity. The situation in
Unity state is particularly alarming, as prevailing
insecurity prevents humanitarian access to displaced
communities. On 14 August, the World Food
Programme commenced food air drops to Wau Shilluk,
in Upper Nile state, which has significantly reduced the
number of civilians arriving at the UNMlSS protection
site in Malakal.

UNMlSS has continued to provide force protection
to road and barge convoys and other activities to enable
humanitarian agencies to meet the primary needs of
those at risk. Yet the delivery of humanitarian assistance
is being severely challenged by land, riverine and air
movement restrictions and the heightened risk of being
caught in crossfire.

With respect to the human rights situation in
South Sudan, 1 am deeply shocked by the parties'
utter disrespect for human life. UNMlSS continues
to receive reports of gross violations of human rights
and humanitarian law committed by all parties to the
conflict. On 29 June, UNMlSS released a human rights
flash report documenting human rights violations that
were perpetrated as fighting escalated in the Greater
Upper Nile region in April and May. Reported violations
include indiscriminate killings, rape and other sexual
violence, abductions of civilians and the destruction
of civilian objects, property and livelihoods. The
deliberate targeting of innocent civilians, including
women, children and the elderly, must stop immediately,
and the culture of impunity must end.

lam also concerned by the recent restrictions placed
on press freedom in the country, including through the
detention of, threats to and violence against journalists.
Although the circumstances around the recent killing of
Peter Moi, a journalist of the New Nation newspaper, are
still unclear, the event raises serious concern. I urge a
swift and thorough investigation into the incident. Noting
that the Government has made repeated commitments
to press freedom, it is important that they match words
with action. I strongly encourage the Government to
implement the Media Authority, Broadcast Corporation
and Right of Access to Information Act, which was
signed into law in December 2013. Ensuring the safety
and security of members of the press and swiftly
investigating incidents of violence and intimidation
againstjournalists are critical.

As I have noted in previous briefings to the
Council, UNMlSS continues to face serious obstacles
to its operations, including grave obstructions by
both parties to its freedom of movement. That limits
the Mission's ability to protect civilians and monitor
the human rights situation, while also delaying and
interrupting the movement of life-saving humanitarian
aid to the most vulnerable. I would like again to urge all
parties to allow unhindered freedom of movement for
Mission and humanitarian operations.

Following the hopefully successful conclusion to the
peace talks, we must bear in mind that implementation
will have significant resource implications. The
agreement includes a number of important tasks for
the Mission and several implied tasks that will require
UNMlSS support. In orienting the Mission to assume
those functions, we must be careful that resources are
not diverted from key mandated tasks, particularly the
protection of civilians. The four pillars of the current
mandate of UNMlSS will continue to be necessary and
critical to creating an environment in which peace can
take root.

As we welcome hopefully the signing of the
agreement by the Government, I would reiterate
my call to the leaders of South Sudan to place the
interests of their people above their personal ambitions
and implement the peace agreement in good faith.
While we will all do everything possible to support
implementation, I must remind the Council that this
agreement, albeit very important, is only a first step.
Peace, stability and prosperity will not come to South
Sudan overnight. The process will require concerted
and sustained efforts from both national stakeholders
and international partners.

Focus will also need to be drawn to the range of
intercommunal and other conflicts, which in some
states prove to bejust as Violent as the political struggle.
We must devise ways to support the South Sudanese
people to address the drivers of conflict as we lay the
foundation for longer-term peace and development.

I would like to conclude by reaffirming the
commitment of the entire United Nations family on
the ground to work closely with the African Union,
regional and international partners and, not the least,
the people of South Sudan to make that vision a reality.
