Ms. Loj (Denmark): I too wish to start by
thanking Mr. Ibrahima Fall, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes region, and
Ambassador Liberata Mulamula for their briefings.
Denmark appreciates this opportunity to discuss the
issue of peace, security and development in the Great
Lakes region. We would like to associate ourselves
with the statement to be made by the representative of
Finland on behalf of the European Union.

The adoption of the Pact on Security, Stability
and Development in the Great Lakes Region at the
Second Summit of the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region is encouraging. It could certainly
be a useful contribution to advancing the peace and
security agenda of the region. Political will and
dedication are the driving force in promoting peace and
stability. We hope to see strong commitment from the
core countries with regard to implementation and the
establishment of an efficient follow-up mechanism
with regional actors in the lead.

The current situation in the Great Lakes region is
promising. The successful conclusion of the transition
processes in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Burundi and the ongoing peace negotiations between
the Government of Uganda and the Lord's Resistance
Army give rise to optimism.

However, the situation in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is still very
difficult, and the continuing deterioration of the
situation in Darfur and its spillover to neighbouring
countries are causes for great concern. They constitute
a significant threat to international peace and stability
in the larger region. We should not allow the positive
developments in the Great Lakes region to be lost in
yet another regional conflict.

I would like to stress that the positive
developments in the Great Lakes region to a large
extent are a consequence of the improved neighbourly
relations and the close cooperation between the African
Union and the United Nations.
11

Allow me to use this opportunity to commend

Tanzania and South Africa for the constructive role

they have played, and continue to play, in support of
peace in the region.

Let me conclude with a few words on the
protection of civilians and on impunity. Despite the
progress just mentioned, the need for protection of
civilian populations continues to be immense
throughout the region. Governments in the region have
the primary responsibility to protect their own
populations; if they fail to do so, they leave that
responsibility to the international community.

Finally, in order to secure long-term stability and
respect for the rule of law, all States concerned must
take action to bring to justice perpetrators of violations
of human rights and international law. Impunity should
not be the order of the day, and all States must
cooperate with international criminal courts, including
the International Criminal Court, to facilitate
investigation and to ensure apprehension and surrender
of suspects. Where the United Nations is engaged, it
should be part and parcel of its mandate to assist States
in eliminating impunity.

