Mr. Holkeri: I thank the members of the Council
for their constructive discussion of issues of crucial
importance to the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and to
the people of Kosovo. The proposals and assessments
of Council members are most welcome. I will now try
to answer the questions raised in the discussion and
offer my comments on some details of particular
interventions.

I will begin with the Foreign Minister of Serbia
and Montenegro, whom I thank for his remarks. I fully
agree with his call for dialogue and reconciliation
between Kosovo Serbs and Kosovo Albanians.

I should like to pick up one point from the very
insightful statement made by the representative of
France. I welcome and agree with his statement that
those considering how to handle Kosovo's political
future should do so in transparency and discussion with
one another. We are entering a tricky and sensitive
phase, and we in the United Nations should closely
coordinate our efforts with those of concerned Member
States.

I fully concur with the representative of France's
observations on the quality of the media in Kosovo.
Like media in other regions emerging from ethnic
conflict, the media in Kosovo do not meet international
standards. UNMIK is studying carefully the recent
report of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and is prepared to consider
appropriate measures to impose sanctions on the media
that inflamed the situation in March.

I take note of the list of measures outlined by the
representative of the Russian Federation, aimed at
normalizing the situation in Kosovo following the
March violence. As I stated in my briefing, enhancing
security in Kosovo - particularly the security of non-
majority communities - and working towards multi-
ethnicity, returns and freedom of movement are at the
heart of UNMIK's current efforts. The implementation
of the standards remains the centrepiece of UNMIK's
activities under its mandate, in accordance with
resolution 1244 (1999).

The representative of Japan referred to a recent
Amnesty International report. He said that, with regard
to the issue of trafficking in girls and women, Japan
hopes that UNMIK will provide further information
and take appropriate measures to address the problem
without delay. UNMIK takes the Amnesty International
report very seriously. The report on human trafficking
addresses a very serious problem that is common
throughout the Balkans. We recognize that UNMIK has
important responsibilities to combat this tragic and
criminal phenomenon in Kosovo. UNMIK policy is
also to ensure the provision of appropriate assistance
and rehabilitation to the victims of such trafficking.
Our Mission takes immediate and strict disciplinary
action against any staff member found in
establishments where prostitution is suspected and that
we have declared to be off-limits. I have directed
UNMIK staff to review the recommendations in
Amnesty International's report and to take action to
improve our response in combating human trafficking
where appropriate.

I should like to thank in particular two countries,
Iceland and Ukraine. Iceland has provided us with
important support in areas where it has expertise - air
traffic control and airports.

Ukraine is one of the few countries that
responded to our request by providing new
investigators for the riots that took place mid-March.
We are grateful for that kind of support, and we hope
that this encourages other Member States to help us as
well.

In conclusion, I would like to thank Council
members for their support of UNMIK and of our
policies. Such support is absolutely essential for our
joint efforts in the successful implementation of
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999). I note the
priority issues raised in members' interventions:
security, the rule of law, the rebuilding of houses and
destroyed property, protection of the rights of
communities, multi-ethnicity, returns, reform of local
government, implementation of standards and revival
of Kosovo's economy. I can assure the Council that
these are our common priorities and that we will make
every effort to achieve them.

Finally, let me say that I am encouraged by this
discussion. I sense a growing recognition of the fact
that the United Nations and all concerned Member
States must reflect deeply on the issue of how to
handle Kosovo's political future and move towards a
more stable political settlement. I encourage this
reflection and look forward to further discussions with
the Council on the sensitive steps ahead of us.

