The President (interpretation from Chinese): I shall
now make a statement in my capacity as representative of
China.

As a neighbour of Tajikistan, China welcomes the
General Agreement on the Establishment of Peace and
National Accord in Tajikistan, signed by the two parties
in that country, and we are pleased by the stabilization of
the overall situation in Tajikistan. We believe the General
Agreement is conducive to moving the Tajik peace
process forward, leading to the ultimate realization of
national reconciliation in Tajikistan.

In his report to the Security Council, the Secretary-
General recommends the extension of the mandate of the
United Nations Mission of Observers in Tajikistan
(UNMOT) and UNMOT' 5 expansion. We believe that this
recommendation is in conformity with the wishes of the
parties concerned and is conducive to the implementation
of the General Agreement. The Chinese delegation will
therefore vote in favour of the draft resolution.

The peace in Tajikistan is hard won. We appreciate
the mediation efforts of the Secretary-General, his Special
Representative and the countries of the region, such as the
Russian Federation. We hope that the two parties
concerned can implement the General Agreement in real
earnest, adopt effective measures and cooperate with the
United Nations so as to enable UNMOT to smoothly
carry out its mandate.

At the same time, we believe that the international
community should provide Tajikistan with urgently
needed assistance to help its economic reconstruction.

We sincerely hope that, through the common efforts
of the parties concerned, and with the vigorous help of
the international community, Tajikistan can achieve
sustained stability and economic development as soon as
possible.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now put to the vote the draft resolution contained
in document S/1997/887.

A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Chile, China, Costa Rica, Egypt, France, Guinea- of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
Bissau, Japan, Kenya, Poland, Portugal, Republic of of America
Korea, Russian Federation, Sweden, United Kingdom
The President (interpretation from Chinese): There
were 15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 1138 (1997).

There are no more speakers on my list. The Security
Council has thus concluded the present stage of its

consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.10 pan.

