Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): I would
like to express my appreciation to Japan for organizing
this debate on the situation in Afghanistan. I also thank
the Ambassador of Afghanistan for his statement.
Finally, I would like to thank Mr. Yamamoto, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), for his briefing
and for presenting the latest report of the Secretary-
General, as contained in document S/2017/1056.

Unfortunately, security and instability remain
the major challenges for Afghanistan. According to
the Secretary-General's latest report, despite a minor
four per-cent decrease in incidents, the security
situation has remained highly volatile, as conflicts
between Government and anti-Government forces have
continued throughout most of the country. The report
also highlights one of the most violent weeks in recent
times, when terrorist elements staged coordinated
attacks in several locations.

Iran continues its full support for the promotion of
security, stability, and comprehensive and sustainable
development in Afghanistan. The security situation
in Afghanistan has a direct impact, in our view, on
the security of our borders and the region. Iran also
reiterates its support for any Afghan-led, Afghan-
owned, Afghan-controlled reconciliation and peace
process and stands ready to participate as a regional
actor in all such ongoing processes.

The Afghan National Unity Government is at the
forefront of the fight against terrorism, in particular
against the Taliban, Al-Qaida and Da'esh and its
affiliates, as well as other terrorist and extremist
groups and criminals, including those involved in the
narcotics trade. Greater sustained support on the part
of the international community is needed to support the
Afghan Government in that fight, as well as to address
its complex security, economic and political challenges.

Strengthening our regional cooperation with
Afghanistan is a priority and represents a major step
towards consolidating peace and economic activity
in the region. We welcome and urge further efforts
to strengthen the process of regional economic
cooperation, including measures to facilitate regional
connectivity, trade and transit. In that context, we
welcome the first consignment of goods from India to
Afghanistan through Chabahar Port in November 2017.
Afghanistan and Iran also continued their bilateral
efforts to finalize a comprehensive partnership
agreement, with a second round of working committees
taking place in Kabul on 8 October. Water, security,
and refugee and migrant issues have been discussed at
the deputy ministerial level.

The challenges facing Afghanistan and our
region are interconnected. We are very concerned
over the findings of the Afghanistan Opium Survey
2017 of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, which indicate an 87-per cent growth in opium
production in the course of this year. That information
is especially alarming when we take note of the fact
that narcotics serve as a major source of income for
the terrorist groups. The international community
needs to support the relevant international and regional
projects and activities, including those carried out by
Afghanistan, the Islamic Republic of Iran and Pakistan
within the framework of the triangular initiative to
counter narcotics.

For more than three decades Iran has hosted
millions of Afghan refugees, sharing our resources
and services with them, including basic commodities,
public health and public education at all levels. Iran
continues to participate in the work of the Tripartite
Commission in order to plan for the voluntary, safe,
dignified and gradual repatriation of Afghan refugees.
Success in voluntary repatriation depends, first and
foremost, on providing for the reasonable needs of
repatriated refugees in Afghanistan and underscores the
necessity for mobilizing more international support for
that purpose. A stronger coordinated approach between
the Government, donors and the United Nations, and an
overall strategy for addressing the combined needs of
the displaced and returnees are crucial in making the
repatriation of Afghan refugees more effective.

We support UNAMA and other United Nations
agencies in their efforts to provide development and
reconstruction assistance to Afghanistan through
a comprehensive plan. Sustained ownership and
partnership with the Afghan Government are needed in
order to best utilize UNAMA and the United Nations
system for the delivery of necessary services in priority
areas, as advised by the national Government.

