Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Like the previous speakers, I would like to thank the
Permanent Representative of the Republic of Korea,
Ambassador Oh Joon, for his presentation and for the
dedication shown by him and his team in chairing the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) over the past two years. While this time it was
not possible to hear presentations by the Chairs of all
the Sanctions Committees during a single Council
meeting, Ambassador Oh Joon's presentation is a
useful complement to the presentations made last
week by the Chairs of the Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities, and
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) concerning counter-terrorism (see S/PV.7316).
Cooperation, coordination and synergy between the
1540, 1267/1989 and 1373 Committees should continue
to be promoted in order to strengthen the fight against
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.

The proliferation ofnuclear, chemical and biological
weapons and of their means of delivery continues to
threaten international peace and security. The risk
of terrorists or other non-State actors acquiring,
developing, trading or using such weapons remains
high. It is, therefore, a duty for all Member States to
join forces to minimize that risk. In that respect, the
submission of national reports on the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) and their regular updating are
important confidence-building measures in the fight
against all types of weapons of mass destruction.

Resolution 1540 (2004) plays akey role in preventing
proliferation, but it will be effective only if all Member
States are determined to implement its provisions.
Country visits and the participation by members of
the 1540 Committee and its Expert Group in such
events as the regional workshop held last month in the
Republic of Korea are essential for raising awareness
among Member States and promoting the universal
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). Luxembourg
welcomes the fact that, at present, there remain only
20 Member States that have not yet submitted national
reports. Advocacy efforts must continue to further
reduce that number.

The 1540 Committee also continues to play an
important role as a centre for exchange connecting those
seeking and those providing assistance. The growing
number of exchanges testifies to that. We encourage the
1540 Committee and its Group of Experts to persevere
in their efforts to match requests for and offers of
assistance, and to increase the number of assistance
providers, since demand currently exceeds supply. We
believe that the topic deserves to be among the key
priorities of the 1540 Committee in the context of the
coming first comprehensive review of the status of
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), which must
be conducted before December 2016.

The open debate organized by the Republic of Korea
on 7 May under its Council presidency (see S/PV.7169)
gave new impetus to the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004). In that context, civil society, industry
and private sector have a key role to play. Several
initiatives have demonstrated the benefit of involving
such stakeholders with the efforts of Governments. As
examples, I will cite the recent conference organized
by Germany, with the support of the European Union,
in the framework of the Wiesbaden process, in which
industries participated, or the legislative guide for
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) at the
national level that was published by an independent
non-governmental organization, VERTIC, with the
support of Canada and the United Kingdom. Any new
initiative in that area would be welcome.

In conclusion, I reaffirm the active support of
Luxembourg for the comprehensive implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004). Nationally, we are pursuing
our efforts to reform our export control system in
order to strengthen national mechanisms to combat the
proliferation ofweapons ofmass destruction and related
technologies. As ofOctober 2015, Luxembourg, with the
Netherlands, will assume the annual co-chairmanship of
the Missile Technology Control Regime, demonstrating
our strong commitment to combating the proliferation
of delivery systems for weapons of mass destruction.

