Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, and Ambassador
Gustavo Meza-Cuadra for your informative briefings
and tireless work and active leadership in the three
Committees. The close cooperation and engagement of
the Committees are an excellent example of the use of
subsidiary bodies in highlighting the effectiveness of
the Security Council as the organ entrusted with the
maintenance of international peace and security.

Let me also commend the ongoing cooperation
among the respective expert bodies of the three
Committees: the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team, the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate (CTED) and the Group of Experts of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004). Their mutual understanding of the importance
of information-sharing, cooperation in matters
of common concern and outreach to regional and
subregional organizations is highly appreciated.

This year, the 1540 Committee has started the
preparatory work for the upcoming comprehensive
review ofthe implementation ofresolution 1540 (2004),
which will be completed in 2021. The review will have
two major objectives: to evaluate the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004), with a View to increasing
its effectiveness, and to analyse the work of the
Committee and recommend any necessary changes.
Based on resolution 2325 (2016), we ought to remember
that recommendations should take into account the
evolving nature of risks of proliferation and the rapid
advances in science, technology and commerce in the
context of non-proliferation. While the use of weapons
of mass destruction and their means of delivery by
terrorists continue to pose a real threat, non-State
actors are becoming more creative in weaponizing
new technologies.

Obligations under resolution 1540 (2004) are not a
one-time task. We call on all States to fully implement
resolution 1540 (2004) by taking national and
international measures to strengthen their capacities
in countering threats posed by the terrorists acquiring
weapons of mass destruction.

Secondly, Poland welcomes the achievements
of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999) 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning ISIL
(Da'esh) Al-Qaida and associated individuals groups
undertakings and entities. Despite the defeat of Da'esh
in Iraq and the liberation of the last remaining territory
occupied by Da'esh in Syria, the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant still poses a significant challenge to
international peace and security. Al-Qaida is relatively
strong in many parts of the world and poses long-term
danger to stability and sustainable development.

In that regard, it is a matter of the highest
importance to keep the sanctions list updated and to
stay focused on the current threat. Having said that, I
would like to underline a significant achievement made
by all Security Council member States that enabled the
listing of a person responsible for a deadly terrorist
attack in the State of J ammu and Kashmir. We welcome
the progress achieved and encourage all States to work
together to hold perpetrators, organizers and sponsors
of acts of terrorism accountable.

Lastly, I would like to express our appreciation for
the work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee. Thanks
to its efforts, last year we adopted the addendum to the
Madrid Guiding Principles. Now it is up to Member
States to make the best use of them and come up with

country-tailored responses to tackle the threat posed
by foreign terrorist fighters. The special meetings of
the Committee, such as the recent one on the nexus
between international terrorism and transnational
organized crime, are an excellent tool for States to
address those linkages and foster actions aimed at the
phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters. They are also
a unique platform to galvanize discussion.

With the adoption of resolution 2462 (2019), on
countering the financing ofterrorism, Poland hopes that
the CTC, together with CTED, will play a coordinating
role in the dialogue with Member States in terms of the
implementation of its provisions.

To conclude, let me stress that aside from States'
efforts in countering terrorism, we should not
underestimate the effectiveness of engaging with the
private sector and civil society organizations. Without
mutual trust among all relevant actors, our undertakings
will be futile.

