Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I wish to
begin by thanking Deputy Secretary-General Mr. Jan
Eliasson and Assistant Secretary-General Mr. Andrew
Gilmour for their briefings. Let me also take this
opportunity to express to Mr. Jan Eliasson the deep
gratitude of France for his exemplary work on all fronts,
beginning with human rights, which serves as a source
of inspiration and admiration.

First and foremost, I wish to welcome the decision
taken once again by the Security Council to allow those
briefings to be delivered under a stand-alone item on the
agenda. The situation, which remains one of the most
serious in the world, warrants the full attention and
mobilization of the Security Council. It is the Council's

responsibility, inasmuch as some of those crimes may
constitute crimes against humanity. Given the gravity
and systematic nature of those violations, they are the
expression of an absolute totalitarianism that flies in
the face of the rule of law.

The report of the international commission of
inquiry of February 2014 shed light on

"the gravity, scale and nature of these violations
[that] reveal a State that does not have any parallel in
the contemporary world" (A/HRC/25/63, para. 80).

The North Korean regime has chosen to give
priority to repression and to developing its nuclear and
ballistic capacities to the detriment of the economic
development and welfare of its people. In that sense,
it poses a threat to the region and, further afield, a
threat to international peace and security. That is yet
another reason for the Security Council to be seized of
the situation.

The briefings that we have just heard demonstrates
that the situation has remained unchanged since
the commission of inquiry's report was published,
with mass executions, tens of thousands of political
prisoners, the systematic use of torture, slavery,
famine, abductions, the displacement of populations,
trafficking in human beings and women in particular,
and finally the restriction of access to essential services,
due to the fact that the resources of the State have been
diverted for military purposes. That is, of course, not
an exhaustive list. Let me focus on three points.

First, there is a right to freedom of opinion
and expression, the exercise of which enables us to
determine whether other rights are being respected. In
North Korea, crimes are committed under the guise of
censorship and the prohibition of any form of critical
expression. The witnesses of that tragedy are reduced
to silence. There is a lack of human rights advocates,
a lack of free press and a lack of international media.
The High Commissioner for Human Rights no longer
has access to the territory. The entire population is
subject to controlled education and alienated, or even
imprisoned and killed, in its own land.

Accordingly, we must welcome the holding of this
meeting of the Security Council; the existence of an
office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights in
Seoul, designed to follow the situation in North Korea;
the annual General Assembly resolution; and the
organization of events at the United Nations. All of that
can help to maintain the vigilance of the international
community, despite the authorities' attempt to stifle it.

Secondly, I would like to discuss the fate of the
victims of enforced disappearances and the families
that have awaited news of their loved ones for years.
The tragedy of enforced disappearance, which France
is keen to combat, is out of all proportion in North
Korea. It also extends to other countries, especially
Japan, whose authorities are still waiting for the
enquiries promised by the North Korean authorities
to be conducted. We encourage all States whose
nationals have been abducted by the regime to ratify
the International Convention for the Protection of All
Persons from Enforced Disappearance, which was
adopted 10 years ago. The Convention, the Working
Group and the Committee on Enforced Disappearances
provide States with the technical assistance necessary
to combat this scourge.

France also supports the strong plea made by the
High Commissioner for Human Rights the day before
yesterday, 7 December, in response to the suffering of
these families, some of which have been separated for
more than 60 years, since the Korean War.

Thirdly, I wish also to draw attention to the situation
of North Korean workers abroad, who are the modern
slaves of a regime that diverts the majority of their
income to fund its nuclear and ballistic programmes, in
violation of the international commitments undertaken
by North Korea, in particular with respect to Security
Council resolutions. These workers, who are scattered
across a number of countries, live in conditions that
clearly violate international human rights standards. We
must work together to put an end to the use of these men
and women in service ofa cause that seriously endangers
international and regional security and undermines
their most fundamental rights and freedoms.

The Pyongyang regime must shoulder its
responsibilities, which are clear: put an end to violations,
release political prisoners, and provide justice and
reparations. Here I wish to reaffirm the importance of
the fight against impunity and to welcome the work of
the group of independent experts on impunity, whose
recommendations we will read attentively. All options
must be collectively explored, including the referral of
the situation to the International Criminal Court and
sanctions imposed for reasons related to human rights.

Following his visit to Seoul in late November, the
Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights
in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea made a
plea for "a people-focused approach in dealing with the
situation in North Korea".

Let me conclude by drawing the Council's attention
to those who, risking their lives, crossed borders to
bear witness to the daily oppression that is crushing
the people of North Korea. The Council must spare no
effort to find the ways and means necessary to ensure
that concrete change finally occurs, for the sake of the
security and well-being of these people, these men,
women and children who daily are subject to violations
and live in fear.

