Mr. Martinez Blanco (Honduras) (interpretation from Spanish): My delegation will vote in favour of the draft
resolution on Eastern Slavonia because it believes that
effective implementation of the Basic Agreement of 12
November 1995 is essential for the reintegration of
Croatia's Sector East, the reduction of tensions between
the parties and the promotion of peace prospects. This
would eliminate the possibility of the resumption of a
struggle threatening serious consequences for the region
as a whole. Furthermore, we believe that implementation
of this Agreement is important for mutual recognition
between Croatia and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.

The tasks listed for implementation of the Basic
Agreement are difficult. With regard to security, the plan
is to generate the necessary confidence between the
parties, demilitarize the region and monitor the voluntary
and safe return of refugees and displaced persons. In the
civil area, it is to reintegrate the region to the judicial and
constitutional system of Croatia. This involves police
training, respect for human rights, facilitating the return
of refugees, the organization of elections and other
measures designed to promote confidence and
reconciliation. The tasks to be carried out by the military
and civilian components of the new peace-keeping
operation - the United Nations Transitional
Administration for Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western
Sirmium (UNTAES) - are, therefore, difficult and
complex. We believe that the success of the operation will
largely depend on the parties' cooperation. We urge them,
therefore, to support UNTAES and faithfully observe all
their commitments under the Basic Agreement.

As regards the situation in the Prevlaka peninsula,
we believe that the continued presence of United Nations
military observers will continue to contribute to the
demilitarization process, and thus to the reduction of
tension. We will therefore vote in favour of the draft
resolution authorizing their presence in the region for
three more months. We hope that the Republic of Croatia
and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia will continue in
good faith to seek an agreement that will resolve their
differences in a peaceful way.

