Mr. Umemoto (Japan): First of all, I would like
to express my appreciation to you, Mr. President, for
presiding over this important debate. I would also like
to congratulate Ms. Sandra Honore on assuming the
post of Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH), and I would like to thank her for her
comprehensive briefing today as well as her significant
contribution to the Mission. I also pay tribute to the
men and women of MINUSTAH for the commitment
and fortitude they have demonstrated under difficult
circumstances.
I welcome the Secretary-General's report on
MINUSTAH issued on 19 August (S/2013/493). As the
report mentions, we are very pleased to note that Haiti
has made progress. The Government of Haiti established
a transitional Electoral Council on 19 April and has been
advancing President Martelly's Administration's "five
Es" policy of employment, education, the environment,
energy and the establishment of the rule of law. With
regard to the recovery process, since the earthquake in
2010, more than 10 million cubic metres ofdebris, which
amounts to almost 80 per cent of the total debris, has
been removed. And the number of internally displaced
persons has been reduced by 82 per cent, according to
the Secretary-General's report.

In recognition of that change on the ground, Japan
withdrew its ground Self-Defence Force's engineering
unit in Haiti last December. The number of personnel
who have served in the Japanese contingent since
2010 totals approximately 2,200. In that regard, Japan
welcomes the MINUSTAH consolidation plan referred
to in the previous report (S/2013/139)of the Secretary-
General and the fact that the plan has been progressing
in cooperation with the Government of Haiti.

Haiti certainly continues to face many challenges.
As the Secretary-General's report points out, continued
delays in the implementation of long-overdue elections
and strained relations between the executive and
legislative branches of the Government risk thwarting
progress in the stabilization process. Japan welcomes
the fact that Haiti established its transitional Electoral
Council in April, but more work will be needed for the
Government to carry out its next elections in a peaceful
and democratic manner.
Basic infrastructure in the country remains fragile.
In addition to the earthquake in 2010, Hurricane Sandy
last October brought significant damage to the country.
Although the international community responded right
after the hurricane, Haiti still needs to improve its basic
infrastructure, including roads, electricity and potable
water, as well as social services, including access to
education and medicine. High unemployment also
remains a big concern.

To respond to those important needs, the
Government of Japan has already disbursed more than
$150 million, exceeding the $100 million pledged in the
New York conference in 2010. Even after the withdrawal
of its Ground Self-Defense Force's engineering unit,
Japan intends to continue supporting and cooperating
with Haiti. When the engineering unit left Haiti,
Japan donated engineering equipment to the Haitian
Government and contributed to human resources
development in the country through the sharing of
its expertise in the use of that equipment. Japan also
currently supports strengthening the capacity of national
authorities in the areas of debris management and the
operation of engineering equipment. The Government
of Japan will continue to provide support to Haiti as it
restores or establishes basic social services, mainly in
the fields of health, hygiene and education.

As you are aware, Mr. President, the Great East
Japan Earthquake struck our country in March 2011,
about a year after the significant earthquake that hit
Haiti. Like Haiti, Japan is a country where natural
disasters occur frequently; that is why Japan firmly
intends to continue collaborating with Haiti.

