Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We would like to welcome the initiative of the United
Kingdom to convene this open debate, and especially
your participation, Mr. Minister. We appreciate the
important briefings by the Secretary-General, The
Most Reverend and Right Honourable Justin Welby,
Archbishop of Canterbury, and Ms. Mossarat Qadeem.

Giventheincreasingcomplexityofglobalchallenges,
Peru believes that it is of the utmost importance to
strengthen multilateralism and to revitalize the United
Nations in order to make it more coherent, effective and
efficient in supporting the efforts of Member States to
achieve a sustainable peace. We therefore support the
leadership and reforms promoted by the Secretary-
General. We encourage him to continue to do so in line
with the functions conferred upon him by the Charter
of the United Nations and the principle of the peaceful
dispute settlement. In particular, among the provisions
listed in Chapter VI, we underscore the validity
and relevance of mediation for effective preventive
diplomacy, at all levels of human interaction, before,
during and after conflict.
From a legal perspective, we would like to
recall that, in its original codification, in The Hague
Conventions of 1899 and 1907, international mediation,
together with so-called good offices, transcends the
establishment of contact between the parties and the
organizational aspects of facilitating a negotiation.
Mediators are called upon to guide a negotiation to its
conclusion, which implies respect for the sensitivities
of the parties, including those related to the sovereignty
of States, since it requires their consent at all times.

Mediation is mandated by the parties, which,
in turn, must be in accordance with applicable
international law, including international humanitarian
law and international human rights law, as well as
the relevant Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions. Special Envoys of the Secretary-General
and other United Nations representatives normally
involved in mediation have a special responsibility
to guide the parties to a dispute or conflict towards
solutions consistent with the functioning of a rules-
based international system. In no case can the exercise
of that responsibility be considered unfriendly. On
the contrary, recourse to mediation by a trained
representative of the United Nations or other specialized
agencies is very valuable to any legal entity interested
in peacefully resolving a dispute.

We highlight the establishment of the Secretary-
General's High-level Advisory Board on Mediation
and the important role played by former President
Olusegun Obasanjo of Nigeria, one of its members,
in supporting the political process in Liberia during
the presidential elections held last December. In that
regard, Peru encourages the Council to play a more
active role in its work, by promoting and supporting
the use of mediation and other peaceful means of
dispute settlement provided for in the Charter of the
United Nations. We believe that it is Vital for achieving
peaceful solutions to major conflicts, such as those
in Syria and Yemen. The respective Special Envoys
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan de Mistura and
Mr. Martin Griffiths, have the unanimous support of
the Council in their efforts to bring the relevant parties
together. We also believe that the changing nature of
contemporary conflicts calls for the strengthening and
deployment of regional, subregional, national and local
capacities to resolve them peacefully in an inclusive
manner, including specific mediation capacities.

In that regard, we would like to highlight the
important role that the African Union and other regional
and subregional organizations continue to play in
coordination with the United Nations system, and with
the Council in particular. For example, we recognize
the important mediating role of the Intergovernmental
Authority onDevelopment in the conflict in South Sudan.
However, we underscore the need for the international
community, in cooperation with such organizations
and civil society, to promote more actively the building
and strengthening of mediation capacities. We also
stress the importance of a comprehensive approach to
conflict, under which mediation can, as appropriate,
be complemented by other tools and capacities, in
particular for early warning and prevention.

Peacekeeping operations and, in general, peace
missions deployed under the mandate of the Council,
in line with peacebuilding efforts in conflict-affected
countries, should be receive adequate training to enable
them to mediate and promote national capacities as part
of their exit strategies.

In conclusion, I emphasize the importance of
promoting, at all levels, greater women's leadership
and participation in mediation processes. That means,
inter alia, increased resources for training, in line
with resolution 2242 (2015), on women and peace
and security.

