Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation has consistently
supported the Secretary-General's good offices mission
and his efforts aimed at a just settlement of the Cyprus
problem on the basis of Security Council resolutions
and the express will of both Cypriot communities. We
base ourselves on the need of the international
community - and particularly the Council - to assist
in reaching arrangements between the Cypriot parties
themselves, but in no way to impose any decisions on
them.

We firmly believe that the referendums planned
for 24 April in both parts of Cyprus must take place
freely, without any external interference or pressure.
We must await their results, after which the Security
Council will be in a position to take a considered
decision, including with respect to deploying a new
United Nations peacekeeping operation on the island,
taking fully into account the situation that will obtain
on the island following the referendums - including
with respect to the concerns of the Cypriot sides with
regard to security safeguards - within the framework
of a comprehensive Cyprus settlement.

The Russian delegation expresses deep regret at
how the work was structured on the draft resolution
that will be put to the vote in the Council today. This
involves the formulation of a serious decision on the
parameters of a new United Nations peacekeeping
operation in Cyprus and the imposition of an arms
embargo. Such a technically and legally complex
decision calls for the most thorough and careful
analysis. However, the sponsors of the draft resolution,
having ignored the views of other Council members
and having essentially forgone discussion, have
submitted the draft resolution for a vote.

We draw the Council's attention to the fact that
views opposed to such precipitous adoption of a draft
resolution on the eve of the referendums were
expressed by the parties directly interested in the
settlement as well as by the majority of Council
members. Under those circumstances, the Russian side
has no other choice but to exercise a veto on technical
grounds, in order to ensure conditions in the future for
normal, mutually respectful work to agree upon
Security Council decisions that are acceptable to all
parties.

The Russian delegation is prepared in future to
take part most constructively in formulating a draft
resolution on this issue in the Security Council. We
base our position on the understanding that such work
will be continued after the referendums in both parts of
Cyprus and that it will duly take the results into
account and provide for universally acceptable ways to
remove concerns on the part of the Cypriot parties.

