Mr. Wlosowicz (Poland): When my delegation took
the floor on 28 June 1996 on the occasion of the adoption
of the Security Council resolution setting up the United
Nations Support Mission in Haiti (UNSMIH), it expressed
its firm belief that the international community has an
obligation to assist the Government and the people of Haiti
in their struggle for stability and normalcy in that country.

Today, when we are about to extend the mandate of
UNSMIH for the last time, with the actual date of its
expiration being either 31 May 1997 or the end of July
1997, we find our earlier conviction still to be valid.
Indeed, there has been considerable progress in the peaceful
resolution of conflict in Haiti. The Haitian Government has
started regulating the economy and the social infrastructure
of that country, both of which are of paramount importance
for properly addressing and eventually resolving the
problems that persist there. It is our hope that the new laws
concerning in particular the modernization of State
enterprises and the status of the civil service will add new
momentum to the process of normalization, which was
stalled until recently.

Similarly, we welcome the improvements in the
security situation in Haiti. We have taken note of some
positive trends - however limited they still may be - in
the functioning of the Haitian National Police Force in the
capital as well as in other regions of the country.

Yet it is clear, from the report of the Secretary-
General as well as from numerous other sources, that
notwithstanding all the progress that has been made to date,
the Haitian authorities are still not in a position to secure

 

the kind of environment they need to carry out the
economic, institutional and judicial reforms to which they
have committed themselves.

Generally speaking, the security situation in Haiti
continues to cause us concern. The Haitian National
Police is in clear need of further strengthening. It requires
more training, equipment and better coordination of its
activities. The justice system in Haiti should also be
profoundly reformed. In the view of the Secretary-
General, it is characterized by a continuing inability to
respond professionally to existing challenges.

The international community has been assisting Haiti
in its quest for security and stability since the restoration
of constitutional order. In our opinion, there are
compelling reasons to continue this assistance in order to
facilitate the difficult transition to normality and
democracy in that country. This is also the wish of the
Haitian authorities, as stated in the letter from President
Rene Preval requesting the extension of the mandate of
the United Nations Support Mission in Haiti (UNSMIH).

It is for these reasons that the Polish delegation will
vote in favour of the draft resolution extending the
mandate of UNSMIH, thereby paving the way for
different forms of cooperation between the Haitians and
the international community.

Finally, I should like to pay tribute to the members
of UNSMIH and to their Governments, which have been
extremely generous in their approach to the situation in
Haiti.

