Mr. Kolby (Norway): I, too, would like to thank
Ambassador Adeniji for his briefing. We welcome this
opportunity to exchange views on the situation in
Sierra Leone.

Norway would like to reiterate its strong support
for the peace process and we note with satisfaction
recent positive developments. The deployment of the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL)
to new areas, the release of a significant number of
child combatants and the disarmament of several
thousand ex-combatants represent significant progress
for the peace process.

The process of disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and rehabilitation merits particular
attention. Norway is pleased to see the progress of the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process
and the revitalization of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme. The
agreement to construct new camps for demobilization
and the creation of a mobile disarmament unit will
facilitate the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process further. We welcome the idea of
integrating the Revolutionary United Front (RUF) and
the Civil Defence Force (CDF) into the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration monitoring
mechanism and technical bodies.

There are, however, significant challenges
remaining. The reintegration of ex-combatants,
returnees and internally displaced persons in the region
that has been declared safe requires concrete and
comprehensive measures. Close cooperation between
the Government of Sierra Leone, UNAMSIL and other
United Nations bodies is required. Particular attention
should be given to the situation of child ex-combatants.
For the long-term stability of the country, it is
crucial that income-generating activities are created
and that ex-combatants and returning populations are
given the possibility to participate in the revitalization
of the country's economy. The extension of civilian
authority is another precondition for the success of the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process.
Incentives for disarmament must be created by
providing citizens with a basic sense of security. We
therefore strongly encourage UNAMSIL to continue to
work with the Sierra Leonean Government on efforts to
extend civil authority, both qualitatively and
geographically.

Norway has stated its willingness to provide
additional personnel to the civilian police component
of UNAMSIL, and we are preparing to have another
Norwegian police officer, a superintendent, in place in
Sierra Leone shortly.

The Secretary-General has underlined the risk
that the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme will soon stall as a result of insufficient
funding. As a response to this situation, Norway is
prepared to contribute another $500,000 to the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration fund in
addition to the $1 million we contributed in 1999. We
will, however, need to see a firm commitment from
other donors too, and we appeal both to the members of
the Council and to others to contribute to the fund.

Norway has thus far contributed $8 million to
humanitarian efforts in Sierra Leone and Guinea in
2001, and we have pledged $500,000 for the
establishment of a special court for Sierra Leone.

The gradual improvement of the security situation
in Sierra Leone has given the humanitarian agencies
access to formerly inaccessible regions. The return of
refugees has placed a heavy burden on the resources
and the infrastructure in the Government-controlled
areas. There is a clear need for the resettlement of both
internally displaced persons and returnees to other
regions.

Norway supports the efforts of the humanitarian
agencies in their resettlement and reintegration
activities. It is important that local governments, in
close cooperation with peacekeeping forces, provide
the necessary protection and security for the returning
populations in the areas that have been declared secure.

It is also essential that the Government be able to
provide for a minimum of public services in former
RUF-controlled areas. Improvements in the human
rights situation in Sierra Leone are necessary. The
situation for many internally displaced persons is
particularly difficult, and reports of violations of
international humanitarian law against the civilian
population underline the need for swift and efficient
UNAMSIL deployment and the establishment of
civilian authorities.

In conclusion, we would like to express our
appreciation for the efforts made by the United
Nations, the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), the Governments in the region, the
various humanitarian non-governmental organizations
working in the country, and in particular those
countries contributing troops and financial means.

We congratulate the United Nations, ECOWAS
and all parties involved in the conflict on the progress
that has been made, and we urge them to maintain the
momentum created in the peace process over the past
two months.

I have four questions.

We see from paragraph 27 of the report that the
total number of disarmed ex-combatants stands at
5,669, and that those combatants have handed in 2,991
weapons. It seems to me that the number of weapons is
low compared to the number of disarmed combatants.
Could Ambassador Adeniji comment on this and
elaborate a little bit on the types and quality of the
collected weapons?

Secondly, paragraph 30 of the report refers to the
importance of the reintegration aspect of the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme, and states that ex-combatants could resort
to banditry or return to the bush if adequate
reintegration opportunities do not exist. How serious a
problem is crime among ex-combatants at present, and
does Ambassador Adeniji have a sense of whether the
problem is worsening?

Since May this year, the RUF and the CDF have
released more than 12,000 child combatants. Could the
Ambassador please elaborate on the concrete measures
put in place to provide for the former child
combatants?

My fourth and last question is as follows. The
report of the Secretary-General indicates that both CDF
and RUF commanders and ex-combatants lack
information regarding reintegration support. Which
concrete measures have been taken to ensure that the
ex-combatants are given clear and adequate
information on reintegration and support?
