Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I wish to align

myself with the statement to be made later this
morning by the presidency of the European Union.

I would like to thank the Under-Secretary-
General for his thought-provoking presentation. It is
not acceptable that even now, in the twenty-first
century, violent conflict impacts most severely on the
civilian population. Helping to ensure the protection of
civilians during armed conflict is central to the work of
the Council.

In that connection, let me say that we regret the
deaths of civilians that have resulted from operations
by international forces in Iraq and Afghanistan and
elsewhere. Any civilian casualty is one too many. We
recognize that it is incumbent on those forces to
continue to do everything they can to avoid any
civilian casualties, and we remain committed to that.

At the same time, it is important that we all
distinguish between these unintended deaths and those
resulting from the deliberate and callous targeting of
civilians by insurgents and others. The issue is quite
simple: we seek to avoid civilian deaths, whereas the
insurgents seek to cause them. That goes to the heart of
why we are dealing with conflicts in the first place.

Many challenges face us on the ground in such
situations. Civilians continue to be deliberately
targeted by insurgents, terrorists and others. In many
areas of conflict, sexual and gender-based violence is
still widespread. The abhorrent practice of using rape
as a weapon of war continues. Millions of civilians are
or remain displaced from their homes every year, left
to lead a fragile and vulnerable existence. We have also
heard too many stories over the past few weeks in
which humanitarian workers, journalists and others
have been attacked, kidnapped or murdered.

All of those things are unacceptable. It cannot be
right that civilians continue to bear the brunt of violent
conflict. They account for the greatest number of
casualties. The most vulnerable - women, older
people and children - are hit particularly hard. Let me
cite some examples. In Burma, ongoing military
campaigns against the insurgents have meant that
civilians in conflict areas have suffered the
repercussions. In Sri Lanka, the escalation in conflict
has brought a high human cost. We remain concerned
about the fragile state of security in Somalia and the
impact that terrorist violence is having on civilians
there.

The United Kingdom has also said many times in
this Chamber that the terrible suffering of the people in
Darfur has gone on for far too long. We welcome the
agreement of the Government of Sudan to a hybrid
force. At the same time, we draw attention to the
deteriorating security situation in Darfur. We are
concerned that humanitarian agencies may be forced to
pull out unless there are safety guarantees and unless
those responsible for attacks are held to account. We
call on the Government of the Sudan to continue to
remove bureaucratic impediments to the operations of
humanitarian agencies.

The United Kingdom is also deeply concerned
about the humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip. The
recent violence, as has been stated in this Chamber, has
had tragic consequences. The United Kingdom fully
supports the statement by the Quartet and efforts to
meet the humanitarian needs of the Palestinians. In that
regard, we welcome Israel's decision to facilitate
humanitarian access and to ensure the provision of
basic services.

In conflict situations, all parties must do their
utmost to ensure full, safe and unimpeded access to
humanitarian and relief agencies. Let me place on
record my country's appreciation of and respect for
those national and international staff who are prepared
to work in the most difficult conditions in order to
provide humanitarian relief. I welcome the Saving
Lives Together initiative, which aims to improve
security arrangements in the field.

It is easy to identify the challenges but much
harder to identify what more we can do to try to
address them. We should continue to hear the Under-
Secretary-General's briefings on protection and
country issues. This gives us an opportunity to draw
attention to the actions of the worst offenders and to
support those who are making progress.

We should strengthen respect for, and
enforcement of, international law. We should work
towards ending impunity by ensuring that there are no
hiding places for the perpetrators of the most egregious
crimes. The United Kingdom highlights the important
role of the International Criminal Court in that regard
and underlines that States with an obligation to
cooperate with the Court should do so.

The Council can also continue to ensure that,
where appropriate, United Nations peacekeeping forces
are given the mandate and support that they need to
protect civilians from violence. We have made gradual
progress on this front - for example, we welcome the
robust action taken by the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC) against armed militia that threatened the
local population - but more should be done. We can
all think back to the time in Bosnia when United
Nations forces were not able to protect the population,
and we can regret that; but we can help make sure that
such an event never happens again by ensuring that all
United Nations-mandated forces have the most robust
mandate possible. What the Under-Secretary-General
said about the need for evaluation of the impact of
protection language in peacekeeping mandates is
something that we find very interesting and would like
to explore further.

Protection concerns, therefore, should be
reflected more systematically in peacekeeping
mandates. We should encourage and facilitate a closer
working relationship between the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) on
this agenda. We should also continue to work towards
better reporting to highlight abuses. In that regard, we
very much welcome the Under-Secretary-General's
proposal to monitor and report on access issues.

While national Governments have the primary
responsibility to protect their citizens, the international
community also has responsibilities. We should live up
to them.

