It has been 20 years since landmark resolution 1325 (2000), which recognizes that women's protection and participation are crucial to peacebuilding, sustaining peace and promoting inclusive development. This year the United Nations also commemorates 75 years since the signing of the Charter of the United Nations, and 25 years since the conclusion of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action for women. These are significant milestones that show how far the United Nations has come and how much more work it needs to do in order to realize the aspirations of resolution 1325 (2000). The Secretary-General's 2019 report on women and peace and security (S/2019/800), highlighted that there are considerable challenges to advancing the goals of resolution 1325 (2000). The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has multiplied all these challenges manifold. Fiji welcomes the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire and to focus all efforts on fighting the COVID-19 pandemic. Conflicts compound obstacles to advancing women's rights. The pandemic has further worsened conditions for women and girls and undoubtedly represents the gravest challenges yet to the women and peace and security agenda. Violence against women and girls has increased. Girls have been disproportionately impacted by the closure of schools. The Pacific Island Forum's Boe Declaration on Regional Security identifies climate change as the "single greatest threat to the livelihoods, security and well-being of the peoples of the Pacific." Fiji fully recognizes that enhancing the preparedness, protection and resilience for all women and girls is an investment in security. Fiji is implementing its third women's plan for advancing women's rights. It is working towards adopting a national prevention action plan to prevent violence against women and girls. Fiji has established a national gender policy to promote gender equality. There has been an increase in the number of women in leadership positions, in both the civil service and the Parliament. Fiji's social and economic recovery pays considerable and careful attention to protecting social security, supporting women in small businesses, enhancing food security and help women who have become unemployed due to the pandemic. Fiji has continuously participated in United Nations peacekeeping for over 40 years, for nearly 30 of which it has been deploying women peacekeepers. Fiji is proud to report that 56 per cent of Fijian police officer peacekeepers are women, including the first female Police Commissioner of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan, Unaisi Vuniwaqa. Recently, Fiji deployed a female senior military officer to be the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization as Chief of Observer Group Golan. Fiji is working closely with our partners to improve the capacity and skills of women peacekeepers. Fiji continues to strengthen and mainstream gender perspectives across all areas. Advancing the women and peace and security agenda across our peace operations is not free. Peace operations are becoming more complex, and they need predictable and sustainable long-term financing. In the past 20 years, Fiji has made continued progress in increasing women's participation and protection and in mainstreaming gender issues, under the Beiying Declaration and Plan of Action and resolution 1325 (2000). However, far more needs to be done. This year, as we recommit to the Charter of the United Nations and to building the future that we want, Fiji reaffirms its commitment to all its obligations under resolution 1325 (2000).
