Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the Secretary-General for his remarks andUnder-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo for her briefing. The situation in the Idlib de-escalation zone has deteriorated and remains very tense. We continue our contacts with our Turkish colleagues, at both the inter-ministerial and the highest levels. President Putin and President Erdogan had another telephone conversation this morning. It was agreed to arrange a face-to-face meeting in the very near future, in early March, when the schedules of the two leaders will allow it. The Russian delegation is currently in Ankara and is intensively negotiating ways to stabilize the situation. We are therefore continuing our contacts within the Astana format. We are convinced that if the military, diplomats and representatives of security services participating in the Astana format focus on basic agreements with regard to the Idlib de-escalation zone, it will pave the way for changes on the ground in the very near future. Yesterday, there was an incident with the Turkish military, not at the observation post, as our United States colleague told us today. Turkish soldiers feel completely safe at the observation posts. The incident took place near the village of Balyun, which is outside the observation post. The Russian Defence Ministry made detailed comments in which it confirmed that the Turkish and Russian forces on the ground are in constant daily contact. The Turkish forces, in real time, informed the Russian Centre for the Reconciliation of Opposing Sides in the Syrian Arab Republic about the location of Turkish soldiers in the Idlib de-escalation zone. Those coordinates were conveyed by Russia to the Syrian Armed Forces to ensure the security of Turkish soldiers when responding to terrorist attacks. As noted by the Defence Ministry, the coordinates transmitted yesterday made no mention of the areas where the Turkish soldiers later died. As soon as it became clear what had happened, the Russian side took exhaustive measures to cease hostilities and to ensure the safe evacuation of the dead and injured. In order to prevent speculation, the Defence Ministry confirmed that the Russian air forces had not used combat aircraft in that particular area. We regret the fact that the Turkish soldiers died, just as we regret the deaths of Syrian soldiers. We are convinced that respecting the agreements reached, including on de-conflicting, will help avert such tragedies in future. Our military forces on the ground stand ready to continue to work towards that goal. Both in discussions with our Turkish colleagues and in the Security Council, we have reiterated that we are committed to the Sochi memorandum of 17 September 2018. I should like to recall for the Council the essence of those agreements: the separation of the opposition from terrorists; the creation of a demilitarization zone free of jihadists, so that no one can shell civilian facilities, Syrian army positions or Russian military bases from there; and the provision of unhindered access to the M4 and MS highways, which are vital to the Syrian economy, humanitarian assistance and all the people of Syria. We share that goal with our Turkish colleagues. We are well aware of the challenges that we will face in achieving those goals, but together we can make them a reality. I should like to underscore that the Sochi decisions are temporary because, as the Sochi memorandum of understanding states, they refer to the national territory of Syria and its sovereignty and territorial integrity, which the parties must respect and which is guaranteed by the Charter of the United Nations. In recent months, terrorists, mainly from Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham, seized Idlib and ramped up their incursions against civilians, the population in neighbouring populated areas and Syrian forces. In response to the ongoing violations of the ceasefire from within the Idlib zone, the Syrian army has the right to retaliate and clamp down on the terrorists. We cannot ban the Syrian army from upholding the commitments made in Security Council resolutions on an uncompromising fight against terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. I would underscore here that this is taking place on its own territory, the territory of sovereign Syria - no one else's territory. Today Rosemary DiCarlo reminded us that Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham is designated recognized as a terrorist organization by the United Nations, as well as Russia, Syria, Europe, the United States and Turkey. In this regard, we would once again draw the attention of colleagues and everyone who is closely following the situation in Idlib that attempts are being made to justify the terrorists' actions. Unfortunately, that is happening at the level of officials, including representatives of the United States of America. An argument is being made that Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham members are not actually terrorists but patriots and revolutionaries, simply because they are fighting the legitimate Syrian authorities. We deem such statements to be unacceptable and very dangerous. It is unfortunate, but today such statements seem to be taken as a call to action. Recently, a well-known non-governmental organization decided to hold an interview with the leader of Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham, Al-Julani, who said that the activities of the group are changing and that it is starting to focus on combating the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic rather than terrorist attacks. My Syrian colleague asked yesterday, when talking about the calls for a ceasefire, why no one had spoken to Bin Laden or Al-Baghdadi? He noted that he did not recall such people being interviewed by Western journalists. To be frank, we have some questions about the weapons that the terrorists are using. The Russian Defence Ministry regularly provides such information, which is available on various websites. There are video clips and photos, and it is clear that the fighters are armed with the latest versions of Western military products: drones, armoured vehicles, small arms and light weapons, missiles, and anti-tank and anti-aircraft equipment. Those weapons are used against Syrian and Russian forces and against civilians. I would warn our Western colleagues against repeating their past mistakes, when in order to achieve their geopolitical goals of regime change in Afghanistan, Iraq, Libya and Libya, they relied on the use of terrorists, hoping that the latter could be controlled later, once their geopolitical aims had been achieved. This is historically unprecedented. We urge all our colleagues to bear in mind the fact that it is impossible to make deals with terrorists, especially in the context of reaching a settlement in Syria. We have repeatedly underscored the need to pool our efforts to combat terrorism and to cooperate in order to de-escalate tensions. We are prepared to cooperate with all who genuinely desire to do so. It is important for this understanding of the need for cooperation to be demonstrated at all stages, not just when we urgently need to resolve crises. I should like to remind the Council that in 2003, when Iraq was bombed on trumped-up charges, our United Kingdom and United States colleagues did not speak of cooperation. Libya, following the NATO operation carried out in violation of Security Council resolutions, has de facto fallen apart. They are trying to do the same to Syria. We once again reiterate our call for the parties to be guided by the interests of the region rather than by narrow geopolitical interests, which are often incompatible with the interests of the people who live in the region, whom they supposedly care so much about.
