Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
I wish to begin by welcoming your initiative, Sir, in
convening this wrap-up meeting, the sixth one of
the year. I will not repeat the reasons why Argentina
considers these meetings of fundamental importance.
The fact that all non-permanent members and some
permanent members have convened or planned to
convene wrap-up meetings during their presidencies
this year will, we hope, encourage those members who
retain doubts about their usefulness and value to do the
same.

According to your directions, I will evaluate the
Security Council's working during the month of July
with a view to proposing some recommendations
on how the Council could improve its efficiency and
effectiveness, and also its legitimacy.

I would like to first thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing the open debate on the participation of
regional organizations in peacekeeping operations.
Given that the very Charter of the United Nations
promotes the Council's use of "regional agencies" in
fulfilling its primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security, the future of United
Nations peacekeeping operations is inextricably linked
to the process of regionalization of peacekeeping
missions.

Also, in view of the significant changes that have
taken place in such operations since Argentina joined
the Council in 2013, with increasingly robust mandates
and the use of new technologies, to cite just a few, these
debates provide the entire membership with a forum
in which to express their views and also to participate,
to the extent to which they set out their views, in the
decision-making process, which my country believes is
how it should be.

You, Mr. President, have had the challenging and
sad privilege of conducting our work during 15 days
that have perhaps been the most dramatic and intense
in recent years. Those 15 days have seen real turning
points in the three conflicts - of the many and very
serious conflicts on the Council's agenda - that are
keeping the international community in suspense in
View of their implications not only for regional peace
and security but also at global level.

During those 15 days, on 14 July the Council
members were able to overcome our differences and
adopt resolution 2165 (2014), by which we decided
that humanitarian agencies of the United Nations and
their international partners could, with notification to
the Syrian authorities, use routes across conflict lines
and the four authorized border crossings, as well as
those already in use, in order to ensure humanitarian
assistance. However, the fact that the resolution was
necessary is the result of systematic and deliberate
non-compliance, by all parties to the Syrian conflict,
with the Council's prior decisions, including resolution
2139 (2014), adopted barely five months ago.

Two weeks is too soon to evaluate the implementation
of resolution 2165 (2014), but we hope and demand that
it will lead to the change in the trend that we fruitlessly
anticipated after the adoption of resolution 2139 (2014)
and that it will begin to produce a positive change in the
lives of thousands of people.

Three days later, on 17 July, we witnessed one ofthe
worst tragedies in international commercial aviation, in
which almost 300 people lost their lives while flying
over an area that has been enveloped in violence, in a
crisis situation that holds the international community
and the Security Council in suspense, if not because
of the number of victims - although the latest figures
indicate that more than 700 civilians have died since the
start of the Government's military campaign against the
separatist rebels in eastern Ukraine in mid-April - at
least because ofits geopolitical dimension and potential
ramifications in terms of international peace and
security.

For the first time in four months, the horror
at the consequences of an incident that was not
caused intentionally - at least, we hope that is the
case - enabled Council members, not without difficulty
and after long negotiations, to achieve a consensus
that led to the adoption on 21 July of resolution 2166
(2014). Barely 10 days after adoption of the resolution
the Council's calls appear not to have been heard, given
the persistent difficulties in accessing the site of the
downed plane to finish recovering the bodies of the
victims and conduct an investigation of the incident,
as military activities in the area have not ceased, as the
Council demanded.

During those 15 days as we have again seen, for the
third time in less than six years, Gaza being submerged
again in violence - violence suffered mostly by the
civilian population, including children and women.
Despite appeals by the Council, children, women,
disabled persons, innocent civilians have suffered
the worst forms of violence in these days. Not only
the Council but also other voices of the international
community called for moderation.

However, we have seen only an intensification of
the fighting and an open challenge to the obligations
under international humanitarian and human rights law
and the protection of civilians. Faced with the horror
of more than 1,300 civilian victims, attacks on schools
and the deepening humanitarian crisis that exceeds the
international community's capacity to respond, Council
members were able to agree on elements for the press,
a press statement (SC/11472) and even a presidential
statement (S/PRST/2014/ 13), for the adoption of which
we met at midnight on a Sunday, since we could not
do otherwise given the urgency and gravity of the
situation.

In that most recent statement 0f28 July, the Council
called for an immediate ceasefire. Despite that, within
less than 24 hours, just yesterday, Gaza suffered the
worst bombings since the beginning of the recent crisis.
In the same presidential statement, the Council called
on all parties to respect civilian and humanitarian
facilities, including those of the United Nations. This
morning, we woke in New York to the news of the
deaths of 15 people as a result of an attack on a United
Nations school that was sheltering Gaza refugees.

Despite their differences, Syria, Ukraine and
Israel-Palestine have in common the fact that they are
experiencing conflicts in which the Security Council has
a limited, if not marginal, role owing to the differences
among its permanent members, which, in turn,
reflect - it would be unfair not to recognize it - the
differences among the international community. Such
differences are evident not only in the disagreements
but also in the agreements reached within the Council
through its resolutions, presidential statements and
other pronouncements, which, at best, are weak and
ambiguous and are usually completely ignored by the
parties to whom they are addressed. The vacuum left by
the Security Council has been filled, in the best case,
by countries, leaders and regional organizations.

In your concept note (S/2014/526, annex),
Mr. President, you asked us to make recommendations
to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of our work.
I am not sure that I have specific recommendations to
make but I have a general appeal.

Just as we call for the active role of countries,
leaders and organizations in the various crises, we
require the same of the Security Council. We do so
as a part of it. We say that every time that we meet
to address such situations, and we reiterate it today.
We believe that the Security Council, assuming the
responsibilities entrusted to it by the Charter, can and
should more strongly support the efforts to establish
the conditions for the parties from Ukraine and Syria
to Israel and Palestine to resume dialogue in order to
achieve specific political solutions, which are the only
guarantee for a lasting peace and security.

We far from oppose bilateral diplomacy or
diplomacy among groups of States or that of other
organizations, but not at the expense of leaving the
Security Council as a body empty of content and unable
to act in the settlement of conflicts. It is a question
of finding complementary, convergent and effective
strategies. It is about recovering ethics and of fulfilling
the Charter mandate.

Argentina believes that true multilateralism, such as
that found in the space and scope of the United Nations,
cannot be seen as an obstacle to achieving a more just
and peaceful world. It is not about multilateralism versus
bilateral relations or multilateralism versus regional
organizations. It is about each of those dimensions and
strategies being united and coordinated in a common
goal, while acknowledging, at the same time, that it
is the multilateral aspect that ensures that all States
and their peoples, without exception, can be heard and
recognized as equal in dignity and rights.

I do not know if this is the last meeting over which
you, Sir, will preside but, as it is a necessary meeting
that the Security Council should hold, 1 would like
most sincerely to thank you, Mr. President, and your
entire team for your leadership of our work during the
month of July. I also avail myself of this opportunity
to wish the United Kingdom the greatest success
in its presidency and to offer it all the support of the
Argentinian delegation that it needs.

