Mr. Simonovic' (Croatia): It gives me special
pleasure to greet our former colleague, Volodymyr
Yel'chenko, in his capacity as President of the Security
Council, on the occasion of this open debate, and to
take part in this follow-up of the recent Security
Council summit.

The Security Council summit was a monumental
event in many respects. Besides its symbolic value, it
certainly brought us closer to a shared vision to ensure
an effective role of the Security Council in the
maintenance of peace and security in each and every
region of the world. Building on that momentum in a
series of open debates and through several actions of
the Council in the past six months, we have reaffirmed
repeatedly our conviction that the United Nations
remains indispensable to safeguarding world peace.

We have reaffirmed the importance of timely,
competent and otherwise effective peacekeeping,
which has increasingly acquired ever more complex
formats. The troop-contributing countries that shoulder
the greater share of peacekeeping in the field told the
Council in January what they need to carry out their
duties as they are expected and called upon to do, as
did the Member States on the issue of women, peace
and security last October. Also, just last month we
moved closer to outlining a comprehensive strategy for
peace-building. Throughout these debates, we said
again and again that we need all the political will,
mutual trust and bureaucratic capacity to act upon the
very causes of conflicts in a timely and effective
manner in order to prevent their occurrence or
recurrence.

For the time being, Africa should remain the
special focus of the Security Council, the entire United
Nations system and the regional organizations, but
frozen conflicts in other regions should not be
underestimated either. Given the extent of poverty and
the spread of infectious diseases, which are occurring
there at a greater scale than elsewhere, the need for a
convergence of the peace and development agendas
figures prominently, particularly in Africa. No
development can be sustained without peace or without
people. Investments in peace thus encompass
investments in health, education and environment, as
well as in human rights and good governance.

As an advocate for and guarantor of peace, the
Security Council must use its visibility and its prestige
to consult with and augment the efforts of the United
Nations bodies principally charged with furthering the
world development agenda. In this regard, great
importance should be attached to the substantive
cooperation between the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council.

