Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): I thank High
Representative Valentin Inzko for his comprehensive
update on the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
based on his recent report (S/2018/974, annex). We are
also pleased to see in the Chamber the delegations of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, the European Union, Serbia,
Croatia and neighbouring countries.

Over the past six months since the last meeting
of the Security Council on the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (see S/PV.8248), important events have
occurred in the country, most importantly the general
elections held on 7 October. We believe that the elected
political leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina have a
new opportunity to focus on the future of the country
and not on its past and to meet the national interests
of all of its peoples and citizens. It is now vital that
the new leadership realize and accept responsibility for
the situation in the country and make every effort to
move further in a unified direction. The international
community should help it engage in constructive
dialogue in a spirit of cooperation. That is where we
can see the growing importance of the special role
and responsibility of external actors who have the
opportunity to positively influence the situation.

In that context, Kazakhstan welcomes the
continuous efforts of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe mission in promoting
stability and reconciliation, while assisting Bosnia
and Herzegovina on its path to regional, political,
economic and social integration. We commend the
project activities of the mission in the areas of good
governance, justice and education, which uphold
human rights and the rule of law for all citizens. We
also believe that today's extension of the mandate of
the European Union-led peacekeeping force Operation
Althea for another 12 months is a necessary step on the
path to bringing peace and sustainability to the region.

In May, the members of the Security Council
voiced in this Chamber both the achievements and
their concern about the many serious problems that
exist in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Unfortunately, those
challenges have not gone away and are waiting for their
further settlement. We therefore consider it necessary to
speed up the process of forming the House of Peoples,
in accordance with the decisions of the Constitutional
Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and the functional
Government of the country at all levels for their urgent
implementation in practice.

We take positive note that, within the framework
of the reform agenda for 2015 to 2018, the authorities
of Bosnia and Herzegovina are implementing measures
for broad structural socioeconomic reforms. However,
as mentioned by the High Representative in his report
(5/2018/974, annex) most of those reforms remain at
the preparatory stage, including the depoliticization
of public administration and the restructuring of
State-owned enterprises, as well as reforms in
legislation entrenching the rule of law in every region
of the country.

In that regard, the main challenge is still in
formulating constitutional reform in order to improve
the system of public administration. The Government
of Bosnia and Herzegovina should work closely with
the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank to
improve the state of the economy and implement reforms
to improve the business and investment climate. The
Government-led reform of the financial system should
be aimed at reducing the share of the shadow economy
and the related negative implications of corruption. To
that end, the role of the citizens themselves is invaluable,
and non-governmental organizations and the media
must be supported at the legislative and executive
levels. In that context, it is important to accelerate the
adoption of a nationwide strategy for managing public
finance, as well as strategies in areas such as energy,
employment and the national programme to harmonize
the Bosnia and Herzegovina legal system with European
Union standards.

Kazakhstan additionally notes the issue of
migration and refugees that was brought to the attention
of the Council at its previous meeting on this issue. The
recent events that took place in Bosnia and Herzegovina
on the border with Croatia at the end of October clearly
demonstrated the existence of that problem and the
need for the timely and high-quality response of the
authorities and international organizations. Along with
the resolution of priority issues on the accommodation
of migrants, it is necessary to comprehensively
approach the settlement of that big challenge in the long
term. Stability not only in Bosnia and Herzegovina
but in South-East Europe in general depends on that.
Therefore, not only the Government of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, but also international organizations,
foundations and relevant European Union structures,
should actively participate in that process.

To conclude, our delegation calls on the new
leadership of Bosnia and Herzegovina to take all
measures to eliminate the existing costs of the judicial
system and ensure depoliticization, impartiality and
independence, including in the consideration of war
crimes cases. Kazakhstan also considers it crucial to
emphasize the high importance ofrespecting the Dayton
Accords as the basis not only of civil peace in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, but also of stability and security in
the region. Reconciliation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
can be an example of resolving one the most complex
and protracted conflicts in the history of Europe and
become a pattern for other States and regions of the
world to follow.

