Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): Iwould
like to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Yamamoto, Executive Director Fedotov; and
Under-Secretary-General Voronkov for their briefings.
China listened attentively to the statement by the
representative of Afghanistan.

Peace and stability in Afghanistan have a direct
bearing on the well-being of the Afghan people, as well
as on security, stability, development and prosperity
in the region. The Afghan parliamentary and district
council elections will be held during the year and
preparations are under way. The recent terrorist
attacks caused a large number of civilian casualties
and the political and security situation in Afghanistan
remains severe.

China welcomes President Ghani's recent
unilateral declaration of a temporary ceasefire with
the Taliban and appreciates the Afghan Government's
efforts to maintain national stability and promote
national reconciliation and economic development. The
international community should continue to provide
strong support for Afghanistan.

Peace and stability are the foundation for
Afghanistan's national reconstruction and economic
development. The international community should
continue to support the capacity-building efforts
of the Afghan National Security Forces, strengthen
Afghanistan's self-defence capacities and work
together to effectively address such threats as
terrorism, transnational crime and drug trafficking. At
the same time, regional efforts should be made to help
Afghanistan meet those challenges. The international
community should strengthen coordination and
cooperation in combating regional forces of terrorism.
Strengthening governance is an important guarantee
for promoting peace and reconstruction in Afghanistan.

Afghan affairs should ultimately be determined by
the Afghan people. All political parties in the country
should strengthen unity and resolve differences through
dialogue and consultation. The international community
must earnestly respect the Afghan people's right to
independently choose their political system and path to
development. In accordance with Afghanistan's national
development strategy and specific needs, it should
help the Afghan Government improve its governance
capacity in a targeted manner. Advancing national
reconciliation is essential to resolving the question of
Afghanistan. We should firmly support an Afghan-led
and Afghan-owned peace and reconciliation process,
including supporting the role that the Kabul process
continues to play. We support the Afghan Government
in reaching an agreement on national reconciliation
with armed opposition groups, including the Taliban,
and launching the peace process. The Taliban should
actively respond to the peace initiative of the Afghan
Government and commit to lasting peace and stability
in the country.

As a historically friendly neighbour ofAfghanistan,
China has always supported the country in achieving
peace, security, stability and development as soon as
possible. Subsequent to the first Foreign Ministers'
dialogue with Afghanistan and Pakistan hosted by
China last December, China hosted in Beijing in May
a Deputy Foreign Minister-level strategic dialogue
among China, Afghanistan and Pakistan, as well as
a Deputy Foreign Minister-level counter-terrorism
security consultation among those three countries and a
Deputy Foreign Minister-level meeting of the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization (SCO)-Afghanistan Contact
Group. President Ghani, as Head of an observer nation,
attended the eighteenth meeting ofthe Council of Heads
of SCO member States in Qingdao, China, in early
June. All of the activities I just mentioned achieved
positive results in promoting a political settlement of
the Afghanistan issue, while strengthening regional
cooperation and advancing counter-terrorism efforts.
China is ready to continue to use the mechanisms I
just referred to in order to strengthen cooperation with
Afghanistan and other countries in the region to jointly
address the threat of terrorism and promote regional
peace, stability and development.
Afghanistan is an important country within the
Belt and Road Initiative. Security Council resolutions
have pointed out time and again that all parties should
take advantage of the Initiative to promote economic
development in Afghanistan and regional cooperation,
in that regard, so as to help Afghanistan achieve stability
and prosperity and, through dialogue and cooperation,
make concerted efforts to create a community with a
shared future for humankind. In accordance with the
provisions set out in the relevant Security Council
resolutions, China will continue to work with all other
parties to help the country leverage its comprehensive
and comparative advantages, participate in regional
economic cooperation and connectivity and achieve
economic and social development.

In conclusion, I would like to commend the work of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and voice support for the positive role that
UNAMA has played in helping Afghanistan promote
the political process, safeguard national security, foster
economic development and enhance its governance
capacity. China will continue to support UNAMA and
Special Representative Yamamoto in their work.

