Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation wishes to thank you, Sir, for
making a special trip to New York to preside over this
meeting. China welcomes the presence of Mr. Bernard
Kouchner, Minister for Foreign Affairs of France;
Mr. Charles Michel, Minister for Development
Cooperation of Belgium; and Mr. Vittorio Craxi,
Under-Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs of Italy. I
wish to thank Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, for her briefing and Ms. Ann
Veneman, Executive Director of UNICEF, for her
statement. In addition, I welcome the presence of
Ms. Jo Becker, representative of the Watchlist on
Children and Armed Conflict, and thank her for her
statement.

China is very much concerned about the
violations committed against children in armed
conflicts in various countries. China is opposed to the
recruitment and use of child soldiers and to other
violations committed against children in armed
conflicts. We support the efforts of the United Nations,
including the Security Council, to enhance the
protection of children in armed conflict. On this

08-2361]
occasion, I should like to emphasize the following
points.

First, the Security Council should strengthen its
efforts to prevent conflict and maintain peace with a
view to providing protection for children by
preventing, reducing and resolving the causes of armed
conflicts. The need to protect children in armed
conflicts arises out of the conflicts themselves.
Therefore, the Council should base itself on efforts to
resolve armed conflicts, by taking actions within its
mandate to reduce the number of such conflicts.
Meanwhile, efforts should be made to enhance the
effectiveness of peacekeeping operations and to
improve the humanitarian situations in conflict areas.

In the current situation, children in some conflict
areas have become victims of the escalation of conflict,
while the positive progress made in peace processes in
other areas has given children hope for a better future.
That proves once again that the Security Council
should give great attention to efforts to resolve
conflicts.

Secondly, in efforts to address the issue of
children and armed conflict, the role of the
Governments concerned must be consistently respected
and supported, as emphasized repeatedly in resolution
1612 (2005). Those Governments bear primary
responsibility for protecting their children. Other
parties must seek the cooperation of the Governments
concerned in a joint effort to address the violations
committed against children in armed conflicts. The
Security Council and its Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflicts should enhance their
communication with the Governments concerned. They
should acknowledge and support the positive measures
that those Governments have taken, so as to improve
mutual trust. At the same time, the issue of children
must not be politicized. The protection of children
should not be used as a pretext for interference in a
country's internal affairs.

Thirdly, resolution 1612 (2005) should continue
to serve as a basis for improving and perfecting the
monitoring and reporting mechanism and the efforts of
the Working Group. Since the mechanism's main task
is to collect information and carry out work on the
ground, it must seek the cooperation of the
Governments concerned. We hope that the Secretary-
General will assess the achievements and inefficiencies
of the mechanism so that it can be further improved
during the next phase of work.

Under the coordination of France, as Chair, the
Working Group of the Security Council has considered
the issue of children in quite a number of countries and
has submitted relevant recommendations to the
Council. We hope that the Working Group will
maintain its professionalism, seek to address relevant
issues through cooperation and constructive
consultation with the Governments concerned and
submit effective recommendations to the Council.

China has always supported the use of dialogue to
resolve specific issues. China has always opposed the
wilful use or threat of use of sanctions in the Security
Council. Caution is called for in dealing with the issue
of children and armed conflict, as well as in using
sanctions.

Conflicts vary and thus must not be addressed
through a one-size-fits-all approach. Once again, China
calls upon all parties to armed conflicts to truly honour
their obligations, abide by international humanitarian
law and respect and protect children's rights. In post-
conflict reconstruction efforts, the international
community should place priority on reintegrating
children into family, school and society and should
ensure that adequate resources are provided in that
regard.

If we are to resolve the issue of children and
armed conflict, efforts by the Security Council alone
will be far from sufficient. We encourage UNICEF, the
World Bank and other international institutions to play
a greater role in helping the countries concerned to
prevent the involvement of children in armed conflicts.
We also welcome the positive role played by
non-governmental organizations.

Before concluding, I wish to inform participants
in this meeting that, not long ago, China ratified the
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child on the Involvement of Children in Armed
Conflict and has therefore become a party to the
Protocol. We call on all countries that have not yet
done so to ratify and accede to the Protocol. China
hopes that, through joint efforts by all parties, the
situation of children in armed conflicts will be
effectively improved so that children can have a better
tomorrow.

