The President (spoke in French): In accordance with
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure,
I invite the representatives of Afghanistan, Albania,
Algeria, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Belgium, Benin, Botswana, Brazil, Burundi, Cambodia,
Canada, Colombia, Croatia, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Egypt, Estonia, Germany, Guatemala,
Hungary, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Kazakhstan, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Mali,
Montenegro, Morocco, Myanmar, the Netherlands,
Pakistan, the Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, the
Republic of Korea, Rwanda, Slovakia, Slovenia, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, the Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland,
the Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Turkey, Ukraine,
Uruguay and Viet Nam to participate in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict; Ms. Yoka
Brandt, Deputy Executive Director ofUNICEF; Ms. Julie
Bodin, Child Protection Technical Advisor, Save the
Children International in the Central African Republic;
and Mr. Junior Nzita, President of Paix pour l'enfance.
We sincerely thank them all.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
individuals to participate in this meeting: His Excellency
Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation
of the European Union to the United Nations; His
Excellency Mr. Stephen Evans, Assistant Secretary-
General for Operations of NATO; and His Excellency
Mr. Tete Antonio, Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations.

I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer ofthe Observer State ofPalestine to the United
Nations to participate in the meeting, in accordance

with the provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in the meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2015/168, which contains a letter dated 6 March 2015
from the Permanent Representative of France to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General,
transmitting a concept paper on the item under
consideration.

I warmly welcome the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and I now give him the
floor.

