Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): The
Kingdom of the Netherlands is pleased that the Council
has ultimately been able to adopt unanimously a text
that will increase the chances for peace in Yemen.

In line with resolution 2417 (2018), on the link
between conflict and hunger, resolution 2451 (2018)
calls on the parties to allow and facilitate the safe,
rapid and unhindered access of humanitarian personnel
to all those in need. In the context of the tremendous
humanitarian challenges in Yemen, with millions
of Yemenis on the brink of a massive, conflict-
induced famine, the text will help to alleviate the
humanitarian situation.

The resolution welcomes the consultations held in
Sweden, noting the vital importance ofmaking progress
towards a political agreement to end the conflict. Such
an agreement is to be attained through an inclusive
political process; this also implies that the parties
themselves should include women in their delegations.

With this resolution, Special Envoy Martin
Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock
and retired Major General Patrick Cammaert, as Chair
of the Redeployment Coordination Committee, will be
able to operate for the benefit of the people of Yemen.

In the presidential statement on Yemen of 15 March
(S/PRST/2018/5), the Council stressed the importance
of accountability and respect for the principles of
proportionality, precaution and distinction. The
Kingdom of the Netherlands believes that accountability
is key to preventing further indiscriminate attacks and
the targeting of civilians and civilian objects, wherever
they occur.

We strongly reaffirm the need for all parties to
comply with their obligations under international
humanitarian law. The need for transparent, credible
and independent investigations into alleged violations of
international humanitarian law is clear. Without it, the
violence and instability in Yemen is likely to continue.
Those responsible for violations of international
humanitarian law need to be held to account.

We thank the United Kingdom, as penholder, for
the wise manner in which it steered the process as
well as its tireless efforts, and we thank all Council
members for putting the interests of the Yemeni people
at the centre of their decision-making.

