Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): We are pleased to see
you, Sir, presiding over the Security Council. Today's
meeting provides a unique opportunity to hear the
views of numerous delegations on the most burning
issue of the day.

More than half a century ago, speaking about the
efforts to achieve peace, Sir Winston Churchill said:

"Vast and fearsome as the human scene has
become, personal contact of the right people, in
the right places, at the right time, may yet have a
potent and valuable part to play in the cause of
peace which is in our hearts".

A few days ago, thousands of people gathered here as a
vast and fearsome ocean at the United Nations, calling
it the right place for the right and adequate decision to
be taken in order to preserve the peace.

On behalf of the Ukrainian delegation, I wish to
join those who believe that the right people, gathered
today in the Security Council, will find the right
solution to the critical issue on our agenda, and I
express, Mr. President, our full support for your
strenuous efforts to lead the Council towards that goal.

Ukraine is extremely concerned about the
situation around Iraq. We understand that there may
exist serious grounds for suspecting Iraq of concealing
its weapons of mass destruction. The position of
Ukraine is well known and clear: Iraq must fulfil all its
obligations under respective Security Council
resolutions, resolution 1441 (2002) included.

Ukraine welcomes the outcome of the inspections
and the report presented to the Council on 14 February
by the Executive Chairman of the United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
(UNMOVIC) and by the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), as well
as the move by the United States to provide the United
Nations with additional information.

It is imperative that the United Nations inspectors
continue their work so as to be able to clarify the
unresolved questions of the disarmament of Iraq. The
questions still remain.

I would like to express to Mr. Hans Blix and Mr.
Mohamed ElBaradei Ukraine's confidence in their
mission and our full support. We have already
demonstrated it through the work of the Ukrainian
experts in UNMOVIC. We consider the inspection and
monitoring mechanisms to be the best way to detect,
destroy and verify the elimination of weapons of mass
destruction in Iraq.

It is perfectly clear that the work of UNMOVIC
and the IAEA can be effective only with full
cooperation in good faith on the part of Iraq. We call
upon the Iraqi authorities to translate concretely and
urgently their declared commitments into active
cooperation and collaboration with the inspection
process, as provided for in resolution 1441 (2002). We
urge Iraq to adopt a more proactive approach, to make
further explanations and clarifications on the issues
raised by the Executive Chairman of UNMOVIC, the
Director General of IAEA and the United States
Secretary of State and, ultimately, to disarm in
compliance with the Security Council's resolutions.

The Security Council has a common stand on the
issue of the elimination of weapons of mass destruction
in Iraq. Ukraine's position has been unequivocally
aimed at achieving the disarmament of Iraq in the most
effective way possible, while ensuring at all times that
this goal is achieved at the lowest cost in terms of
human suffering. Under the present circumstances, it is
critical to make further steps towards achieving the
unity of the Security Council on this issue without
undermining the ongoing battle against international
terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction.

We are entering a crucial stage in the
consideration of the Iraqi issue. The Ukrainian
delegation believes that the option of a political and
diplomatic solution has not been fully exhausted and
that it can still provide effective results. As long as
there is the slightest hope for a peaceful settlement, we
should exert our utmost efforts to achieve it. Ukraine,
on its part, is ready to make a further practical
contribution to the international efforts aimed at
achieving a successful settlement of the Iraqi crisis and
at ensuring international security.

As the world is pinning its hopes on the United
Nations and the Security Council in making the
decision, we have to weigh all the pros and cons and
consider what lies ahead not only in the forthcoming
weeks and months, but years. We must make sure that
our decision is guided by wisdom and responsibility.

War is the last and worst resort, and I cannot but
agree with one of the speakers who said here earlier
that war is always the sanction of failure.

What the world needs most today is peace. Let us
stay united and work tirelessly for it. Let us give peace
yet another chance.

