Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to thank Assistant Secretary-
General Fernandez- Taranco for his briefing.

The region of the Middle East is undergoing
sweeping transformations. We understand people's
yearning to take their destiny into their own hands by
fundamentally changing the direction of their internal
and social-economic systems. The role of the
international community should consist of helping
them to find the most effective and least painful route
towards achieving that goal. Attempts by outside forces
to manipulate the situation from afar or to bring to
power certain political, ethnic or religious groups
rather than others to serve their own interests are
fraught with grave consequences as much for the
people of individual countries as for regional stability
and international peace and security.

The turmoil in the Middle East should not
obscure the need for a Palestinian-Israeli settlement.
Moreover, as the head of the Palestinian Authority,
Mahmoud Abbas, underscored during his recent trip to
Moscow, intensifying efforts to break the stalemate in
the Palestinian-Israel peace process on the universally
accepted basis of international law constitutes an
important factor in regional stability that, in turn,
would favour Israeli security.

The yearnings of the Palestinian people are well
known, namely, the swiftest possible settlement of the
conflict, the establishment of an independent, viable
and territorially indivisible State with its capital in East
Jerusalem, according to the 1967 borders, living side
by side in peace and security as good neighbours with
Israel, and a resolution of the issue of refugees.

As with other crises, the solution to the
Palestinian-Israeli problem can be found only through
negotiations, and not through force. In that respect, we
are seriously concerned by the continued periodic
isolation of the Gaza Strip. We call upon all sides to
refrain from the use of force and to prevent armed
clashes. We welcome the beginning in Amman, thanks
to Jordan's assistance, of direct Palestinian-Israeli
contacts with a view to resuming a substantive
negotiating process and achieving an equitable, lasting
solution on the basis of international law. We believe
that both sides will be able to show a constructive
approach, that they will uphold their obligations under
the road map - inter alia, that they will draw up and
implement confidence-building measures - and that
they will refrain from unilateral acts of provocation.
Along with other members of the Quartet of
international mediators, Russia will work towards
relaunching the substantive Palestinian-Israeli
negotiation process and towards establishing an
atmosphere conducive to that end.

Of particular importance in that context is the
immediate cessation of Israeli settlement activities on
the West Bank of the Jordan River and in East
Jerusalem. Such activity is illegal and seriously
undermines international efforts to achieve a settlement
on the basis of a two-State solution. We cannot help but
be concerned by the rise in violence towards
Palestinians and their property in the West Bank, which
has been subjected to settler aggression that goes

virtually unpunished. The demolition of Palestinian
buildings, the expropriation of Palestinian property,
restriction of their freedom of movement and other
violations of international humanitarian law have
unfortunately become a daily fact of life. That must be
brought to a halt.

In our view, the arrest by the Israeli military of
Palestinian members of Government is inappropriate.
We were particularly concerned to learn of the
detention of a leader of the Palestinian Legal Council
who was elected in 2006. That kind of action is hardly
conducive to building the atmosphere of trust required
for conducting a comprehensive Palestinian-Israeli
peace process.

We call on the Israeli Government to take strong
measures to swiftly normalize the humanitarian
situation in the Gaza Strip: lift the blockade and help
restore its effective trade with the outside world.

The Palestinian people have an undeniable right
to full membership in international organizations and
can count on Russia's support in that regard.

