Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We too are grateful to Mr. Ahmedou Ould
Abdallah, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Somalia, for his briefing on the situation in
Somalia. We listened with interest to the statements of
Mr. Abdurahman A. Ibrahim, First Deputy Prime
Minister of Somalia, and of Mr. Ramtane Lamamra of
the African Union.

Broadly speaking, we agree with their assessment
of the situation in Somalia. We agree also that there has
been some success in the work of the Transitional
Federal Government with respect to the peace process.
The Government's social base is expanding slowly but
surely as State authority grows stronger. Hence, we
support Somali development by the Somalis
themselves, on the basis of their own efforts.

At the same time, we are concerned about
stability in the country. The irreconcilable opposition
continues to attack Government positions, African
Union troops and Somali forces. This undermines the
efforts of the Transitional Federal Government to
effectively govern the country. Even in the capital the
extent of its influence is narrow, and in the central and
southern parts of the country, extremists are in nearly
total control. United Nations personnel, local people
and humanitarian workers are in danger, which makes
the humanitarian situation even more difficult than it
already was.

The international community must continue to
take agreed measures to provide assistance to the
Transitional Federal Government in the areas of
security and capacity-building, as it seeks to carry out
its governance functions.

In the current situation, the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) is an important
stabilizing factor in the country. In that regard, we, like
others, want it to be fully staffed and provided with
appropriate logistical support. We believe that,
depending on the political situation and with the
consent of the Somalis, that presence should continue
as the United Nations presence gradually expands.

Along with the Secretary-General, we continue to
advocate coordination of the work of United Nations
agencies in Somalia. We agree that it is necessary to
broaden the United Nations partnerships with other
players and to pool efforts to overcome the security
challenges in the peace process and to advance in the
development process. Here, we welcome the Istanbul
Conference on Somalia, to be held this month, which
our Turkish colleague introduced in detail.

We support the Secretary-General's proposal to
strengthen the Somalia sanctions regime. We believe,
however, that targeted sanctions must be imposed on
the basis of reliable and verified information.

With respect to piracy, Russia continues to be an
active participant in international efforts to repel that
threat. In our view, prosecution of pirates is a difficult
problem. We stress that, as the relevant reports of the
Secretary-General are prepared pursuant to Council
resolution 1918 (2010), they should explore the
possibility of establishing special judicial chambers or
an international tribunal on piracy, taking international
practice into account.

We believe that if there is to be a long-term
solution for piracy the political process must continue
and there must be renewal in Somalia. Russia supports
the efforts of the Somali President and the Transitional
Federal Government to achieve lasting peace and
national reconciliation on the basis of the Djibouti
Agreement, in the interest of strengthening security
and stability in the region. We believe that the
authority of the legitimate Government must be
extended throughout the territory of Somalia,
irrespective of the current political situation in
particular regions.

