Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French):
We firmly condemn Saturday's attacks on the oil
facilities in Abqaiq and Khurais. Such actions can
only exacerbate tensions and the risk of conflict in the
region and undermine political efforts to resolve the
crisis. They absolutely must end.

I thank the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
and the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs for their briefings.

In the face of the catastrophic humanitarian
situation, we must redouble our efforts. The
intensification of fighting continues to come at a high
cost for the population in all governorates of Yemen.
All parties must ensure compliance with international
humanitarian law. In that connection, I recall two
absolute priorities: the protection of civilians, including
humanitarian and medical personnel, and guaranteed
immediate, safe and unhindered humanitarian access.

Four and a halfmillion people are unable to receive
assistance due to restrictions imposed by the parties to
the conflict. New constraints imposed by the Houthis

on food aid supply chains could further aggravate the
situation. Given the fact that more than 80 per cent of
the Yemeni population is dependent on humanitarian
aid, this aid must not be allowed to decline at any cost.
The World Food Programme needs $663 million for the
next six months, two-thirds of which before the end of
the year. We support the appeal of the Under-Secretary-
General for pledges to be honoured as soon as possible
or for new contributions to be made to the United
Nations humanitarian response plan. We commend
those States that have indicated their intention to
respond to this call.

The fight against impunity is essential, including to
achieving lasting peace. France calls on the parties to
conduct transparent, independent, impartial and credible
investigations and to cooperate with international
mechanisms. France takes note of the conclusions of
the report of the Group of Eminent International and
Regional Experts on Yemen. It is important for the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict to be
able to adopt conclusions.

Only a political solution will bring a lasting end to
the crisis in Yemen and the suffering of the population.
With every passing day, it becomes more urgent to
find that solution, as reinforced by the recent tensions
in the south of the country. Discussions to reach a
comprehensive political agreement must therefore
resume without delay or preconditions and on a more
inclusive basis. The parties to the Stockholm Agreement
must pursue their implementation efforts.

But the progress expected in Al-Hudaydah should
not be a prerequisite for the resumption of discussions
to reach that comprehensive political solution. We can
wait no longer. France encourages the parties to take
steps in that direction and reiterates its support for the
efforts of the Special Envoy. In addition, France stands
ready to promote de-escalation. A commitment by the
parties to the conflict to reducing the level of tensions
would be a first step towards resuming discussions on a
political solution. The partial withdrawal of the forces
of the United Arab Emirates on the ground is a step in
the right direction in that regard.

