Mr. Kawamura (Japan): I thank Under-Secretary-
General Feltman and Ms. Imam for their briefings.

Boko Haram represents an ongoing threat to the Lake
Chad basin, with devastating near-term humanitarian
impacts and long-term socioeconomic effects. We are
encouraged by the efforts of the countries in the region,
including gains made through the Multinational Joint
Task Force during the reporting period. However, much
more needs to be done to implement resolution 2349
(2017) and stabilize the region. Allow me to highlight a
few areas that need particular attention.

More than anything else, there are massive and
immediate humanitarian needs. The large-scale food
insecurity and nutritional emergency requires not
only more aid, but also delivery and access. There is
a commendable effort under way to strengthen civil-
military cooperation among humanitarian actors,
the Multinational Joint Task Force and national
security services. We encourage these actors to share
information and best practices. We also call for full
implementation of the tripartite agreement between the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, Cameroon and Nigeria, which is essential
for the safe and dignified return of refugees. Japan is
actively considering additional humanitarian assistance
to counter food insecurity and nutritional emergency.
In addition to the immediate humanitarian response
to the crisis, long-term investment in socioeconomic
development is required for early recovery. Following
the Oslo Humanitarian Conference on Nigeria and
the Lake Chad Region in February, the first senior
officials meeting of the Oslo Consultative Group last
week expanded the focus to long-term stability and
development, including through enhanced institutions.
Our efforts must build on this growing global attention
to ensure that the United Nations technical expertise in
development and peacebuilding is deployed coherently
and effectively across the Lake Chad basin.

Both the Security Council and the African Union
Peace and Security Council have visited the field
individually. These missions led to a shared awareness
of the challenges facing the Lake Chad basin and
of the need to do more. It has become clear that the
deterioration of the economy raises the risk of terrorist
recruitment. Local calls for job creation, education and
vocational training for youth are common throughout
the region. The long-term impact of climate change
on the socioeconomic stability of the region and
community also needs to be examined. The importance
of enhancing community resilience to Violent
extremism by addressing the root causes of the Boko
Haram insurgency cannot be overemphasized.

I would also like to draw attention to the
disproportionate impact of sexual and gender-based
violence on women and girls in the region by Boko
Haram, as well as other actors. Female internally
displaced persons are also most vulnerable during a
humanitarian crisis and a gender-responsive approach
is a must.

All actors must integrate gender analysis into their
substantive work, including by adopting a gender-
specific approach for the protection and empowerment
of women and girls victimized by or formerly
associated with Boko Haram. As a recent example of
efforts to implement resolution 2349 (2017), Japan has
funded a subregional workshop, hosted by the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the Office of
the High Commissioner for Human Rights, in Yaounde
in July, to better integrate a gender perspective into
criminal justice responses to terrorism. This workshop
supported multisectoral efforts by four countries,
as well as the African Union (AU) to strengthen the
criminal justice response while ensuring that women's
rights are respected.

In a similar vein, we commend the recent United
Nations-AU joint mission to Nigeria under the Deputy
Secretary-General to support efforts to advance peace
through women's well-being and empowerment.
Empowering women and promoting their active role
is essential to rebuilding society and strengthening
community resilience against terrorism and
violent extremism.

Japan strongly supports the United Nations regional
approaches to the Lake Chad basin and the Sahel.
We also encourage UNOWAS and UNOCA to focus
sustained attention on and follow up to resolution 2349
(2017) in that regard. Japan looks forward to working
together with international and regional partners to
secure a better future for the region.

