Mr. Thomson (United Kingdom): Like my
French colleague, I welcome the fact that the
Secretary-General was able to be here at the start of
this meeting, and I thank him for his report. I am
grateful to Michael Steiner for a clear and useful
presentation, and I, too, associate my delegation with
the statement of the European Union, to be made by
our Greek colleague later this morning.

I would also like to say a word of thanks to
Norway, and especially to Ambassador Kolby, for the
role that they played last year, including on the Council
mission to the region.

We reiterate our support for the priorities set out
by Michael Steiner, most recently in his television
address to Kosovo on 20 January, especially his
reiteration of the principle of standards before status,
and the need for all parties in Kosovo to work more
seriously.

The United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), and Michael Steiner
leading it, have achieved a good deal over the past
three months: UNMIK authority established across the
whole of Kosovo; the number of minority judges
increased; steps taken by the Kosovo Police Service to
assume responsibility for some law-and-order
activities; an improved feeling of security on the
streets; and easier access across the bridges in
Mitrovica. But we have to recognize that we are still a
long way from the Security Council's goal of a multi-
ethnic Kosovo which could take its place in Europe,
along with the rest of the Balkans.

To give just a few examples: the recent cycle of
violence - including successful and attempted
assassinations and attacks on Orthodox churches -
seems to indicate that local extremists feel that they
can act with impunity. They cannot and must not. Local
leaders need to condemn all such acts of violence and
to support the efforts of UNMIK police and the Kosovo
Police Service in their efforts to clamp down on this
selfish extremism, which hinders Kosovo 's
development and affects the normal lives of the normal
people in Kosovo. We also urge UNMIK and KFOR to
tackle this extremism at its roots.

Secondly, the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government at all levels must also cooperate with the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and UNMIK if and when any indictments
are presented. Compliance is an international
commitment, and it will be important for Kosovo to
show its political maturity and be seen to be acting
within common European Union values.

Thirdly, there is a further way to go on the
establishment of a multi-ethnic civil service. Nearly 60
per cent of senior civil-servant posts remained unfilled
at the end of 2002. And there is a continuing,
substantial task to achieve returns. The Council's
mission showed that hard work by all concerned will
be needed if returns are to increase in 2003.

My delegation welcomes UNMIK's intention -
and Michael Steiner has just confirmed it for us this
morning - to transfer further competencies to the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government. We
encourage UNMIK to press on with this. But with
power comes responsibility. All parties need to work
within "standards before status". All parties need to
show that they are working towards European
standards. Delivering those standards will help to
deliver the three priorities that Mr. Steiner has rightly
pointed to. All parties need to show that they can carry
out their commitments within the existing
Constitutional Framework before status negotiations
are possible. Prejudging final status, either by
declarations in Pristina or Belgrade or by the
transformation of the Kosovo Protection Corps into an
army, is unacceptable. Kosovo needs to show that it is
serious about actually running itself and about
integrating minority communities into Government. At
the same time, those minorities must demonstrate that
they are committed to Kosovo's future.

There can be no progress towards final status
without dialogue between the Provisional Institutions
of Self-Government and the Government in Belgrade.
Initial dialogue should focus on practical issues that
directly affect the daily lives of the citizens of Kosovo
and of those internally displaced persons who remain
outside Kosovo. A key issue will be the rule of law and
fighting organized crime, as highlighted in the 25
November 2002 London conference on this subject.
Such a dialogue, in a positive, cooperative framework,
will help to create a climate of mutual confidence for
looking eventually at wider questions of Kosovo's
future.

