Let me begin by thanking Special Representative Zerrougui for her briefing and commending the continuation of the vital operations of the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) throughout the unprecedented coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. We are also grateful to Ambassador Abarry for briefing us on the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004), concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We welcome President Tshilombo Tshisekedi's call for electoral reforms based on consensus. We call on all parties to reduce tensions, which jeopardize progress, and to work together to seek reform in order to deliver timely and credible elections. We remain committed to ensuring long-term stability and security in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. The deterioration in North and South Kivu, the resurgence of conflict in Ituri and increased Allied Democratic Forces activity in areas previously controlled by the armed forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo are of concern. There is a critical need for security sector reform in the Democratic Republic of the Congo that is grounded in a comprehensive national strategy to be developed by its Government. We are encouraged by MONUSCO's work with governors in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo on the development of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration road maps and welcome reports that a number of armed groups and militia combatants are ready to surrender. We call on the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to support that momentum by nominating a national focal point and developing a comprehensive national framework on disarmament, demobilization and reintegration. The human rights situation remains deeply troubling, in particular the increased abuses by armed groups, widespread conflict-related sexual violence and continued violations by State agents, including in the context of measures implemented to tackle COVID-19. We condemn the involvement of the armed forces and police of the Democratic Republic of the Congo in conflict-related sexual violence. We echo the Secretary-General's call for the adoption of a national transitional justice strategy capable of addressing the culture of impunity and providing justice. We urge all State agents to demonstrate full respect for human rights and call for continued efforts by the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo on improving the human rights environment. As the second-largest bilateral donor to the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United Kingdom remains a committed humanitarian and development partner. We recognize the broader socioeconomic impact of COVID-19 on the health crisis and humanitarian situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We are concerned about the risk of further deterioration in both and a reduced capacity to respond to crises, including the eleventh Ebola outbreak in Equateur province and growing concerns of food insecurity. We echo the Secretary-General's call to investigate fully the allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse in 2018-2020 against those working on the Ebola response in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. Sexual exploitation and abuse are abhorrent, and the United Kingdom expects thorough investigations whenever allegations are made. The protection of civilians is of the utmost importance to peace and stability. We welcome MONUSCO's development of targeted provincial protection-of- civilian strategies. Local and national ownership will be essential to their successful implementation. We call for the prompt implementation of mandated reforms to MONUSCO and its Force Intervention Brigade. While we note the delays due to COVID-19, it is crucial that all relevant stakeholders, particularly the relevant troop-contributing countries, cooperate constructively to ensure the full implementation of the reforms mandated by the Council. Finally, we look forward to receiving MONUSCO's exit strategy - developed jointly with the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo - later this month. We expect the transition to be conditions-based, with clear and measurable benchmarks. We call on the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to participate actively in planning MONUSCO's exit. National ownership will be critical in ensuring a sustainable exit.
