Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I
would like to begin by thanking the Secretary-General,
his Special Representative Laila Zerrougi, Deputy
Director Brandt, Ms. Bodin and Mr. Nzita for sharing
their insights to day and for the work they are doing to
safeguard the world's children.

In this Chamber we make choices about international
responses to conflict through our resolutions, the work
of our peacekeepers, the weight of our sanctions and,
sometimes, tragically, through our inaction. We have
a duty to make choices so that children do not fact
impossible ones. We have seen many worthy efforts to
protect children, but we would not be doing our jobs if
we did not use our time here today to focus on what we
can do better.

States Members of the United Nations must be held
to the highest standards. At an absolute minimum, we
must ensure that national armed forces do not unlawfully
recruit and use children. To that end, we applaud the
work of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and the "Children, Not Soldiers" campaign,
but recognize that this is a collective responsibility and
a challenge that can be addressed only through difficult
choices being made in capitals to take a stand against
abusers.

The United States is doing its part. In 2008, the
Child Soldiers Prevention Act was signed into law in
the United States. That law requires the publication of
an annual list of countries whose countries unlawfully
recruit and use child soldiers, or Governments that
support armed groups that do so. The law goes further
than publicly naming those countries; countries on
the list can also be subject to certain restrictions on
assistance provided by the United States Governments.
We know those tools can work. Public listings and
assistance restrictions, in coordination with the
concerted engagement of other Member States and
international actors, are useful tools and have helped to
encourage Governments to take important action.

In response to that kind of multilateral engagement,
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo signed an action plan with the United Nations to
end the unlawful use and recruitment of child soldiers
within its armed forces, as well as sexual violence and
other violations and abuses committed against children
by the armed forces and security services. They have
made significant progress towards meeting their goals,
as documented in the latest report of the Secretary-
General (S/2014/339). The United Nations has been
given greater access to State security facilities and
detention centres in order to identify and separate

minors, and important new policies have been adopted.

Of course, much more remains to be done. But
tools like those can be helpful, and we encourage other
Member States to establish legislation and employ
similar tools to press countries to take meaningful
action to address the unlawful recruitment and use of
child soldiers. We of course know that the solution to
this problem is more complex than any single piece of
legislation or act of bilateral pressure can solve, and
the risk posed by non-State actors is great. To that end,
there is more that we can do at the United Nations in the
common cause for children.

First, we can insist on strong human rights
reporting in peacekeeping missions, which includes
accurate and timely information on violations and
abuses committed against children. And then we can
act on that information with all the tools we have at
our disposal to hold perpetrators accountable for their
actions.

Secondly, we can ensure that child protection issues
are on the table during the difficult work of negotiating
peace agreements. There has never been a conflict
that did not involve children. The peace that we seek
should be for their benefit. Child protection is an issue
around which all sides should be able to agree, even if
they cannot agree on much else, and it is a choice that
warring parties can affirmatively make when making
peace.

Thirdly, we must be ready to receive children
coming out of conflict with more robust disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programmes.
Kidnapped at the age of 10 along with four other girls
by soldiers of the Forces democratiques de liberation
du Rwanda (FDLR), a Congolse told representatives
of a non-governmental organization that when FDLR
soldiers raped a woman in front of her, she had no choice.
"I did nothing", she said, "I could not do anything
to stop the rape." After seven years as s soldier, she
deserted the group and ran through the forest for two
days, avoiding certain execution if caught by the search
party sent after her. Bilaterally and through our United
Nations agencies, we must bolster the shortcomings in
the DDR process so that children do not have to make
the choice to continue fighting or to return to fighting
simply because they are unable to escape and they
see no other path. One programme - an $8 million
DDR programme in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, funded by the United States in cooperation
with UNICEF - is working to separate and reintegrate
children from armed groups into safe, secure and
stable communities. More than 1,000 children have
been separated from armed groups to date. There is an
urgent need for more such work.

I want to raise another choice, a terrible one,
confronting some children today with which we must
contend. We are increasingly seeing young people go to
great lengths to join organizations intent on fomenting
violence and instilling terror. Children are being lured
into war zones tojoin terrorist organizations committed
to a barbaric and violent confrontation with humankind
and modernity. On 17 February, three young girls
boarded a flight from London to Istanbul and reportedly
crossed into Syria with the goal ofjoining the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). A family member
of one of the girls described her as "an A-star student".
Her family has publicly begged her, implored her, to
come home. Those girls were likely lured by ISIL's
false promises of righteousness and glory, while in
fact all that awaits them, and too many like them, is
terror, murder and suffering. The propaganda employed
by ISIL in its effort to recruit terrorists is innovative,
shockingly effective and prolific - and estimated
90,000 tweets and other social media responses per
day. Even as we engage ISIL on the battlefield to win,
we must also contest and expose ISIL'S malignant lies
and its pernicious efforts to recruit and exploit young
people from lands near and far.

Therefore today, when we speak of children and
armed conflict we are no longer just speaking of
conflict chasing after children like the young girl who
mustered the courage to escape into the forests from the
murderous FDLR. We are also speaking, frighteningly,
of young people who leave behind their families and
seek out conflict. Perhaps we can never understand
what drove those three young girls to seek to join
ISIL's campaign of cruelty and hate, but it merits our
uninterrupted attention and unwavering resolve to stop.

Whether victimized by terrorists or exploitative
Governments, or armed groups, children deserve
and need our protection. From better reporting to
new accountability measures established by Member
States to inclusive peace negotiations and robust
demobilization efforts - we must make those policy
choices here and in our capitals so that our children do
not have to confront impossible choices in our stead.

Junior Nzita was forced to become a soldier at
the age of 12, and, as he so eloquently briefed us and
wrote: "My childhood was not like other children's.
It was stolen, confiscated and deprived of the love
of my mother and the protection of my country". But
Mr. Nzita's story is not only about loss; it is about
what he has created. His organization provides support
for marginalized children and helps to reintegrate
them into society. Given the opportunity, he chose to
make life better for others who have suffered what
he has suffered. We must ensure that all children in
all societies are shielded from conflict and have the
opportunity to become leaders who can build strong,
stable communities and carry out the important work
of making peace.

