The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2010/28l, containing a letter dated
4 June 2010 from the Permanent Representative of the
Republic of Korea to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2010/294, containing a letter dated
8 June 2010 from the Permanent Representative of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council.

I wish to also draw the attention of Council
members to document S/2010/349, containing a letter
dated 30 June 2010 from the Permanent Representative
of the Republic of Korea to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council, as
well as to documents S/2010/343 and 8/2010/358,
containing, respectively, letters dated 29 June 2010 and
6 July 2010 from the Permanent Representative of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council.

After consultations among the members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council notes the letter dated
4 June 2010 from the Permanent Representative
of the Republic of Korea to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/20lO/281), and the letter dated 8 June 2010
from the Permanent Representative of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea to the
2
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2010/294).

"The Security Council deplores the attack
on 26 March 2010 which led to the sinking of the
Republic of Korea naval ship, the Cheonan,
resulting in the tragic loss of 46 lives.

"The Security Council determines that such
an incident endangers peace and security in the
region and beyond.

"The Security Council deplores the loss of
life and injuries and expresses its deep sympathy
and condolences to the victims and their families
and to the people and Government of the
Republic of Korea, and calls for appropriate and
peaceful measures to be taken against those
responsible for the incident aimed at the peaceful
settlement of the issue in accordance with the
United Nations Charter and all relevant
provisions of international law.

"In view of the findings of the Joint
Civilian-Military Investigation Group led by the
Republic of Korea, with the participation of five
nations, which concluded that the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea was responsible for
sinking the Cheonan, the Security Council
expresses its deep concern.

"The Security Council takes note of the
responses from other relevant parties, including
from the Democratic People's Republic of Korea,
which has stated that it had nothing to do with the
incident.

"Therefore, the Security Council condemns
the attack that led to the sinking of the Cheonan.

"The Security Council underscores the
importance of preventing further such attacks or
hostilities against the Republic of Korea or in the
region.

"The Security Council welcomes the
restraint shown by the Republic of Korea and
stresses the importance of maintaining peace and
stability on the Korean peninsula and in North-
East Asia as a whole.

"The Security Council calls for full
adherence to the Korean Armistice Agreement
and encourages the settlement of outstanding
issues on the Korean peninsula by peaceful
10-44279
means to resume direct dialogue and negotiation
through appropriate channels as early as possible,
with a View to avoiding conflicts and averting
escalation.

"The Security Council reaffirms the
importance that all Member States uphold the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations."
10-44279
This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2010/13.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 9.50 am.
