Mr. Prosor (Israel): First Lady Eleanor Roosevelt,
one of the architects and earliest champions of the United
Nations, wrote, "One's philosophy is best expressed not
in words, but in choices". Today, the Middle East is at a
critical moment - a moment that calls for leadership.
And history will judge today's leaders not by the words
they speak but by the choices they make.

I am here today to issue a warning to the world. At
this time of turmoil and transition for our region, the
stakes are very high. The decisions that are made in
these halls in the coming weeks could echo for years to
come, well beyond the Middle East.

The duty is clear. It is to support democratic
institutions and aspirations, to promote negotiation
as the road to resolving conflict and to ensure that all
in our region abide by the agreements that they have
signed. These are founding principles of the United
Nations - principles that are now being put to the test.

Today there is a clear choice between constructive
solutions and destructive resolutions. In April, Israel
put a serious and comprehensive proposal on the table
before the Palestinians in Amman. We spelled out
our position. Most people in this Chamber know that.
The Palestinians never responded. They walked away,
and the world said nothing. Many of the countries
represented in this Chamber today did not utter a
single word calling on the Palestinians to respond to
Israel's offer. They have stood idle as that proposal
gathers dust. Instead of sitting with Israel in direct
negotiations, the Palestinian leadership is pursuing the
path of unilateralism at the United Nations. This is no
road to real statehood. It is a march of folly.

Peace must be negotiated. It cannot be imposed
from the outside. There are no shortcuts, no quick fixes
and no instant solutions. The Palestinians' unilateral
actions are a clear breach of every agreement that they
have signed with Israel, including the Oslo Accords,
the interim agreements and the Paris Protocol. These
agreements form the basis for 40 spheres of Israeli-
Palestinian cooperation.

I know that some in this Chamber think that the
Palestinians can breach these agreements with no
consequences. Some think that, afterwards, we will
be able to go back to business as usual. Well, they
are mistaken. Every Member State that lends it hand
to supporting Palestinian unilateralism at the United
Nations will be responsible for the grave consequences
that follow. How can Israel be expected to abide by the
same agreements that the Palestinian leadership ignores
whenever it is convenient? How could anyone expect
the Israeli public to trust this Palestinian leadership
when it signs future agreements? Would anyone make
painful sacrifices or give up tangibles in exchange for
pieces of paper that the other side has proven more than
willing to throw into the garbage?

Symbolic declarations will change nothing on the
ground. They will only raise expectations that cannot
be met. This is a recipe for instability and, potentially,
violence. A General Assembly resolution will not pave
the road to peace. No, it will encourage the Palestinians
to drive recklessly towards conflict, with both feet
on the gas, no hands on the wheel and no eyes on the
road. Member States will not be planting the seeds of
peace, but fanning the flames of conflict. They will be
encouraging the Palestinian leadership to intoxicate
its people with fantasy when it needs to sober them
up with reality, inflating a dangerous bubble that will
inevitably burst. They will be responsible for affixing
a seal of approval onto an entity that does not meet the
most basic requirements for statehood.

Make no mistake. We in Israel hope that the day
will come when they meet those requirements. But let
me be clear - today the Palestinians are a very long
way from meeting the basic criteria for statehood.

The Palestinian Authority has absolutely zero
authority in the Gaza Strip, an area where nearly half
the population of the proposed State resides. President
Abbas has not seen Gaza, even through binoculars,
since 2007. The mandate for his presidency expired
in 2009. Three years later, President Abbas continues
to personally extend his term, with no regard for any
democratic process.

I am sure that many people from the countries
represented around this table might be just a little
concerned if their politicians decided to personally
extend their terms of office for years on end. Yet we do
not hear the leaders of many great democracies - some
of which are represented around this table - uttering a
word publicly about the fact that the Palestinian people
have not seen the inside ofa voting booth since 2006.

Palestinian leaders claim that they are building the
institutions of a modern and peace-loving State. Yet,
these same leaders name public squares after suicide
bombers, fill textbooks with incitement and seek unity
with Hamas, an internationally recognized terrorist
organization committed to Israel's destruction - the
same organization that fired 40 rockets into Israel in
just the past week.
Now, the speakers in this debate thus far have
forgotten to mention anything about a human rights
report on Hamas abuses. I am sure that these omissions
were accidental, mere oversights, but for the sake of
clarity, I would like to highlight a few of the findings
that were released just last week.

The human rights report documented how Hamas
police arbitrarily arrest, torture and in some cases
execute innocent people, with absolutely zero judicial
protection. Indeed, the report documents 147 instances
of torture by Hamas from just 2011. It makes clear that
Hamas brutally subjugates anyone who dares to dissent
from its extended political agenda: political opponents,
human rights activists, criminal defence attorneys and
women who go out in public unaccompanied by a man.
The only crisis on the ground in Gaza is Hamas, a crisis
that is too often overlooked in this Chamber.

The Palestinian Authority claims that it is
peace-loving, but dedicates $54 million in its annual
budget to sponsor convicted terrorists and mass
murderers with blood on their hands. This year, as
the Palestinian Authority threatened to delay payroll
for many employees, it tripled its monthly payments
to convicted terrorists. Talk about priorities. The
Palestinian Authority devotes 6 per cent of its budget
to terrorist salaries and less than 1 per cent to higher
education. What message does this send? Instead of
investing in their children's future, they offer incentives
for future terrorists. Instead of using their funds for
nation-building, they use them for nation-sinking.

The money the Palestinian Authority lavishes on
terrorists does not materialize from out of thin air. It
comes from many donor countries that are represented
in this Chamber. The European Union (EU) sends more
than €500 million in annual EU aid to the Palestinian
Authority. How many taxpayers in London, Paris,
Berlin and Lisbon know that some of their money is
going to convicted terrorists with blood on their hands?

The unrestricted flood of international aid to the
Palestinian Authority will not bring us any closer
to peace as long as it is used to sponsor, encourage
and elevate terrorists. It is time for the international
community to finally speak publicly about this reality
and to acknowledge the many unresolved questions
about the future Palestinian State. These issues cannot
be swept under the carpet. They go to the core of
resolving our conflict. They are critical to ensuring
lasting peace.

Today, there is a clear choice in the Middle East
between peace and conflict, between reconciliation
and provocation. During the opening of the sixty-
seventh session of the General Assembly, Israel's
Prime Minister, Benjamin Netanyahu demonstrated
once again that he chooses peace (see A/67/PV.12). He
extended his hand to President Abbas. He reaffirmed
Israel's desire to resume direct negotiations with the
Palestinians, without preconditions and without delay.
He reiterated his vision of two States for two peoples.

On the same stage, President Abbas made a very
different choice. Once again, he used the platform of
the United Nations to demonize the State of Israel and
deny the Jewish people's historic connection to their
ancient homeland. He said that the presence of Jews in
Jerusalem is altering"the city's historic character and
the glorious image of the Holy City as etched in the
minds of humankind" (A/67/PV12, p 31).

The truth is plain and simple. Jerusalem had a
Jewish character long before most cities in the world
had any character. It was the capital of the Jewish people
long before Homer composed The Iliad before Romulus
and Remus founded Rome, and before the armies of
Alexander the Great swept through the Middle East.
Jews have lived continuously in Jerusalem for 3,000
years, from the time that King David built his great
palace in the city's rolling hills.

By denying the history of the Jewish people, the
Palestinian leadership plants the seeds of intolerance
in their next generation. They raise doubts about their
commitment to peace. It is time for the international
community to speak clearly, openly and publicly against
this incitement. It is time for all in this Chamber to say
that Israel is the nation-State of the Jewish people and
Jerusalem, our capital, is its beating heart.

Mutual recognition is the key to securing lasting
peace. I often point out during these debates that one
will never, ever hear any Palestinian leader say "two
States for two peoples". You will not hear them say "two
States for two peoples" because today the Palestinian
leadership is calling for an independent Palestinian
State but wants millions ofits people to flood the Jewish
State. That would mean the destruction of Israel. No
one who believes in peace could ever accept it. It is a
non-starter.

Since the Palestinian leadership refuses to tell
the Palestinian people the truth, the international
community has the responsibility to tell them the truth.
It has a duty to stand up and say that the so-called claim
of return is a non-starter. Yet many who are so vocal
in telling Israel what it needs to do for peace stutter,
mumble and lose their voices when it comes time to tell
the Palestinians this basic truth.
Today there is a clear choice between complacency
and leadership. Over the past 30 years, the Hizbullah
terrorist organization has killed tens of thousands of
men, women and children in attacks spanning dozens of
countries and five continents. Working with its Iranian
patrons, Hizbullah has killed families on vacation,
peacekeepers sleeping in their barracks and diplomats
carrying out their official business.

Iran has provided Hizbullah with funds, training
and advanced weapons to hijack the Lebanese State
and transform it into an outpost for terror. Just last
week, Hizbullah's leader, Hassan Nasrallah, publicly
admitted that Iran had provided the military drone that
his organization sent over Israel. One does not need any
further evidence that Hizbullah is a direct proxy of the
Iranian regime.

Hizbullah's continued provocations could have
devastating consequences for the region.

I want to make this perfectly clear, so that no one in
this Chamber can say that they did not hear me or did not
understand me: Hizbullah's continued provocation and
military buildup could have devastating consequences
for the region.

Not all Lebanese are so happy that Hizbullah
is using their country as its playground. As former
Lebanese Prime Minister Saad Hariri said last week,
Lebanon is not an unmanned drone. He reiterated "deep
concerns over the uncalculated risks which Hezbollah
wants to drag Lebanon into".

Nasrallah claims that he needs a private,
independent army - with more missiles than many
NATO members - to defend Lebanon against Israel.
Today, on the streets of Horns, Hama and Damascus, we
see that Hizbullah's army is far more preoccupied with
butchering their Arab brothers and sisters in Syria.

Ahmadinejad and Nasrallah sit on Bashar
Al-Assad's advisory board, offering the tyrant of
Damascus guidance on how to butcher the Syrian people
more efficiently. Together they form what I call a trio of
terror. I know that there is no shortage of those willing
to express their "commitment to Israel's security" in
these halls. Yet such displays of commitment to Israel's
security have been difficult to find over the past six
years, as Hizbullah has turned southern Lebanon into a
giant storage facility for 50,000 missiles.

Some countries around this table continue to define
Hizbullah as a charitable and political group, not a
terrorist organization. That is no less ridiculous than
describing the Mafia as a gentleman's social club. In
many European countries, Hizbullah is raising money
from supporters as if it were the Red Cross. Nasrallah
recently admitted that being placed on a European
terrorist list would "destroy Hizbullah", drying up
many sources of financial, political and moral support.

How much longer must this absurdity continue?
How many more innocents must fall victim to
Hizbullah's terror before Europe acts? It is time for all
responsible nations to call Hizbullah exactly what it is:
a global terrorist organization.

In this Chamber today, the need for leadership is
clear. Later in this debate, Iran will speak on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement. In other words, the world's
greatest sponsor of terrorism will speak to the Security
Council on behalf ofroughly two thirds ofthe countries
represented in the United Nations.

What a sham, and what a shame. It is time for all
those Non-Aligned Movement countries that care about
peace and security to realign the Movement. It is time
for the international community to finally act to stop
the Iranian regime from acquiring nuclear weapons.
With every day that passes, the enriched uranium in
Iran piles higher and higher.

One can only imagine what that ayatollah regime
would do with the dangerous combination of extremist
ideology, advanced missile technology and nuclear
weapons. An Iranian nuclear bomb would be the mullahs'
greatest dream and the world's worst nightmare. And
with the very worst nightmares, sometimes the only
way to stop them is to wake up.

The hour is getting very late. The red line is very
clear. The world must stop Iran before it is too late.

For Israel, the lessons of history are very clear. Real
security 4 and real peace - can be secured only in the
real world, not in the fantasyland of vague statements
and empty resolutions.

To those truly committed to the security of Israel
and the Middle East, to those committed to a two-State
solution, I say: act tangibly, speak out publicly and
show us concretely. The choices are very clear. They
can recognize Israel as the nation-State of the Jewish
people, or allow the Palestinian leadership to deny our
history without consequence.

They can work to end the Palestinian Authority's
incitement and support for terrorists, or allow hate and
extremism to take root for generations to come. They
can say publicly that the so-called claim of return is a
non-starter, or they can allow this claim to remain an
obstacle on the road to peace.

They can choose to support direct negotiations
and talks around the table or to undermine them with
unilateral resolutions at the United Nations. They can
choose to look the other way at Hizbullah's terror, or
show the political courage to stop the organization in
its tracks. They can choose to stand idle as an Iranian
nuclear bomb becomes a reality in the Middle East, or
they can take action before it is too late.

Today I say to the leaders of our region, to the
members of the Council and to each and every Member
of the United Nations: these choices are yours. The fate
of the Middle East hangs in the balance. The time to
act is now.

