Mr. Mbuende (Namibia): My delegation would
like to associate itself with the statement delivered by
the representative of Pakistan on behalf of the Group of
77 and China and with the statement to be delivered by
Cuba on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
My delegation recognizes that threats to peace
and security emanate from different sources. Poverty
and unemployment can give rise to instability that
threatens peace and security. Underdevelopment and
global economic imbalances can create tensions among
nations that could threaten international peace and
security.

Non-traditional threats to peace and security,
however, can best be addressed through the appropriate
organs charged with the responsibility to take remedial
action in a particular area. The Charter of the United
Nations recognizes the link between social and
economic development - or, rather, the lack
thereof - and peace and security. It was against this
background that the Economic and Social Council was
created with a View to addressing these issues. Threats
to peace and security that emanate from social and
economic factors can best be addressed through
investments in economic development. By the same
token, threats to international peace and security
emanating from climate change and global warming
can best be addressed through interventions in the
environmental arena. There are indeed a host of
instruments designed to deal with environmental
problems before they get out of hand - or, rather, to
stop further deterioration.

We are taking part in this debate today because of
the seriousness with which we view the phenomenon of
climate change. This is not an academic exercise but
rather a matter of life or death for my country,
Namibia.

Humanity, and the developing countries in
particular, have been subjected to what could be
described as low-intensity biological or chemical
warfare. Greenhouse gases are slowly destroying
plants, animals and human beings. A large part of
Namibia is today subjected to frequent droughts while,
at the same time, another part is flooded. The
combined effect of drought and floods has had a
tremendous impact on our biodiversity. Namibia has
two deserts, the Namib in the west and the Kalahari in
the east. These deserts are spreading, claiming more
and more range and agricultural land and rendering
these lands uninhabitable.

Another characteristic of climate change that is
becoming evident in Namibia is the spread of malaria
to areas hitherto considered free of the disease.
Historically, this disease was prevalent in the northern
and north-eastern parts of the country only because the
central and southern parts had colder temperatures.
However, with the change in temperatures, malaria-
carrying mosquitoes have extended their range to
nearly everywhere in the country and are spreading the
disease. Meanwhile, our fight against malaria is
hindered by the high cost of medicines. Our attempts to
produce cheaper generics have been met with
resistance, as multinational pharmaceutical companies
invoke their intellectual property rights. The impact of
climate change on health is further exacerbated by the
fact that some plants that were used for traditional
medicinal purposes are likely to be extinct.

We cannot talk about climate change in a casual
manner, and it cannot be business as usual. The cause
of the problem is known. Those who are responsible
for the problem are also known. Now is the time to
hold them accountable for their action. They cannot be
allowed to escape with impunity.

There is a need to take drastic measures to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions. The economic argument that
these measures will be costly does not hold water. For
the continuation of the status quo is also costly to those
who, though not responsible for global warming, suffer
its consequences. However, we are encouraged by the
steps that some industrialized countries are taking. But
is it not too little, too late? Still, every step to curb
emissions is important.

Climate adaptation will be a costly exercise for
Namibia. The people of my country, like those of many
other developing countries, are dependent on natural
resources. However, these resources are being
destroyed by a combination of droughts, wildfires and
floods. Namibia had placed high hopes in the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
and the Kyoto Protocol. These two instruments contain
a number of commitments by States parties. If fully
honoured, they could have assisted us tremendously in
our endeavours to reverse this ruinous phenomenon.

It saddens us that, despite elaborate paragraphs
and wording in both the Convention and the Kyoto
32

Protocol, what we have been witnessing is the
continuation of a business-as-usual attitude. Indeed, as
developing countries, we are facing what I dare to call
an unprovoked war being waged on us by developed
countries. In fact, what we see happening is a concrete
example of the proverbial discarding one's dirty water
in the backyard of one's neighbour.

Despite long-standing treaty commitments to help
poor countries deal with global warming, the industrial
Powers are spending very little on ways to limit
climate and coastal hazards in the world's most
vulnerable regions compared to what they are spending
on securing their own continued survival. How many
more conventions and protocols does the international
community require before drastic measures are taken to
address the issues of climate change in earnest?

Kyoto 2 will probably come and go, and so will
Kyoto 3 and 4, while our peoples and countries are
rendered more and more vulnerable. What we need is
action now and not mere debates that do not produce
concrete results. In this regard, my delegation would
like to see the establishment of an effective mechanism
to take charge of the governance of climate change. We
have in mind a mechanism that will monitor and ensure
the compliance of States parties with the provisions of
the instruments they have acceded to and their
fulfilment of the commitments contained therein.
Namibia intends to make this recommendation in the
appropriate organs.

