Mr. Alasania (Georgia): At the outset, let me
express my condolences to the families of victims of
the tragedies caused by the natural disasters in China
and Myanmar.

I would like to extend our gratitude to the United
Kingdom Mission to the United Nations for the
excellent opportunity afforded us to address this crucial
issue.

Georgia aligns itself with the statement made by
the Slovenian representative on behalf of European
Union.

Georgia considers the Peacebuilding
Commission, in close cooperation with the other main
United Nations bodies, as the most important
instrument in the field of peacebuilding, post-conflict
rehabilitation and stabilization. As a member of the
newly established body, Georgia is looking forward to
the implementation of the strategic frameworks in
those respective fields.

As we are discussing comprehensive issues
related to post-conflict peacebuilding, allow me to
contribute with observations based on experience
gained during 15 years of hosting peacekeeping
operations in Abkhazia, Georgia.

We believe that a strong peacekeeping operation
has to be supported by solid law enforcement and
security elements in order to create the secure
environment necessary for ensuring the normal rhythm
of life. We refer to the impartial international civilian
law enforcement elements, which can effectively
restore law and order and ensure the dignified and safe
return of refugees and internally displaced persons to
their homes.

For more than a decade now, we have been
witnessing that most of the objectives of the current
peacekeeping forces in Abkhazia, Georgia have not
been achieved. Clearly, our experience seriously calls
into question the rationale of having an immediate
neighbour country serving as the dominant
peacekeeper in the conflict. In our case, the gradual
shift from a military peacekeeping operation to an
international police operation with capabilities for
addressing threats to security and stability is inevitable.
We assume that the role of an effective international
police force should include anti-crime patrols,
investigation of crimes and human rights violations and
the training of local police forces.

We are confident that efficient conflict resolution
in Abkhazia, Georgia requires the appropriate
enlargement and enforcement of the mandate of the
United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia
(UNOMIG), especially in the field of law enforcement
activities. Together with operational functions, the new
mandate should allow the civilian police to supervise,
guide and train joint local police forces to enforce the
law effectively and impartially. The primary goal of the
international civilian police is to restore law and order
and assist national institutions while maintaining full
respect for the host country's sovereignty.

Based on our experience, the blueprint for a
successful peacekeeping operation includes
impartiality guaranteed by wider international
representation and solid collective international efforts
to ensure the operation's responsiveness to the changes
on the ground.

