Mr. Listre (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to thank the Secretary-General for his
valuable information, and I would particularly like to
thank you, Mr. President, for having shared with us
your impressions from your recent trip to Ethiopia and
Eritrea. We would also like to thank you for the
valuable suggestions that you have made this morning,
which we will study very carefully.

Since Argentina joined the Security Council, we
have clearly put forward our substantive situation in
this territorial conflict, a position we wish to reiterate
at this time.

The use of force in international relations is not a
valid means for the acquisition of territory under
international law. As such, the occupation of a territory
by force gives no better legal title to disputed territory.
However long the conflict may last, the situation does
not change. That title does not hold as can be seen from
Article 2, paragraph 4 of the Charter prohibited use of
force in international relations is an imperative in
international law. Together with that States are obliged,
as stipulated in Article 2, paragraphs 3 and 33, to
peacefully solve disputes.

For these reasons, the withdrawal of troops to
defined positions, that is to say, return to the status quo
ante, does not prejudge the final status of the territory
under dispute. The final legal status of that territory
will result from negotiations conducted by the parties
to delineate and demarcate the border. Respect for the
principle of territorial integrity underlies the peaceful
and lasting solution of this conflict.

We think that today we have reasons for cautious
optimism on the evolution of this situation. The
agreement on the cessation of hostilities signed on 18
June last, unlike what has occurred in other conflicts
before the Council, is being complied with in good
faith in Ethiopia and Eritrea. Those parties are
cooperating with UNMEE and it has already deployed
military observers in the area of the mission. Unlike
other peacekeeping operations in Africa, UNMEE has
enough troop contributors coming from more than 20
States Members of the United Nations. These
favourable circumstances should be utilized by the
parties to consolidate the peace and reach a final
decision on this shared border. The presence of
UNMEE will surely help to generate a climate of
mutual confidence, but both Ethiopia and Eritrea must,
by concrete measures - such as the release of
prisoners of war or the exchange of information on
mined areas - work to restore the confidence that has
been lost after two years of war. Nor can there be any
doubt that UNMEE, with its 4,200 troops, will play a
stabilizing role, but we also agree that it should not be
considered by the parties as a replacement for the
peace agreement. The parties must continue to
participate flexibly and with a sense of commitment in
the negotiations under way with the assistance of the
United States, through that President's personal
representative, Mr. Anthony Lake, and President
Bouteflika of Algeria in order to reach an agreement on
the final delimitation and demarcation of their shared
border.

As we said in the open briefing on Wednesday,
15 November, dealing with exit strategies for
peacekeeping operations, the humanitarian,
institutional and economic consequences of a conflict
show us that lasting peace and reconciliation require
much more than a ceasefire. Conditions for sustainable
development must also be established. The
international community cannot and must not remain
indifferent in this vital task of consolidating this peace
that was so difficult to achieve between Eritrea and
Ethiopia.

