Mr. Aboulgheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Two
days ago, on 20 November, Egypt recalled its
Ambassador from Tel Aviv following the unacceptable,
unprecedented and unjustified intensification of
systematic Israeli bombings of Palestinian government
buildings and installations in the Gaza Strip. Egypt did
so in the hope of sending a clear and categorical
message to Israel that Egypt, which initiated the peace
process in the Middle East, cannot remain silent and
passive in the face of this excessive, intensive and
arrogant use of military force against the Palestinian
people, its institutions and its property.

A few weeks ago, we warned the Council and the
General Assembly of the fact that the deterioration of
the situation between the Palestinians and Israelis and
Israel's intensive and inexcusable use of deadly
retaliatory military force and violence could only lead
to more violence. Indeed, the cycle of violence is a
vicious circle. The Palestinian people feels frustration,
outrage and a sense of injustice under military
occupation.

Egypt calls on Israel to fully respect the
agreements undertaken at the Sharm el-Sheikh summit
with regard to the withdrawal of its heavy weapons
from all Palestinian regions and from areas where they
are prohibited under bilateral arrangements. Egypt
believes that such a step is a fundamental measure for
bringing peace to the situation.

Any incident in which civilians on any side are
targeted should be condemned by all parties. Egypt
certainly condemns and rejects the targeting of Israeli
civilians just as forcefully as it condemns the targeting
of Palestinian civilians. It would therefore be useful in
this respect to emphasize that one of the most
important causes of friction between the two parties,
making the situation all the more explosive and tense,
is the presence of Israeli settlers on Palestinian
territory. These are armed civilians who behave
provocatively. We have all seen their conduct and
heard their positions on our television sets. They are on
Palestinian land. Because of this illicit and illegitimate
presence, in violation of the resolutions of the Security
Council and the norms of international law, the
approximately 1 million Palestinians living in the Gaza
Strip occupy only 60 per cent of that territory - as the
representative of Palestine pointed out today in the
Economic and Social Council - because the other 40
per cent is inhabited by approximately 4,000 Israeli
settlers. The Council needs to be aware of these facts.

The situation is so grave that it threatens the
stability of the entire region. Israel continues to take
measures that inflict collective punishment on the
Palestinian people, thus running counter to all
international instruments and to all its obligations as an
occupying Power under the Fourth Geneva Convention.

Israel is subjecting the Palestinian people to an
economic blockade that is stifling it. It closes off
Palestinian territory. Israel is hampering the circulation
of food and medication, not to mention the fact that it
hampers trade. It cuts off electric power from the
whole Gaza Strip. This is a situation that the Security
Council must address. It must not lose sight of it
because of its grave consequences for Palestinian
civilians.

All these acts must come to an end immediately.

We hope that the fact-finding committee will
begin its work soon, now that it has been established in
consultation with the Secretary-General, under Senator
George Mitchell's chairmanship. We hope its work will
begin very soon with a clear and specific plan of work
so that it can meet the objective for which it was
created.

In conclusion, the series of events in the occupied
Palestinian territory requires that the Council keep up
with the events. Negotiations and consultations are
now taking place among members of the Council and
with the Secretary-General as well, whose efforts we
appreciate. These consultations are aimed at agreeing
on the establishment and deployment of a United
Nations observer force, which would contribute to
ensuring the protection and security of the Palestinian
people in the face of these recurring Israeli acts of
aggression.

This is precisely the idea that had been advocated
by the Arab Summit in its declaration of 22 October
last.
Egypt, for its part, calls upon the Council to
assume its responsibilities and obligations under the
Charter and to adopt the draft resolution that we hope
will be introduced by the Non-Aligned Caucus of the
Council in the next few days.

I am profoundly concerned and disturbed to hear
the representative of Israel say today that his country is
not convinced of the usefulness of this observer or
protection force.

