Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I, too,
thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo, Mr. Zahir Tanin,
for his briefing. I assure him once again of our support
in the exercise of his functions. I also thank the First
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Republic Serbia, Mr. Ivica Dacie, and Kosovo's
Ambassador, Ms. Vlora Citaku, for their statements.

The future of Kosovo and its regional integration no
longer primarily plays out in the Security Council, but
in the framework of the political dialogue held under
the auspices of the European Union. New progress has
been made on that front in recent months, in particular
with the start of work on the bridge in Mitrovica, which
we welcome.

Nevertheless, those advances are not enough. We
expect that all the commitments made in the context
of the agreements concluded under the auspices of
the European Union will be implemented as soon as
possible, including with regard to the setting up of an
asociation/community of Serb-majority municipalities,
which is a key element of the dialogue. We therefore
urgently call upon the Kosovar and Serbian authorities
to intensify their efforts to produce further concrete
results in the coming months. It is particularly important
that the dialogue at the political level can resume as
soon as possible.

The normalization of relations between Belgrade
and Pristina remains generally a vital prerequisite for
their respective progress on the path towards European
integration, which was once again encouraged at the
Paris-Balkans 2016 Summit, held on 4 July.

The continuation of efforts to consolidate the rule
of law in Kosovo must also remain a priority. That first
concerns the fight against impunity. We had already
had an opportunity to welcome the swift ratification by
the President of Kosovo of the headquarters agreement
signed with the Dutch Government for the installation
of Specialist Chambers in The Hague. That is a crucial
step. We know that the Kosovo authorities work to
enable all components of the Specialist Chambers to
start functioning as soon as possible and to take action
against those responsible for the crimes set out in the
Marty report. We encourage them to continue along
that path.

The consolidation of the rule of law also involves
the fight against radicalization in all its forms. France
welcomes the unconditional commitment of Kosovo in
that area, both locally and in the international coalition
against Da'esh. I also take this opportunity to reiterate
our support for the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo, which contributes every day to the
rule of law and security in Kosovo and whose mandate
was just renewed by the Council of the European Union.

France also welcomes the relative decline in tension
registered in Kosovo's internal political scene since the
presidential election in February. The building of an
independent, modern, democratic State also entails the
establishment of a peaceful and responsible dialogue
among the various stakeholders of the political scene,
in compliance with the provisions of the Constitution
and in the framework of existing institutions. Violence,
hateful rhetoric and disruptions in the proceeedings
of the legitimately elected Assembly have no place in
the type of society that the overwhelming majority of
Kosovar citizens aspire to. We will therefore continue
to condemn them with the same firmness, whatever the
reasons. We also remain concerned about the persistence
of incidents against members of minority communities
and against religious and cultural heritage sites.

It is important that the Kosovo authorities continue
to make efforts in favour of dialogue among the
different political forces and for the establishment
of a peaceful and inclusive society. The reforms
implemented in the framework of the Stabilization and
Association Agreement with the European Union are
already leading in that direction. Kosovo can count on
our full support in that regard.

Finally, France continues to support the efforts
of the Kosovar authorities to achieve international
recognition of their State. Kosovo's participation in
the Olympic Games in Rio de Janeior, crowned by
the country's first Olympic gold medal, in judo, is an
important symbolic step in that regard.

I conclude by recalling once again our hope for a
continued gradual transfer of competencies from the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo to the State's authorities, as well as for a review
of the cycle of the Council's review of the situation
in Kosovo, in view of the continuous progress with
regard to the consolidation of Kosovo's institutions
and the bilateral dialogue between Kosovo and
Serbia. Our debates seem to be out of sync with those
enouraging developments.

