Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We commend the
presidency of China for this opportunity to discuss
the activities of the Joint Force of the Group of Five
for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel). We would like to express
our appreciation to Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Maman Sidikou, Permanent Secretary of the
G-5 Sahel, Mr. Pierre Buyoya, African Union High
Representative for Mali and the Sahel, and Mr. Pedro
Serrano, Deputy Secretary-General for Common
Security and Defence Policy and Crisis Response
at the European External Action Service, for their
comprehensive briefings.
Kazakhstan remains concerned about the
deterioration of the security situation in the Sahel's
tri-border area and the further expansion of terrorist
and extremist groups into central Mali and eastern
Burkina Faso. It is worrying that this insecurity is
further aggravated by the alliances that terrorist and
extremist groups have formed with groups involved
in transnational organized crime, drug and human
trafficking and arms proliferation. Our delegation
welcomes the commitments and determination of the
G-5 Sahel countries to operationalize the Joint Force,
which is critical to effective counter-terrorism in the
region. We believe that making the G-5 Sahel Joint
Force fully operational will positively reinforce the
joint efforts of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
the Malian national security forces and other
mechanisms to bring peace and stability to the Sahel.

However, to succeed, the G-5 Sahel countries need
predictable and long-term sustainable funding from
the donor community, as well as technical assistance
from Member States. We therefore support the
recommendations contained in the semi-annual report
of the Secretary-General (S/2018/1006) regarding
the need to revise support measures and the funding
mechanism. In turn, the GS-Sahel States will have
to speed up the process of making the Joint Force
fully functional, improve its operational readiness
and sustainably implement the human rights and
international humanitarian law compliance framework.
We welcome the opening of the security and defence
colleges established by the G-5 Sahel, which is an
important step towards enhancing the Joint Force's
capacity.

Another important task is ensuring the
complementarity and strengthening the coordination
between the G-5 Sahel Joint Force with all security
forces in the region, including MINUSMA, Operation
Barkhane and regional frameworks, in particular the
African Union-led Nouakchott process. The Joint Force
should find its place within the larger political and
institutional framework and strategy that is planned
for the subregion, and which also calls for improving
coherence among the Sahel countries themselves. We
therefore support the call from the G-5 Sahel summit
held in Nouakchott in July for harmonizing the G-5
Sahel priority investment plan and the United Nations
Support Plan for the Sahel.

To genuinely address instability in the region,
counter-terrorism measures must be accompanied
by development efforts and by tackling the root
causes of conflict and instability. To some extent,
those issues can be resolved or at least reduced by
strengthening local governance, reducing poverty and
tribal rivalries, providing basic services and creating
more jobs. Mitigating the effects of climate change
should be another priority. My country has proposed a
three-pronged strategy for resolving regional conflicts,
consisting in strengthening the security-development
nexus, adopting a regional approach and streamlining
the United Nations system to enable it to deliver as one.

A comprehensive overall strategy ofthis kind could
prove to be a highly effective and sustainable tool for
addressing the common threats facing the Sahel and the
countries of the region. The recalibrated United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel and the recently
launched Support Plan represent a good basis for such
a comprehensive and integrated approach. We are also
looking forward to the alignment of the Integrated
Strategy with the African Union's strategy for the
Sahel. We hope that concrete results will be achieved in
that regard at the upcoming African Union ministerial
meeting on Mali and the Sahel. In conclusion, I would
like to reiterate Kazakhstan's commitment to helping
the Sahel countries to fulfil their vision for peace,
progress and prosperity.

