Mr. Schaper (Netherlands): The Netherlands
fully subscribes to the statement of the European
Union. We would like to make a few additional
comments on the upcoming renewal of the mandate of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and on the situation in Afghanistan.

Experience with post-conflict countries teaches
us a thing or two about how to jump-start progress. In
particular, local authorities themselves must improve
stability, governance and the human rights situation.
All the while, the international community must
empower authorities, and do so in a coordinated
manner. That is why we agree with the Secretary-
General when he writes in his report (S/2010/l27) that
2010 should be the year of transition towards greater
Afghan ownership.

The overriding objective of such a transition was
of course the main message of the London
Conference - a message directed both towards Afghan
authorities and the international community. In our
view, transition should be defined broadly. Ensuring
more Afghan ownership of security by bolstering the
Afghan National Army and National Police and by
enhancing coordination with the International Security
Assistance Force is one side of the coin.

It will be equally important to make tangible
progress on the civilian side, in particular at local
levels. Key areas I want to mention are, first,

significant progress on governance, such as qualified
civil servants, bolstered by an increased push in anti-
corruption efforts; secondly, election reforms, both in
the short and the long terms; and, thirdly, safeguarding
women's rights in conformity with international
standards. Upcoming opportunities to achieve tangible
progress in those areas are the Kabul conference, the
Peace J irga and the elections.

We also agree with the Secretary-General when it
comes to UNAMA's focus. It needs to concentrate
more on empowering Afghan authorities. In doing so,
UNAMA will, in or view, need to take a differentiated
approach. In some areas, Afghan ministries are by and
large already in charge of donor coordination. In that
connection, therefore, UNAMA's role can be limited.
In other areas there will be scope for a more
pronounced UNAMA role. We believe that UNAMA
needs to look carefully into specific areas where it can
make a difference when it comes to donor coordination
or the United Nations internal coordination - the so-
called One United Nations approach. We look forward
to the guidance of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on that.

Finally, let me underline that Dutch troops have
served with honour in Uruzgan province since 2006.
We have made every effort to find the right balance
between our civilian and our military efforts and are
very grateful for the support and cooperation of our
international allies, UNAMA and the Afghan
authorities. I wish to emphasize that the Netherlands is
and will remain a strong partner for Afghanistan in the
years to come.

