Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would like to begin by
thanking this morning's briefers, including Matthew
Rycroft for his update on the London Conference on
Somalia. I think that what we gather from the briefings
and the report (S/2017/408) of the Secretary-General
is that significant political progress had been made
in Somalia during the reporting period. As everyone
said, the political and security advances during the past
recent months must be consolidated and built upon.

It is clear that continued international support
for the Government and the people of Somalia will
be necessary as they seek to build on the promise of
recent gains and confront the remaining challenges.
In that regard, we would like to extend our thanks to
the Government of the United Kingdom for hosting
and arranging the very successful Conference in
London. We strongly welcome the outcome, not least
of which was the security pact and the new partnership
agreement concerning Somalia, which will guide our
continued cooperation and support for the country. The
important agreement between state and federal leaders
on the architecture and accountability of Somali
security forces was instrumental in making the security
pact possible.

Important peace- and State-building tasks remain.
Those include a resumed review of the Constitution
based on inclusive, transparent and broad-based
consultations, and preparations for national elections
in 2020 and 2021. Building trust and constructive
relations within and between the federal member states
and central Government will be key. Strengthening the
capacity of local governance and institutions must be
a top priority with the aim of building confidence in
the legitimacy of State functions, including through
the provision of basic social services. The agreements
reached last week will be of fundamental importance
for our continued and increased cooperation in support
of those efforts.

The United Nations has walked the difficult road of
the past with the Somali people. Going forward, it will
be essential that we configure United Nations support
for Somalia appropriately as the outcome of the London
Conference is implemented. Therefore, we welcome
the strategic review of the United Nations presence in
Somalia and look forward to engaging constructively
with Council members on the renewal of the mandate
of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
(UNSOM).

The ongoing strategic review of the African the
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) is equally
important so as to ensure well-calibrated and well-
coordinated support to Somalia. It is crucial that the
projected drawdown of AMISOM. be conditions-based
and synchronized with a corresponding strengthening
of Somali security forces. A failure to carefully manage
that process could imperil the political and security gains
already made. We should not forget that AMISOM. has
a critical role in counter-terrorism efforts in Somalia
that have positive effects well beyond the borders of
the country. Given its importance, we recognize that
AMISOM. deserves more predictable and sustainable
financing to carry out its mission, and we look forward
to the Secretary-General's recommendations on how to
achieve that.

We are greatly concerned about the current drought
conditions. As we heard this morning, the impact on
the lives and livelihoods of Somalis is immense and
devastating. While first and foremost a humanitarian
issue, we must recognize that the drought could also
have severe security and political implications. We
commend the impressive efforts made thus far by
the Government and the international community
to respond, which have averted a more wide-spread
famine. But it is essential that we sustain the effort
to the end of the year at the earliest. However, urgent
humanitarian assistance needs to be coupled with
efforts to build long-term resilience to droughts and
other crises.

As Chair of the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict, I would like to highlight the
recommendations concerning Somalia adopted last
month. It is important that they now be implemented,
particularly the recommendation regarding UNSOM's
child protection mandate on the need to allocate
sufficient child-protection capacity to the Mission
We would also like to express particular concern with
regard to the continued detention of children by federal
and regional authorities.

I would also like to take this opportunity to
welcome the detailed reporting on cross-cutting issues,
including on women's empowerment and women and
peace and security in the Secretary-General's report.
We also commend UNSOM. for having scaled up
protection efforts in the light of increased incidents of
sexual violence following the humanitarian emergency.
We note that the Secretary-General's strategic review
of UNSOM. mentions that the women and peace
and security agenda should be better integrated
into UNSOM's mandate, thereby going beyond the
protection of women and including their participation.
The review's call for a strong emphasis on the good
offices and conflict-resolution role of the Mission is
also important. We look forward to discussing how that
can be achieved in the updated mandate.

Despite the challenges still facing the Government
and the people of Somalia, the significant progress
made in the reporting period underlines the potential
for Somalia to move forward towards peace and
stability. The outcome of the London Conference shows
that the international community remains committed,
but we must all now redouble our efforts to implement
the outcomes for the good of all Somalis.

