Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): Thank
you, Mr. President, for your words of welcome. I am
most honoured to represent France in this Council,
which has such an important role. You and all my other
colleagues here will find me ready to listen and
cooperate. On behalf of the entire French delegation, I
would like to express to Emyr Jones Parry our feelings
of friendship and our admiration for the remarkable
work he has done in the Council, representing and
defending the interests of the United Kingdom, a
country that France and the French people hold close to
their hearts.

To return the subject that the Council is
considering today, I would like to welcome the courage
and the remarkable work carried out in a particularly
difficult situation by all of the personnel of the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). The
tragic death of Sergio Vieira de Mello and his
colleagues, mentioned by several of my colleagues,
demonstrates the context in which the United Nations
works in Iraq.

Since the Secretary-General is present, I would
also like to warmly thank his Special Representative
for Iraq, Mr. Qazi, whose mission is coming to an end
and who has done so much to advance the political
process for national reconciliation there.

The situation in Iraq continues to be of great
concern in several respects. First, in terms of security,
Iraq remains plagued by violence and the Iraqi people
continue to pay a very heavy price in that regard.
Secondly, on the humanitarian front, the situation
created by the increasing numbers of internally
displaced persons and refugees should command our
attention. It constitutes a grave threat to Iraq and to
regional stability.

In View of those facts, we must now more than
ever work collectively to find solutions. The Iraqi
people themselves must, of course, lead the way in
searching for those solutions. The key, as we know, is a
true national reconciliation process that is as inclusive
as possible and that will isolate the forces that seek the
failure of Iraq.

Efforts must also be made by the States of the
region. The Sharm el-Sheikh conference of 4 May was
a useful step in that direction, since it brought
neighbouring countries together around important
principles such as the stability and unity of Iraq and the
rejection of interference in its internal affairs. All three
of the working groups established by the conference
have already held their first meetings. This momentum
should be maintained and strengthened and should lead
to concrete actions.

Finally, - and this is the purpose of today's
meeting - the international community, through the
United Nations, should strengthen its efforts in support
of the current internal and regional momentum. That is
the focus of the commitment of the United Nations,
which continues to play an important part in the
process of rebuilding Iraq in very difficult conditions.
France has consistently favoured strengthening the role
of the United Nations in Iraq, a strengthening that
should take into account limitations related to the
situation on the ground and the need to ensure the
security of United Nations personnel in the field.

We hope that the various areas of United Nations
intervention in Iraq will be involved in such
strengthening. I am thinking about action that can be
taken in the political area to contribute to the process
of dialogue and national reconciliation, as well as
everything that can be done to ease the severity of the
humanitarian situation. I recall, in that regard, the
responsibility of the Iraqi Government to protect
affected populations as well as United Nations and
associated personnel. Finally, at the economic level, I
am thinking about the implementation of the
International Compact with Iraq and activities to
coordinate humanitarian assistance for the
reconstruction of Iraq.

The text adopted today by the Council enables us
to make progress in that direction. France thus voted in
favour of it and welcomes the Council's unanimous
support for this approach.

