Prince Zeid Ra'ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to
congratulate you Sir, and sisterly Syria on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month and wish you every success in
discharging the task with which you have been
entrusted. We have every confidence in your ability to
fulfil your responsibilities.

I would also like to thank the Permanent
Representative of Singapore, Ambassador Kishore
Mahbubani, for his efforts as President of the Council
during the month of May.

Since 29 March this year, the Israeli military
operations in the territories of the Palestinian National
Authority have continued without interruption, despite
the numerous Security Council resolutions, presidential
statements and statements to the press calling on Israel
to withdraw immediately from the cities, villages and
areas it has recently reoccupied. The Israeli
Government continues to refuse to implement those
resolutions, opposing the will of the Council on various
pretexts and continuing its siege of the Palestinian
people and their legitimate and democratically elected
leadership.

Moreover, the Security Council has demonstrated
its inability to react to the situation and to pressure
Israel to implement its obligations under those
resolutions. This unique situation in the Security
Council has thus encouraged Israel to continue its acts
of violence and destruction, its dismantling of the
Palestinian National Authority and its targeting and
terrorizing of Palestinian civilians - actions that are
intended to achieve strategic goals and create new facts
on the ground leading to the abrogation of the
legitimate Palestinian right to self-determination and to
the establishment of an independent State, with East
Jerusalem as its capital.

The recent developments - and any acceptance
of the policies and situation on the ground that the
Israeli Government is trying to establish - represent a
dangerous setback for the prospects of peace in the
region. In this context, the op-ed piece by the Prime
Minister of Israel, Mr. Sharon, in The New York Times,
offered a twisted legal interpretation of Council
resolution 242 (1967). In writing such an opinion,
Prime Minister Sharon seemed to have forgotten that
resolution 242 (1967) and subsequent relevant
resolutions of the Council all emphasized the
inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by force,
and declared the territories seized by Israel in June
1967 to be occupied territories. Such statements, which
are encouraged by the silence of the international
community and the inability of the Security Council to
react, are destroying the key pillar of the Middle East
peace process: the principle of land for peace. They
also represent a flat-out rejection of the peace initiative
adopted at the recent Arab Summit held in Beirut.

The resumption of the peace process, together
with Israel's implementation of the relevant Security
Council resolutions and its respect for the legitimate
Palestinian leadership and willingness to work with it,
would be guarantees of peace and security for Israel.
Such guarantees can never be achieved through a war
of aggression or by committing war crimes against
Palestinian civilians, including attempts to forcefully
transfer the population outside the occupied territories
by intensifying the military and economic blockade
there. Furthermore, suicide bombings cannot be
combated by destroying the security apparatus of the
Palestinian National Authority.

In this regard, the Government of Jordan, which
condemns the suicide bombings committed in Israel
against Israeli civilians, would like to draw the
attention of the Israeli Government to the fact that its
military operations against the Palestinians and their
leadership have failed to end the bombings. Thus, it
should explore the option of ending its military
operations and returning to the negotiating table in
order to put an end to the suicide bombings.

In conclusion, the Government of Jordan calls on
the Security Council to assume its responsibilities with
regard to Israel's refusal to fulfil its obligations under
the provisions of the relevant Security Council
resolutions. Furthermore, it encourages the "quartet" to
take effective measures against the imposition of a fait
accompli, which would write off the peace process in
the region. As a first step, those who are actively
involved in the peace process should establish a
timetable for the creation of a Palestinian State on the
territories occupied in 1967, including East Jerusalem.

