Mrs. Gaye (Senegal) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by thanking President Churkin and the
Russian delegation for convening this debate on
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations. This morning's meeting
addresses the interaction between the United Nations
and the Collective Security Treaty Organization,
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization and the
Commonwealth of Independent States, following up
our very interesting recent exchanges concerning
cooperation with the African Union (see S/PV.7694)
and the European Union (see S/PV.7705).

Allow me at first to welcome the briefers for their
being here and to thank them for their outstanding
presentations: Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon;
Mr. Nikolai Bordyuzha, Secretary-General of the
Collective Security Treaty Organization; Mr. Rashid
Alimov, Secretary- General of the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization ;and Mr. Sergey Ivanov, Vice-Chair of
the Executive Committee of the Commonwealth of
Independent States.

Today's meeting provides an opportunity to
strengthen the basis for cooperation between the
United Nations and the organizations I just mentioned,
including within the spirit of Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations, which stipulates that regional
and subregional organizations may cooperate in
improving collective security through the maintenance
of international peace and security.

As was rightly indicated by the Secretary-General
in the Chamber in August 2015, "the United Nations
increasingly shares responsibility for peace and
security with regional organizations." (S/PV7505, p. 2) Acting under mandate of the United Nations,
regional organizations have provided local expertise
and operational resources to the United Nations.
For the many conflicts and crises around the world
require especially close cooperation between the
United Nations and its various partners, particularly
regional organizations, which play an essential role in
the maintenance of international peace and security in
their respective areas of competence. Regional entities,
which form a link between the national and global
levels, benefit from geographic proximity with the
conflict situations in their areas and are therefore in a
better position to understand such situations.

It is clear that several of the missions of the entities
with which we are exploring possible cooperation
opportunities are in perfect alignment with the goals of
the United Nations, such as, the maintenance of peace,
security and stability in the region, the fight against
terrorism, the fight against the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction, the fight against transnational
crime, human trafficking and illegal immigration and
weapons and drug trafficking.

The geographic areas covered by the Collective
Security Treaty Organization, the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization and the Commonwealth of Independent
States are faced with multifaceted threats to peace
and security including terrorism, drugs trafficking
and organized crime. The scope of such challenges
requires resolute collective action and the pooling
of efforts by the various stakeholders, which are a
requirement for efficiency and effectiveness. In that
regard, the United Nations, an organization tasked with
maintaining international peace and security, should
be able to benefit from pragmatic cooperation with
regional organizations. In so doing, it would help to
stem the wide array of threats and contain the potential
causes of conflict. In that regard, my delegation would
like to highlight the remarkable work conduced by the
Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central
Asia, which, through its proactive approach, anticipates
the situations that could devolve into conflict, by
promoting dialogue and the peaceful settlement of
disputes as the key elements for achieving peace and
sustainable development.

In conclusion, I would like to state that, now more
than ever, my country is convinced about the usefulness
of and the need for a fruitful partnership between the
United Nations and regional organizations. I would
also like to reaffirm Senegal's commitment to effective
multilateralism that is focused on the United Nations,
with the aim of finding lasting solutions to the critical
challenge of attaining global peace and security.

