Mr. Abdelaziz (spoke in Arabic): Today's Security
Council meeting is taking place against a very complex
regional and international backdrop that poses a
blatant challenge to the framework of multilateralism
in international relations, and a radical change in
the way critical issues are addressed in the United
Nations. This includes the need for Member States,
especially Security Council members, to respect
their international commitments under international
law, international humanitarian law and international
human rights law, as well as the Charter of the United
Nations and the relevant Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions.

At this major historic juncture, I confirm the full
and absolute support of the League of Arab States for
intensive international and regional efforts to achieve a
comprehensive and just peace in the Middle East that
ensures a complete peaceful settlement of the Palestinian
question in all its aspects through negotiations between
Israel and Palestine. Those negotiations would address
five final-status issues, foremost among which is the
question of Jerusalem, pursuant to the key terms of
reference of the peace process, including, inter alia, the
Madrid principles and the principle of land for peace.
This should take place in full compliance with the Arab
Peace Initiative, the Quartet road map and the relevant
Security Council resolutions, including resolutions
242 (1967), 338 (1973), 478 (1980) and 2334 (2016).
Such resolutions provide a reference framework within
which the United Nations can work to establish an
independent Palestinian State, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif
as its capital, and 1967 borders. That would enable
the Palestinian people to exercise their inalienable
rights, above all the right to self-determination, and to
establish an independent and sovereign State.

Today's meeting takes place against the exceptional
international backdrop of the United States' unilateral
declaration of Jerusalem as the capital of the State of
Israel, and the relocation of the American Embassy
to Jerusalem. That move completely ignores all of
the principles, terms of reference and international
resolutions governing the Middle East peace process,
in particular Security Council resolutions. We all
know that Jerusalem is a highly sensitive issue for
the three monotheistic religions. We know that in
order to achieve a just and comprehensive peace,
direct negotiations must take place between Israel
and Palestine. It will not be achieved with unilateral
resolutions adopted by the major sponsors of the peace
process. Although countries choose the locations of
their embassies, their choice should not contradict the
resolutions of international legitimacy, including those
of the Security Council. Such resolutions cannot be
challenged simply because they were adopted several
years ago by previous Governments or administrations.
That includes resolution 2334 (2016) that underscores
the text of resolution 478 (1980), which calls on

"[t]hose States that have established diplomatic
missions at Jerusalem to withdraw such missions
from the Holy City" (resolution 478 (1980),

para. 5 (b)).

At its emergency ministerial meeting in Cairo on
9 December 2017, the League of Arab States renewed
its rejection of the American position on Jerusalem,
announced on 6 December 2017. The move was
supported by the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
in the resolution adopted at the Islamic Summit
Conference held in Istanbul on 13 December 2017. It
was also supported by the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries and other States and organizations in clear
statements and resolutions that stressed the extreme
damage it would cause to the peace process. The
international consensus against the American decision
was underscored when 14 members of the Security
Council voted in favour of draft resolution S/2017/1060,
which was put forward by Egypt on behalf of the Group
of Arab States, and when the overwhelming majority
of the members of the General Assembly voted in
favour of resolution 72/240, with the exception of eight
countries that voted against it.

For the first time in the history of the United
Nations, the United States made several threats to use
economic assistance as a means to exert pressure on
developing countries in order to compel them to change
their position. The League of Arab States thanks all
countries that upheld international legitimacy, stood up
to the threats and held on to the principles and values
of the United Nations. We call on the United States to
review its decision, fully implement Security Council
resolutions on the Palestinian question, and respect
final-status issues.

The Palestinian Authority should not be forced
to accept solutions that do not benefit the Palestinian
people, including threats with regard to the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East and the Palestinian Authority.
Furthermore, we share international concerns about the
tensions and escalation in the Arab region, especially in
the Palestinian occupied territories. We see the Israeli
authorities supporting the position of the United States
on Jerusalem in order to consolidate their occupation
of East Jerusalem. We firmly condemn the provocative
measures taken by the occupying Power, Israel. It
has accelerated and increased its settlement-building
activities in East Jerusalem, in line with decisions taken
by the Knesset that are at variance with international
law and the Charter of the United Nations. Security
Council resolutions call on Israel to halt its settlement
activities, in particular in the occupied Palestinian
territories and East Jerusalem.

We reiterate that the ongoing occupation of
Palestinian territories by Israel, including its illegal
settlement-building activities, is a threat to international
and regional peace and security. We therefore call on
the Security Council to shoulder its responsibility to
protect international legitimacy, as well as its own
resolutions, which are key components of international
action towards lasting andjust peace in the Middle East.
We call on the Council to step up its efforts to reach
a comprehensive outcome through direct negotiations
between Israel and Palestine on the final status.

We call for the cessation of measures that could
alter historic facts on the ground. At the same time,
Israel must understand that if it wants to become a
non-permanent member of the Security Council, it
must show that it is working towards international
peace and security, in accordance with Article 23 of
the Charter of the United Nations. Israel must fully
respect international law and demonstrate that it
supports international peace and security. It must also
end the occupation of Palestinian territories and enable
the establishment of an independent Palestinian State,
with East Jerusalem as its capital. In order to allow
the Palestinian people to enjoy their inalienable rights,
Israel must stop flouting international legitimacy and
breaching Security Council resolutions, in line with
Article 25 of the Charter.

The League of Arab States will step up its
cooperation with other international and regional
stakeholders so as to end the occupation and create an
independent Palestinian State with East Jerusalem as
its capital, through direct negotiations between Israel
and Palestine on all final status issues to ensure that
Israel and Palestine can coexist in peace, security
and stability.
