Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): 1 would like to thank
you, Sir, for organizing this debate. I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH), Mr. Edmond Mulet, for his elaborate
briefing and outstanding leadership. I also thank J ean-
Max Bellerive, the Prime Minister of Haiti, for his
statement on behalf of the people of Haiti. We
commend the Special Envoy, President Clinton, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
the staff of MINUSTAH for their efforts in assisting
the Government and the people of Haiti in delivering
basic services, disaster recovery and preparedness, and
mobilizing critically needed international support in
the aftermath of the devastating earthquake.

The Government and people of Haiti face
challenges in the task of reconstruction and recovery.
They have demonstrated remarkable resilience, and we
salute them for that. The international community has
given and pledged to significant support towards this
effort. It is critical that the pledges made be honoured
in order to help the Government of Haiti finance
critical expenses in the public sector. In this regard, we
welcome the formulation of the Action Plan for the
Reconstruction and the Development of Haiti worked
out by the Government of Haiti with the support of the
international community. We also welcome the $5
billion pledged during the international donors'
conference.

At this critical phase of recovery and
reconstruction, we would also like to emphasize the
importance of effective coordination among the United
Nations agencies and international actors. The role of
the Government will remain central, and it is important
that the United Nations and international actors work
closely with the Government. I was happy to hear the
Prime Minister give his compliments to the excellent
relationship between the Government and the people of
Haiti on the one hand, and the international
community, and especially the United Nations, on the
other.

We commend the launching of cash-for-work
programmes shortly after the earthquake by the United
Nations Development Programme and its implementing
partners. This is a positive step towards creating short-
term employment for the unemployed, especially
young people. We welcome MINUSTAH's community
labor-intensive watershed and canal rehabilitation
projects. We note that the most pressing need at this
time is for the provision of shelter and housing for over
1 million people, especially during the rainy season. It
is important to undertake adequate planning to
establish more durable shelter solutions and early
warning systems.

We note that, although the security situation in
the country remains generally calm, significant new
threats have arisen as a result of the earthquake,
including from former gang leaders who escaped from
prisons. There is a need for support for the
strengthening of the capacity of the Haitian security
forces to deal with these new emerging threats and
challenges. We salute MINUSTAH's efforts, in
collaboration with UNICEF, in improving security and
protecting camps for internally displaced persons,
providing educational facilities and promoting
awareness of child trafficking.

We are grateful to the men and women of
MINUSTAH who, despite their difficulties and the
tragedy that befell them, have continued to play an
indispensable role in maintaining a secure and stable
environment.

Finally, we support the Secretary-General's
recommendation for the increase of 680 police
personnel, in addition to the force levels authorized in
resolution 1908 (2010).

