Mrs. Ithete (Namibia): My delegation joins those
who have spoken before us in congratulating you,
Mr. President, for assuming the presidency of the
Council and commends you for finding it befitting to
include in your busy schedule this important debate on
conflict prevention and resolution in Africa. The
concept paper on the prevention of armed conflict that
you have given us in preparation for this debate, which
in our view forms a good basis for our deliberations
here today, is equally commendable and we share many
of the sentiments expressed.

This debate no doubt gives us ample opportunity
to exchange views and devise ways on how best we can
enhance the capability of the African Union and of its
subregional organizations to address issues related to
conflict prevention and resolution in Africa.

This debate has come at the right time, a time
when the number of conflicts in Africa has,
unfortunately, been increasing day by day, causing
untold hardships, misery and suffering to ordinary
citizens. About half of the world's armed conflict and
some three quarters of the United Nations
peacekeepers are in Africa. As we speak, there are over
6 million displaced persons in the world,
approximately 3 million of whom are in Africa.

While we have always agreed that Africa must
take a leading role in alleviating the predisposing
factors causing conflict on the continent, we are
equally aware that the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security lies
with this organ, the Security Council. Regional
organizations such as the African Union can play a
complementary and supporting role to assist the United
Nations. To this end, we appreciate the efforts being
made to strengthen the relationship between the United
Nations, the African Union and its subregional
organizations in promoting durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa.

These efforts, which should include, among other
things, comprehensive processes of disarmament,
demobilization, repatriation, reintegration and
resettlement, should be of a long-term nature. It is not
enough to end the assistance given to conflict-engulfed
countries immediately after the closure of
peacekeeping missions, without taking into account
underlying factors that may cause the country to
relapse into the same conflict - a series of events that
has occurred before in many United Nations missions.
Democratically elected governments deserve to be
supported and strengthened in establishing their
judiciary systems, reforming their security sectors and
ensuring that their ex-combatants are fully integrated
into the socio-economic mainstream of society.

At the heart of most conflicts lie situations of
underdevelopment and the marginalization of whole
societies or sections thereof, because a hungry man is
always an angry man. It goes then without saying that
durable peace and conflict resolutions should be
carried out through social and economic development
and the equitable distribution of resources at all levels.
In this regard, we are hopeful that the Peacebuilding
Commission, if given adequate financial support, will
fill the gap by exerting and coordinating peacebuilding
and reconstruction efforts in countries emerging from
conflict.
Given that most conflicts in Africa affect many
countries within the subregion, efforts to solve them
should adopt regional and subregional approaches in
order to deal with, among other things, illegal cross-
border activities, including the flow of illicit small
arms and light weapons, which fuel and exacerbate
such conflicts. The availability of such small arms and
light weapons and the failure of Member States to
agree in 2005 on a legally binding international
instrument to enable States to identify and trace these
weapons in a timely and reliable manner have not
helped the situation either. There is scant hope of
solving the deep and deadly problems that beset Africa
when arms are cheap and readily available.

While welcoming all endeavours undertaken to
resolve armed conflicts, we would like to underscore
that greater investment should be made in conflict
prevention, which we believe is cost-effective in
saving lives and financial resources. It is important that
we strive to establish an early warning system that will
enable us to detect and arrest situations quickly before
the real conflict starts.

In conclusion, we should all strive for peace to
prevail while learning to better manage and resolve
conflicts and, most importantly, prevent new ones from
breaking out. We all share the responsibility for one
another's security - all nations, not just those in the
African Union. Only by working to make each other
secure can we hope to achieve security and lasting
peace in Africa or anywhere else in the world.

