Ms. DiCarlo: The situation in Venezuela is cause
for serious concern. The protracted crisis in the country
has had a grave impact on the population, with high
levels of political polarization, growing humanitarian
needs and serious human rights concerns. The economic
situation in the country has become dire. Repeated
efforts to bring the Government and the opposition to the
negotiating table have not led to concrete agreements.
The Secretary-General has consistently stated the need
for a credible and inclusive political process that has the
interests of the Venezuelan people at heart.

The situation has both an economic and a political
dimension. The population has been affected in a
systemic way. Nearly all 30 million Venezuelans have
been affected by hyperinflation and the collapse of real
salaries; shortages of food, medicine and basic supplies;
the deterioration of health and education services;
and the deterioration of basic infrastructure, such as
water, electricity, transport and urban services. Drastic
reductions in production capacities in the agricultural,
pharmaceutical and other sectors have aggravated the
supply situation.

The drop in oil prices recorded in recent years
continued in 2018, with a decrease ofapproximately half
a million barrels per day from 2017 and a consequent
fall in revenues. The International Monetary Fund
reported that the inflation rate hit 1.37 million per cent
last year and has projected a fall in real gross domestic
product of negative 18 per cent in 2019. According to
the Food and Agriculture Organization, between 2015
and 2017 there were 3.7 million undernourished people
in the country. Infant mortality rates have doubled in
recent years. According to United Nations estimates,
over 3 million Venezuelans are now living abroad,
including approximately 2.3 million who have left
the country since 2015, going mostly to other South
American countries.

In the parliamentary elections of December 2015,
the opposition won a large majority of seats in the
National Assembly. Subsequently, the Supreme Court
ruled that the Assembly was in contempt and that all
of its actions were null and void. In 2017, a National
Constituent Assembly was established through elections
in which the opposition parties did not participate. The
National Constituent Assembly took over key functions
of the legislative branch and undertook a process of
constitutional reform that remains inconclusive and is
not recognized by the opposition parties.

Attempts to bring about political dialogue started
as early as May 2016, through an initiative facilitated
by three former Presidents from the Dominican
Republic, Panama and Spain, under the auspices of
the Union of South American Nations. Despite some
initial progress, no concrete agreements were reached
through that initiative, which was suspended by the
beginning of 2017. By mid-2017, there were efforts to
resume dialogue, and formal talks began in September
2017, hosted by the Dominican Republic and with
international accompaniment. The talks ended in
February 2018, without agreements having been
reached. One of the major areas of disagreement was
the electoral calendar and guarantees to ensure free,
transparent and credible elections. Subsequently, the
Government went ahead with presidential elections
in May 2018. President Nicolas Maduro Moros was
declared the winner over two other candidates. Most
of the opposition did not participate in the elections or
recognize the results.

On 10 January, Nicolas Maduro was sworn in as
President for a second six-year term. On 23 January,
large-scale opposition protests culminated with Juan
Guaido, President of the opposition-led National
Assembly, announcing that he did not recognize
President Maduro or his Government. Mr. Guaido
proclaimed himself interim President, pledging to form
a transitional Government and call for elections.

While the protests were largely peaceful, there
were incidents of violence. The Secretary-General has
expressed strong concern over reports of casualties
among demonstrators and has called for the transparent
and independent investigation of these incidents.
According to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights (UNHCR), credible
local sources have reported that at least 20 people have
died in the unrest. Many more have reportedly been
injured and detained in violent incidents.

The High Commissioner stated yesterday that any
violent incident resulting in death or injury should be
subject to an independent and impartial investigation
to find out whether there was excessive use of force
by the authorities or if crimes had been committed
by members of armed groups - pro-Government or
otherwise. She said that she was extremely concerned
that the situation in Venezuela could rapidly spiral
out of control, with catastrophic consequences. The
High Commissioner also stressed that it is of utmost
importance to uphold the right to peaceful assembly
and to refrain from excessive, disproportionate and
indiscriminate use of force.

In a statement on 24 January, the Secretary-General
emphasized the urgent need for all relevant actors to
commit to inclusive and credible political dialogue
to address the protracted crisis in the country, with
full respect for the rule of law and human rights. He
has offered his good offices to help resolve the crisis.
The main concern is the well-being of the Venezuelan
people and their ability to enjoy their full rights.

The United Nations has been providing assistance,
particularly in the areas of health and nutrition, and
the Secretary-General had asked the International
Organization for Migration (IOM) and the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to establish
a mechanism to support Venezuelans leaving the
country. The IOM. and UNHCR appointed Mr. Eduardo
Stein, former Vice President of Guatemala, as their
joint representative to work with regional Governments
to ensure that support to these individuals is in place.

As the Secretary-General has stated, at this

crucial moment it is important that all actors exercise
maximum restraint to avoid an escalation of violence
and confrontation. There are divergent visions of what
the future should hold for Venezuela, but we must all be
guided by the pursuit of the well-being of the Venezuelan
people and work together so that their needs are fully
met. We must do all we can to prevent the worsening of
tensions and we must try to help bring about a political
solution that will allow the country's citizens to enjoy
peace, prosperity and all their human rights.

