Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic ofIran): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement
(NAM). I wish to convey to you, Mr. President, the
Movement's appreciation for convening this open
debate on such a fundamental issue. We hope this
open debate will contribute to our overall efforts to
make the United Nations more efficient and effective
in maintaining international peace and security as well
as being more transparent, democratic and consistent.

As always and at the time of the seventieth
anniversary of the Organization, NAM. consistently
calls upon the international community to renew its
commitment to uphold and defend the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and international law,
as well as the means provided in the Charter for the
peaceful settlement of disputes and non-resort to the
threat or use of force. These are essential in preserving
and promoting peace and security, the rule of law,
economic development and social progress, and human
rights for all.

NAM. member States note that the new and
emerging threats and challenges, including the multiple
interrelated and mutually reinforcing current global
crises, continue to impede efforts by States to attain
greater economic development and social progress,
peace and security and the enjoyment of human rights
and the rule of law. Global peace and security continue
to elude humankind due to, inter alia, an increasing
tendencybycertain Statestoresorttounilateralmeasures
and shirk their obligations - especially concerning
weapons of mass destruction and conventional weapons
treaties - terrorism, conflicts and violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law. Moreover,
the use of double standards in international relations
and the continuing failure on the part of the majority
of developed countries to fulfil their socioeconomic
commitments are also undermining peace and security.
We underscore the need for the international community
to collectively redress those situations according to the
Charter of the United Nations and the principles of
international law.

NAM. member States, guided by the Movement's
principled positions and recognizing the serious threat
and danger posed by actions and measures seeking to
undermine international law and international legal
instruments, stress the need to undertake a wide range
of measures. Among others, they include identifying
and pursuing measures appropriate to achieving a
peaceful and prosperous world and a just and equitable
world order based on the Charter of the United Nations
and international law; conducting external relations
based on the ideals, principles and purposes of the
Movement, the Charter of the United Nations and
international law and the relevant resolutions adopted
by the General Assembly; firmly opposing unilateral
evaluations and certifications of the conduct of States as
a means of exerting pressure on non-aligned countries
and other developing countries; refraining from
recognizing, adopting or implementing extra-territorial
or unilateral coercive measures or laws, including
unilateral economic sanctions, other intimidating
measures and arbitrary travel restrictions that seek
to exert pressure on non-aligned countries, thereby
threatening their sovereignty and independence and
their freedom of trade and investment and preventing
them from exercising their right to decide, through
their own free will, their own political, economic and
social systems, where such measures or laws constitute
flagrant violations of the Charter of the United
Nations, international law, the multilateral trading
system as well as the norms and principles governing
friendly relations among States; and opposing and
condemning the categorization of countries as good
or evil based on unilateral and unjustified criteria and
adopting a doctrine of pre-emptive attack, including
attack with nuclear weapons by certain States, which
is inconsistent with international law, in particular the
international legally binding instruments concerning
nuclear disarmament.

Finally, the Movement has stressed that the Charter
of the United Nations includes sufficient provisions
regarding the use of force to maintain and preserve
international peace and security, and that efforts by the
Council to achieve that goal should be strictly conducted
in full conformity with the relevant provisions of the
Charter. Resorting to the use of Chapter VII of the
Charter as an umbrella in addressing issues that pose
no threat to international peace and security must be
avoided. In that regard, the Council should fully utilize
the relevant Charter provisions, where appropriate,
including Chapters VI and VIII. In addition, consistent
with United Nations practice and international law,
as pronounced by the International Court of Justice,
Article 51 of the Charter of the United Nations is
restrictive and should not be rewritten or reinterpreted.

