Mr. Elaraby (Egypt): Allow me, at the outset, to
express our condolences and to convey a message of
sympathy and support to the delegation of Japan and to the
Japanese people following the tragic earthquake.

Once more, Mr. President, I should like to express the
appreciation of the delegation of Egypt for your very able
leadership of the Council. The timing of our discussion
today under your presidency is no coincidence. Not long
ago we met in this Chamber to express our support for a
joint proposal, initiated by Argentina and New Zealand, on
strengthening the arrangements for consultations between
troop-contributing countries, members of the Security
Council and the Secretary-General. We are confident that
the Security Council, under your wise leadership, will give
the important subject under discussion today the
consideration it deserves.

We listened to the Ambassador of Indonesia speaking
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. We fully support
the views expressed in his statement, and I should like to
add some comments that the Egyptian Government wants
to put on record.

I should like to start by welcoming the timely
introduction of the Supplement to "An Agenda for Peace".
The Secretary-General was indeed able to capture the
attention of the entire international community by
highlighting problem areas where the United Nations is
encountering difficulties in fulfilling the mandate entrusted
to it and where Member States are called upon to make
"hard decisions".

More than two years after the submission of "An
Agenda for Peace", one has to recognize the fundamental
changes in the international environment and their bearing
on the performance and efficacy of the United Nations.
The Secretary-General has reminded us - and rightly
so - that we are still in a time of transition after the end
of the cold war.

There are, however, justifiable doubts that

"the new spirit of commonality that had emerged, of
which the 1992 Summit was a clear
manifestation" (S/J995/1, para. 2)

is still prevailing. When measured against the
determination and unity of the international community
demonstrated during the last war in the Gulf, the lack of
international resolve to deter and repel aggression in
places like Bosnia can only reinforce these doubts.

The issue of prevention has emerged in recent years
as one of the essential tools of international diplomacy in
confronting potential or existing conflict situations. Added
importance and value are given to preventive action if we
bear in mind the limited resources of the international
community working through the United Nations and its
various organs or through regional arrangements or
agencies, whether intergovernmental or non- governmental.

My delegation therefore agrees with the Secretary-
General's assertion that only sustained efforts to resolve
underlying socio-economic, cultural and humanitarian
problems can place an achieved peace on a durable
foundation. It is evidently better to prevent conflicts
through early warning, quiet diplomacy and the active
engagement of the United Nations than to have to
undertake major politico-military efforts to resolve them
after they have broken out. The Secretary-General has
made several suggestions to enhance United Nations
capability in the field of prevention. We should embark
on an in-depth examination of the feasibility of
implementing his proposals.

The role of regional organizations and arrangements,
in accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter, could be
crucial to the success of preventive diplomacy measures.
The United Nations is called upon to help regional efforts
to develop preventive mechanisms for regional conflicts.
In this context, the Government of Egypt has decided to
establish in Cairo a training centre for conflict resolution
and peace-keeping in Africa. We are confident that this
newly established centre will receive substantial assistance

 

from the United Nations and countries with long experience
in peace-keeping training.

The nature of peace-keeping has evolved rapidly and
expanded beyond the traditional peace-keeping and military
observation missions.

The Secretary-General reaffirms in his report that the
last few years have confirmed that respect for certain basic
principles of peace-keeping is essential to its success. His
analysis of recent successes and failures shows that in all
the successes the principles to which he referred were
respected, and that in most of the less successful operations
one or other of them was not.

Some existing peace-keeping operations were given
additional mandates that required the use of force and
therefore could not be combined with existing mandates
requiring the consent of the parties, impartiality and the
non-use of force. Unfortunately, these operations were
mandated with such expanded missions when their existing
composition, armament, logistic support and deployment
denied them the necessary capacity.

The logic of peace-keeping flows from political and
military premises that are quite distinct from those of
enforcement. When the Council authorizes an operation
under Chapter VII of the Charter it should be clear in
everyone's mind that we are departing from traditional
peace-keeping, which is based on the consent of the parties.

The report has accurately cited the difficulties facing
enforcement by the United Nations or by a group of
Member States entrusted by the Security Council to
implement such actions. When adopting enforcement
measures the Council should strictly follow the Charter's
provisions under Chapter VII. Expanding the definition of
what may constitute a threat to international peace and
security, and consequently justify enforcement measures,
could have a negative impact on the Organization's stature
and on its credibility. The same is true when the political
will to enforce peace is missing while an abusive
aggression is being witnessed by the whole world.

The Secretary-General' s report contains very ambitious
plans to make troops and equipment available to mandated
peace-keeping operations. What the Secretary-General calls
a rapid reaction force may be a far-reaching proposal
inspired by the idea of a United Nations army. In our View,
any such arrangements should, however, be set up
according to the Charter's provisions and following wide
consultations.

While we support the principle of the unity of
command and the necessity for a peace-keeping operation
to function as an integrated whole, it is equally important
to consult with the troop-contributing countries. Such
consultations should be undertaken in accordance with the
spirit of the provisions of Article 44 of the Charter by
institutionalizing the consultations with troop-contributing
countries as an integral part of the decision-making
process on any peace-keeping operation. The debate that
preceded the adoption of the Security Council presidential
statement on strengthening the arrangements for
consultations is a good indication of how strongly
Member States feel about this issue.

At the Security Council summit meeting in 1992, the
Council underscored the interest in and concern for
disarmament, arms control and non-proliferation, with
special reference to weapons of mass destruction, the
most devastating of which are the nuclear weapons. The
Secretary-General, however, was not able to report any
tangible achievements in the field of nuclear non-
proliferation and nuclear disarmament, an issue which has
enjoyed unanimous international support and the highest
priority since the adoption of the Final Document of the
first special session of the General Assembly devoted to
disarmament, held in 1978.

Regrettably, some States continue to decline to
adhere to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT), which is due for review and extension
this year. Egypt has repeatedly advocated the universality
of the NPT - the only way to guarantee its viability and
its credibility in the future. We therefore call on all
parties, especially the five permanent members of the
Security Council, to spare no effort to attain this goal,
thereby strengthening international as well as regional
security and facilitating the possibilities of extending the
NPT.

The Secretary-General has referred in his report to
the possible ramifications of sanctions. He has rightly
emphasized the need to examine this important issue,
which directly affects other countries neighbouring the
targeted country - if one can call a country a targeted
country - and, in particular, the vulnerable sectors of the
population of these countries. He has suggested that a
mechanism be established for assessing, monitoring and
measuring the effects of sanctions, that ways be explored
of assisting Member States that are suffering collateral
damage, and that the sanctions be lifted as soon as they
have achieved their intended purposes. We welcome the
Secretary-General's suggestions in this regard.

 

Egypt has long called for the full implementation of
Article 50 of the Charter. We strongly believe that the
responsibility of the Security Council does not stop at
imposing sanctions. The Council should have prior
consultations with countries that may be affected by the
sanctions and must be able to review and assess the desired
political impact of the sanctions and to minimize their
collateral damage. We believe that the General Assembly
should address this issue and consider adopting appropriate
measures to alleviate the negative effects that have afflicted
many countries.

In conclusion, we share the Secretary-General's call
for fresh thinking, for striving together and creating new
ways to overcome crises. The world that emerged after the
end the cold war may still be in transition. The new age,
however, holds great promise for both peace and
development and we should exert every effort to fulfil that
promise.

