Mr. Wolff (United States of America): We
welcome Mr. Michael Smith, the new Executive
Director of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED), and thank him for his
briefing. Mr. Smith is off to an energetic and
productive start, and we value his contributions and
support his recommendations on how best to advance
the work of CTED.

We are also pleased to welcome the new
Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC)
and Permanent Representative of Croatia, Ambassador
Jurica. In his short time in the Chair, Ambassador
Jurica has already proved to be an effective leader.

The United States thanks Mr. Smith for
responding so quickly and efficiently to the Council's
request in resolution 1787 (2007) that he submit any
changes to CTED's organizational plan that he
considers to be appropriate. The paper, which outlines
the proposed changes to the Executive Directorate's
method of work and organizational plan, was produced
following thoughtful and broad-based consultations
with United Nations Member States.

The organizational plan, endorsed by the
Council's Counter-Terrorism Committee, clearly sets
forth CTED's priorities, including active participation
in the counter-terrorism implementation task force,
established to assist Member States in their
implementation of the Global Strategy. It is an
ambitious but realistic plan to move CTED's
operations forward. By doing so, this would enhance
both the CTC's and Security Council's efforts to
promote States' implementation of resolution 1373
(2001).

Counter-terrorism is our common effort. This is
evident in the goals of the General Assembly's Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. It is equally apparent in
the priorities and activities of CTED, as exemplified by
the high priority that CTED and the Council place on
strengthening the facilitation of technical assistance
aimed at increasing the capabilities of Member States
in the fight against terrorism and ensuring that the
provision of assistance is adjusted to each country's
own needs.

In addition to technical assistance, Mr. Smith has
also highlighted two other specific priorities:
consistency and communications. These three
elements: consistency, which is the responsibility of a
new quality control unit; technical assistance; and
enhanced communication with all United Nations
Members are the pillars supporting CTED's work. We
commend Mr. Smith for his outreach to the wider
United Nations membership. It is through those
consultations that the three priorities were reaffirmed.

We also applaud the proposed modifications to
CTED's working methods. They reflect a more focused
and refined approach to its work, which is aimed at
greater efficiency and productivity. In the same vein,
revisions of the operational structure reflect a plan to
make the best possible use of personnel resources. The
United States views these innovations positively and
supports their underlying objectives. My Government
is hopeful that this CTED mandate renewal, under
Mr. Smith's leadership as Executive Director and with
a revised organizational plan, will serve as a new
beginning and will build on the foundation laid during
the course of the prior mandate. This, in turn, will
strengthen the CTC. We will give Mr. Smith and the
CTED staff our full support in this endeavour.

