Mr. Monteiro (Portugal): Barely one month and a
half has elapsed since we adopted resolution 1143 (1997),
in which the Council unanimously welcomed the intention
of the Secretary-General to submit a supplementary report
to find ways of improving the implementation of the
humanitarian programme in Iraq. The Council expressed its
willingness to consider an increase of the Iraqi resources
funding the oil-for-food programme as needed to meet the
priority humanitarian requirements of the Iraqi people. By
the same resolution the 661 Committee was asked to
present a report on the refining and clarifying of its
working procedures.

During this period major efforts were undertaken by
the Secretary-General, the Secretariat, members of the
Council and the 661 Committee to review all aspects of the
humanitarian programme. Many complex technical aspects
were involved. The common objective was not only to
provide for the continuation of the programme, but also to
ensure its renovation by giving it a different and
substantially increased humanitarian dimension.

The draft resolution before us embodies the
appropriate reaction of the Council to all these efforts, in
particular to the innovative proposals contained in the
comprehensive report submitted by the Secretary-General
earlier this month, which we welcomed and which deserves
our highest appreciation.

As President of the Iraq sanctions committee, I have
an acute sense of the serious humanitarian needs at stake
and the obvious urgency of meeting them. This prompted
my delegation to initiate immediately, upon the
presentation of the reports, consultations with all Council
members with a view to achieving agreement on a
resolution giving the Council's full endorsement to the
Secretary-General' s recommendations.

These consultations clearly demonstrated the full
commitment of all delegations to the humanitarian
interests involved and the success of their cooperation in
those endeavours. Many technical complexities had to be
addressed. Others may still arise, or some elements may
still need to be clarified. But we are confident that all the
relevant questions are included in the text of this draft
resolution. It provides a clear political endorsement of the
actions envisaged in the new extended programme and, at
the same time, allows for the necessary flexibility in its
implementation, including adjustments that may be
recommended by further studies to be made with the
cooperation of the Iraqi authorities.

The goals that we have to achieve with this draft
resolution can be attained only with the cooperation of the
Iraqi authorities. We praise the Secretary-General for
having repeatedly sought that cooperation in his overall
review of the humanitarian programme and the
preparation of his report. Unfortunately, certain questions
remain unanswered. We join the Secretary-General in his
appeals to the Iraqi authorities to cooperate fully in the
implementation of this programme. With its
unprecedented scope it can definitely provide substantial
relief to the needs of the Iraqi people, not just through a
considerable increase in the required food and health
supplies, but also by providing for the rehabilitation of
basic infrastructures in Iraq.

The unanimity of this Council around this draft
resolution and the extended humanitarian programme it
encompasses shows the resolve of the Council to improve
the humanitarian situation of the Iraqi people. But it also
conveys a clear positive signal at this very significant
moment when the Secretary-General is in Baghdad. We
fully back him and wish him complete success.

