The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Russian Federation.

The activities of the World Food Programme
(WFP) are of particular significance. In truly helping to
resolve the problem of poverty, they contribute to the
elimination of the breeding grounds of conflict, terror
and extremism. The enormous importance of the
WFP's work in Afghanistan is obvious in a country
where food aid is urgently needed by some 9 million
individuals and where half of the children are suffering
from chronic malnutrition.

The task now before the WFP and other
humanitarian agencies in Afghanistan is twofold. What
is required is not merely to feed people, but also to
assure a smooth and harmonious transition from an
emergency humanitarian situation to recovery and
development. It is evident from Ms. Bertini's statement
that the leadership of the WFP clearly understands this
problem. Of great significance here will be the
coordination of efforts of United Nations agencies in
Afghanistan, other bilateral and multilateral donors and
other partners participating in the humanitarian
operation. We are convinced that a leading role in
ensuring such coordination must be played by the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan.

Today's debate highlights once again the
indissoluble link between those issues that the Security
Council is called upon to address and the tasks of the
international humanitarian community in easing the
suffering of vulnerable populations in conflict zones.
One reflection of that link is the growing involvement
of the Security Council in the consideration of such
issues as the protection of civilian populations in
conflict conditions, the humanitarian aspects of
sanctions, the protection of children in armed conflict
and the consideration of humanitarian aspects in
planning peacekeeping operations.

It is important that the Security Council discuss
these issues not in a generic or abstract fashion, but as
applied to specific crisis situations, as we are seeking
to do here today. We agree with the view expressed
here earlier that food aid should in no instance be used
as a tool for interference or for influencing the course
of conflicts. Moreover, the need to improve
cooperation between the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council on these issues is
becoming increasingly obvious, taking into account
their prerogatives and the principles of interaction
enshrined in the United Nations Charter.

I wish to say a few personal words to Ms. Bertini.
She became the first woman in history to head the
World Food Programme. For ten years now, she has
energetically and productively worked in that post and
has earned general respect and praise. We greatly
appreciate her personal contribution to resolving global
food problems, and express our sincere gratitude for
her selfless work. We wish her our very best wishes for
the future.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now give the floor to Ms. Catherine Bertini for a
concluding statement, including answers to the
questions that have been raised today.

