Mr. Mendonca e Moura (Portugal): I thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this open debate on the
implementation of presidential note S/2010/507. The
inclusion of this debate in the programme of work is
a sign of Japan's commitment to the issue and to the
efforts made by the Japanese delegation towards
improving the Security Council's working methods.
I wish to also express our recognition for the work
recently undertaken by the members of the Council
to move this agenda forward, in particular Angola as
the previous Chair of the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Matters,
and Spain, which organized the productive debate on
the implementation of note 507 in October 2015 (see S/PV.7539).

When the time comes to start the discussions to
update note 507, we must acknowledge that positive
developments have occurred since its adoption in
2010, prompted by an active commitment by Council
members and the contribution and support of the wider
membership, including that of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency Group, of which we are
a part.

The Security Council working methods have
proved to be a subject of interest to us all, and we
appreciate the Security Council's efforts to continue
to push it forward. Very recently, we had an example
of such efforts in the form of the adoption of
presidential note S/2016/619, under Japan's tenure,
with concrete measures to facilitate the preparation
by newly elected members of their mandates and the
appointment ofthe new Chairs of the subsidiary bodies,
aiming at improving the transparency, efficiency and
inclusiveness in the Council.

In this vein and responding to your invitation,
Mr. President, to make practical suggestions on the
implementation of note 507, I would submit two
concrete ones, both in view ofincreasing transparency:

The first has to do with making available to
non-members of the Council draft resolutions and
presidential statements as soon as they are introduced
within informal consultations, or earlier. We think that
this is an important element of transparency, already
reflected in paragraph 44 of note 507, but where some
further efforts concerning its implementation should be
exerted as a matter of regular practice.

The second is the suggestion that at briefings
members of the Council express publicly their views
following the briefers' public statements. That would
allow the members of the Council to put on record
their views on the subject under consideration, which
otherwise might be expressed only in informal
consultations, of course notwithstanding the possibility
of Council members convening subsequently in
informal consultations on the same subject, whenever
appropriate and if still necessary.

These are two concrete suggestions in view of
the future updating of note 507. Let me conclude by
expressing our full support for this initiative and by
thanking you once again, Sir, for your commitment to
improving the Security Council's working methods.

