The President (spoke in Chinese): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Haiti, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Alexandre
(Haiti) took the seat reserved for him at the
Council table.

The President (spoke in Chinese): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2004/164, which contains the text of a
draft resolution prepared in the course of the Council's
prior consultations.

I should like also to draw the attention of the
members of the Council to document S/2004/l63,
which contains the text of a letter dated 29 February
2004 from Haiti.

I welcome the presence at this meeting of the
Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Kofi Annan.

It is my understanding that the Security Council
is ready to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution
(S/2004/l64) before it. If I hear no objection, I shall
now put the draft resolution to the vote.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

A vote was taken by show ofhands.

Infavour:
Algeria, Angola, Benin, Brazil, Chile, China,
France, Germany, Pakistan, Philippines,

Romania, Russian Federation, Spain, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America

The President (spoke in Chinese): There were 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 1529 (2004).

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda. The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 10 p.m.

