Mr. Zarif: On 19 April, following difficult
political negotiations personally facilitated by the High
Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy
of the European Union (EU), Ms. Catherine Ashton,
a historic first agreement on principles governing
the normalization of relations was initialled between
Belgrade and Pristina.

The agreement, consisting of 15 points, provides
for the establishment of an association/community of
Serb municipalities that would encompass a range of
competences related to the people's day-to-day life.
It also envisages holding local elections in 2013 in
northern Kosovo municipalities with the facilitation
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe. Each party also undertook not to block the
other side's progress in their respective European
Union integration paths. An implementation committee
made up of representatives from both sides is to be
established under the facilitation of the European Union.
Importantly, both sides also affirmed the importance of
continuing to engage in a political dialogue.

The Secretary-General welcomed the agreement
and encouraged the parties to conclude this historic
process and to take concrete measures aimed at
faithfully implementing the agreement. I wish to
congratulate the leaders of both sides, who are present
today in this Chamber, for the wisdom, prudence and
political foresight they have shown in jointly taking
this fundamental step forward. That determination
and persistence will also be needed to sustain this
spirit of compromise and mutual respect as they carry
their agreement forward. On 22 May, as a sign of their
commitment, the parties agreed on an implementation
plan for the provisions contained in the 19 April
agreement. It provides timelines for implementation
that will require both sides to move ahead expeditiously.
It is clear that a high degree of commitment, flexibility
and creativity will also be required to meet those
ambitious timelines.

I believe that the international community's
support and resourcefulness will also be needed to
help ensure that positive momentum is sustained in the
face of inevitable challenges. While the international
community has regularly committed a strong level
of political engagement and resources to promoting
progress, that may be even more crucial in the coming
period for all international presences in Kosovo. A
generous investment internationaln resources and
efforts will preserve the peace dividends in the
region, and support for an integrated and coordinated
implementation process will be crucial. Among others,
a key factor in the successful implementation of the
19 April agreement will be support for it from the
Serbs of northern Kosovo. I appreciate the Belgrade
leadership's courageous and continuing efforts to
reach out and raise understanding and support for the
agreement among the leaders and people of northern
Kosovo. Those efforts have included proactive
exchanges with and visits from senior Government
officials in order to address the concerns of Kosovo
Serbs about the impact of the agreement on their future.
I also wish to stress that such support cannot and
should not be seen as Belgrade's sole responsibility.
All share responsibility for achieving better
communications with the population of the north
and for taking action that addresses - rather than
exacerbates - the concerns and legitimate interests of
the people there. Public protests in northern Mitrovica,
including a mass rally of several thousand Kosovo Serbs
on 22 April and a subsequent demonstration organized
by university students on 25 April, indicate the level
of continuing apprehensions, as well as the paramount
importance of better communication to all groups and
stakeholders in the north.

Over the past week, joint working groups have
been focusing on the implementation details and other
issues, such as energy and telecommunications and
the exchange of liaison officers. Those discussions
have been taking place against the backdrop of the
upcoming consideration by the EU Council of Serbia's
and Kosovo's progress on their respective EU accession
tracks.

We continue to witness the symptoms of tension
and uncertainty in various parts of Kosovo with respect
to the translation of political agreements into practice
on the ground. As reflected in the Secretary-General's
report (S/2013/254), the threat of instability remains
present in sensitive areas, both north and south of the
Ibar River. Too often, local leaders still appear to be
reticent to speak out clearly and firmly and to ensure
an effective response to acts of ethnic intolerance
or intimidation directed at members of any of the
communities in Kosovo.

Regardless of those ongoing concerns, there were
also some encouraging efforts on the ground alongside
developments at the political level. In that context, I
should like to make particular mention of President
Atifete Jahjaga, who has been addressing some of the
inter-ethnic issues in Kosovo.

The Kosovo police has established ethnically
mixed special units in four regions for the protection of
Serbian religious and cultural heritage sites. The unit
covering the Pee Patriarchate was constituted on 16 May
and is now working together with the Kosovo Force and

church leaders to gradually assume greater security
duties there. In the same time frame, the implementation
of the Law on the Historic Centre of Prizren moved
forward with the establishment of a Council tasked
with monitoring progress and compliance.

Publicly funded repairs and reconstruction of
the Orthodox gravestones damaged or destroyed in
a wave of attacks across Kosovo this past January is
progressing. A majority of the affected gravestones
have been repaired by now, and work is continuing. At
the end of May, the Kosovo authorities, in cooperation
with the Tony Blair Faith Foundation, organized a
broad-based inter-faith conference, which included
leaders of all faiths in Kosovo, including the Serbian
Orthodox Church.

In compliance with resolution 1325 (2000) on
women, peace and security, the Kosovo Assembly
recently envisaged legislation recognizing the status
and rights to benefits of survivors of sexual violence
during the conflict. That important addition followed
active advocacy efforts by civil society organizations,
together with the United Nations and other international
actors on the ground.

I wish to take this opportunity simply to highlight
one additional crucial area in which progress could and,
in my view, should accompany that being made through
the ongoing political processes, namely, determining
the fate of persons missing since the time of the
conflict. Although the Joint Working Group on Missing
Persons continues to meet regularly and reflects a spirit
of increasing mutual respect and cooperation, much
information vital to the resolution of missing persons
cases from both sides is still lacking. More serious
efforts to locate and provide such information are
needed from each side, which in turn requires a more
substantial commitment at the political level. Without
such commitments, progress on an issue crucial for
reconciliation will continue to be unacceptably slow.

The 19 April agreement represents a major
achievement and a decisive step forward for both
Belgrade and Pristina, which should contribute to
the peaceful solution of issues that have long divided
the parties. Energetic and cogent facilitation by the
High Representative of the European Union has
been fundamental to obtaining that result. No less
fundamental have been the political will and leadership
demonstrated by the parties, who, in their aspirations
to join Europe, have assumed historic responsibility for
difficult but necessary compromises.

The agreement sets a course that will be neither
sure nor swift. In that respect, my sincere hope is that
the membership of the Security Council, indeed the
international community as a whole, will continue to
provide its resolute support to progress. The situation
on the ground, including the domestic political situation
on both sides, remains fragile, and it cannot be taken
for granted that the progress being achieved now is
irreversible or that it is simply assured.
The implementation of the agreements reached
in the EU-facilitated process will require continued
hard work by the parties and the active support of the
international community. The United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) is making
efforts to ensure that its activities, including its own
supporting role on the ground, contribute to the creation,
in close coordination with international partners, of an
enabling environment for the implementation of the
Agreement.

I wish to express deep appreciation to the members
of the Council for their continuing political engagement
with the parties, as well as my hope that such an
engagement will remain steadfast throughout the
coming delicate and challenging period.

I conclude by thanking you, Mr. President, and all
members of the Council for your support to UNMIK
and for promoting the shared objectives of political
progress, peace and reconciliation on the ground.

