Mr. Cevik (Turkey): At the outset, allow me to
congratulate Argentina for assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for this month and to wish you,
Madam President, every success. I would also like
to express our appreciation for the scheduling of this
important debate. And I thank the Secretary-General
and the representatives of the regional organizations for
their statements.

As encouraged in Chapter VIII of the Charter of
the United Nations, effective cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations is of crucial significance in maintaining
international peace and security. Although the primary
responsibility remains with the Security Council,
regional and subregional organizations also play an
important role in that regard. That role is clearly
spelled out in the Charter, and its importance has
been emphasized in various Council resolutions and
presidential statements.

We welcome the regional organizations' keen
interest in working with the United Nations and
further strengthening their cooperation. We hope the
Security Council will seize this opportunity to benefit
from the insightful perspectives from various regional
viewpoints in better facing the urgent challenges that
confront us all.

Building upon that renewed commitment, we
should explore new and practical patterns of enhanced
cooperation and introduce the necessary mechanisms
for their implementation. After all, in today's volatile
security environment, the United Nations is not capable
of dealing alone with all the problems threatening
international peace and security. Addressing them
entails strong and influential regional partners.

That is particularly the case for peacekeeping and
peacebuilding endeavours. Any contribution by regional
organizations in those areas is of great importance, not
only for burden-sharing purposes but also to ensure
regional ownership. In that regard, we are particularly
grateful to organizations such as the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation, the League of Arab States,
the African Union and the European Union for their
determined efforts and exemplary commitment.

Furthermore, cooperation should not be limited to
peacekeeping efforts. Conflict prevention through early
warning, political mediation, cooperative interaction,
confidence-building, post-conflict peacebuilding,
reconstruction and the protection of civilians, including
women and children, are as central as peacekeeping.

Regional organizations have unique perspectives on
and a local understanding of conflicts, cultural norms
and security challenges in their region, giving them a
comparative advantage. In that context, they are making
a growing contribution to effectively complementing
the work of the United Nations in preventing and
resolving conflicts, including through mediation.
Turkey, as co-Chair, with Finland, of the Group of
Friends of Mediation and its 45 members, recognizes
the key role such organizations play in mediation. We
therefore welcome the collaboration on mediation, and
specifically capacity-building, between the secretariats
of the United Nations and the regional organizations as
a concrete example of fruitful interaction. The technical
assistance provided by the Mediation Support Unit of
the United Nations Department of Political Affairs to
such organizations has contributed to enhancing their
capacities in this very important area.

Turkey is a proud member or has observer status in
many of the organizations represented here today. We
firmly support the United Nations policy of intensified
engagement with regional organizations, including the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, the Conference
on Interaction and Confidence-building Measures in
Asia, the League of Arab States, the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations, the Organization of the Black
Sea Economic Cooperation, the Pacific Islands Forum,
the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries, the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization, the Community
of Latin American and Caribbean States, the Union
of South American Nations and the Organization of
American States.

We applaud the cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union, bearing in mind that
two-thirds of the work of the Security Council is on
issues related to Africa. We commend the remarkable
efforts of the African Union and such subregional
organizations as the Economic Community of West
African States, the Economic Community of Central
African States, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, the Southern African Development
Community and the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region to ensure peace, security and
stability throughout the continent.
The Organization of Islamic Cooperation, which
has members on four different continents, plays a
particularly unique role in helping to consolidate
the foundation of global peace and creating a better
understanding between different cultures and religions.

This platform has once more been abused in order
to make total misrepresentations that Turkey has
already categorically rejected. They cannot dissuade
us from standing firmly by the Syrian people, whose
voice, unfortunately, cannot be heard here. Before
I conclude, I would like to express Turkey's earnest
commitment to making every effort to further advance
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations. It is in that same spirit
that we fully support the draft presidential statement
prepared by Argentina.

