Mr. Salam (Lebanon): First, I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing today's debate and for
honouring us with your presence. Allow me also to
welcome the President of Nigeria, the Deputy President
of South Africa and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
France. We also thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
and Mr. Michel Sidibe, Executive Director of the Joint
United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS, for their
comprehensive briefings.

Globally, a significant proportion of people living
with HIV/AIDS - between 8 and 10 per cent - are
affected by conflict, humanitarian crises and
displacement. The relationship between the prevalence
of HIV and conflict is a complex and dynamic one that
varies from one conflict to another. A better
understanding of that relationship is crucial for the
development of effective and efficient strategies to
reduce the risk of infection in conflict and post-conflict
settings. Many factors in those settings may increase a
population's vulnerability to HIV. Massive and
uncontrollable migration, the collapse of health
services, the decline of literacy and access to basic
prevention information increase a population's
vulnerability to HIV in times of war. Conflict-related
sexual violence in particular accelerates HIV
transmission, and often becomes an automatic death
sentence for victims who too often have little or no
access to health care.

Through resolution 1308 (2000), the Security
Council expressed its commitment to addressing HIV
as a devastating public health threat. Other milestone
resolutions followed on the issues of sexual violence,
the protection of civilians and other cross-cutting

11-3654]
matters, further enhancing our collective response to
this epidemic in the context of conflicts. However,
more than 10 years since the adoption of resolution
1308 (2000), many challenges persist. Allow me to
make a few brief comments in that regard.

First, in order to more fully understand the
complex factors that impact on HIV/AIDS in conflicts,
more data needs to be compiled within the United
Nations system, and programmatic experiences and
best practices need to be shared to help guide policy
decisions, advocacy and programming in conflict and
post-conflict societies. Close coordination with local
and national AIDS initiatives is essential in order to
avoid the duplication of efforts.

Secondly, it is essential to mainstream HIV/AIDS
prevention and care policies in conflict prevention,
peacekeeping operations and humanitarian responses to
conflicts. Peacekeepers can play a decisive role as
advocates for awareness and prevention of HIV
transmission, and need to be adequately equipped,
trained and mandated to fulfil that goal. Their practices
should be aligned with the ultimate goal of a universal
standard for HIV and AIDS prevention, treatment and
care.

Thirdly, the international community should
maintain sustained attention in conflict societies with
11-36541

high HIV prevalence, even beyond the life span of a
peacekeeping mission. Post-conflict transitions in
particular are a period of heightened vulnerability to
HIV transmission. The international community should
assist national Governments during this period to
strengthen State capacity in the health sector and the
delivery of basic service. Support should be provided
to national Governments in formulating their policies
to respond to HIV during post-conflict transitions,
especially in the context of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration and security sector
reform. It is also important during this period to foster
community resilience, engage civil society and base
the response to the epidemic on a framework of
participation and inclusiveness.

Finally, the health and lives of ordinary
individuals should be at the centre of our attention in
our endeavours to respond to HIV/AIDS in conflicts.
No efforts should be spared to preserve human lives
and dignity.

