The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of Cote
d'Ivoire.

My delegation thanks Mr. Nickolay Mladenov,
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
for his briefing on the recent developments regarding
the situation in Palestine, which once again reminds the
Security Council of the urgent need to mobilize further
around issues ofpeace and security in the region.

Cote d'Ivoire is concerned about the situation in
the Palestinian territories, particularly in the Gaza
Strip and the West Bank, where tension remains
high despite the many efforts of the international
community to restore peace and stability. My country
wishes to reaffirm its steadfast position in favour of a
peaceful and negotiated solution to the conflict through
dialogue between the parties. That is why we believe,
in accordance with international consensus, that the
status of the city of Jerusalem must be determined
following peace negotiations between Israelis and
Palestinians.

Cote d'Ivoire can, under no circumstances, approve
the policies of settlement expansion and intensive
reconstruction that have thrown entire Palestinian
families into complete disarray, which threatens the
urgent need to restore dialogue in the quest for lasting
peace in the region. We therefore call for stringent
compliance with the provisions of resolution 2334
(2016) and call on the various parties to exercise
restraint and urge them to refrain from unilateral
actions that could irrevocably compromise the chances
ofa peaceful settlement to the conflict.
The Israeli-Palestinian crisis carries with great risk
of deterioration to the socioeconomic and humanitarian
situation in the region. Many reports from United
Nations agencies indicate that unemployment has
reached 27 per cent, the highest in the world. According
to those reports, the state of health of Palestinians
is deteriorating and a significant proportion of the
population does not have access to drinking water or
electricity, despite the substantial assistance provided
by some States in the region, in particular Qatar.
Given the seriousness of the situation, C6te d'Ivoire
reiterates its urgent call for a general mobilization and
collective responsibility on the part of the members
of the Council so that significant humanitarian and
financial assistance is provided to the populations in
distress. In that connection, my delegation urges the
United Nations and international partners to continue
providing financial support to the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East. That support will allow it to efficiently
carry out its mission of providing assistance to more
than 5 million refugees whose needs are constantly
increasing.

The end of the humanitarian crisis is highly
dependent upon a settlement of the political and military
crisis that has pitted Palestinians against Israelis for
several decades. Hence the need to put an end to the
cycle of deadly violence and repression. In that regard,
my delegation calls on the Israeli and Palestinian parties
to enter into new peace talks without preconditions, as
part of the good offices of the United Nations. To that
end, the Council should support all mediation initiatives
in favour of reconciliation between Fatah and Hamas,
thereby allowing the Palestinian Authority to recover
all of its prerogatives over Palestinian territory.

My country welcomes and encourages the
mediation conducted by the Egyptian authorities under
the supervision of the United Nations. We also express
our continued support for the two-State solution,
Israel and Palestine, living in harmony, side by side, in
peace and security, in accordance with resolution 242
(1967). In that connection, I welcome the United States
initiative to develop a peace plan focused on improving
the quality of life for people in the Middle East. I am
pleased to note that the plan will be available in the
near future, and I hope it will have the desired impact
on the region.
In conclusion, my delegation encourages
Mr. Mladenov to continue his constant efforts to find a
negotiated solution.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. I now invite Council members to informal

consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.

The meeting rose at 12.25 pm.
