Ms. Gilmore: On behalf ofthe High Commissioner,
I thank the Council for this opportunity to brief it on the
findings of the assessment mission to improve human
rights, accountability, reconciliation and capacity in
South Sudan.

In short, the findings are that despite the August 201 5
Peace Agreement, human rights violations and abuses
against the civilian population continue unabated.
Since December 2013, all parties to the conflict
have committed gross human rights violations and
abuses, along with serious violations of international
humanitarian law, including the killing of civilians,
widespread sexual violence against women and girls, the
pillaging and destruction of civilian property, including
homes, humanitarian infrastructure, schools, medical
facilities and even hospitals. Both the Government
and the opposition have forcibly conscripted children,
some as young as nine years of age, in violation of
international human rights law, international criminal
law and international humanitarian law.

The Sudan People's Liberation Army and allied
militia systematically perpetrated rapes and other acts
ofviolence against women, during its military offensive
in Unity state. Rape, in particular, was used as a
strategy to terrorize and punish civilians. From April to
September last year, the United Nations recorded more
than 1,300 reports of rape in Unity state alone. The High
Commissioner, like the African Union Commission of
Inquiry on South Sudan, finds that there are reasonable
grounds to believe that allegations of gross violations,
including those committed in 2015, may constitute war
crimes and/or crimes against humanity.

The High Commissioner's report also finds a
new and alarming spread of violence and insecurity
to areas previously less affected by the conflict. In
Western Equatoria, for example, the Government's
intensively militarized response to insecurity has been
met with resistance from an increasing number of
armed defence groups, but it is civilians who are caught
in the middle. Furthermore, space for the exercise
of freedom of expression, including dissent, has
narrowed considerably, with human rights defenders,
journalists and other civil society actors subjected to
intimidation, harassment, attack and detention without
due process. That curtails democratic space, violates
the State's international human rights obligations and,
without any doubt, further undermines prospects for
sustainable peace.

A legacy of violence and revenge underscores
South Sudan's urgent need for accountability for
both past and present-day human rights violations
and abuses, as well as violations of international
humanitarian law. Yet despite the repeated public and
formal commitments given by the parties to the conflict
to ending the violence and punishing the perpetrators,
no evidence has been found of any genuine effort on
the part of either the Government or the opposition
to live up to those undertakings. If South Sudan,
as a country, and its people, as rights-holders, are to
realize sustainable peace, security and development,
the long-standing and vicious cycle of impunity must
be broken. The perpetrators of human rights abuses
and violations of international humanitarian law and
of other international crimes must be held to account.
South Sudan must address the underlying problems and
root causes, including historical grievances, that led not
only to the current conflict, but undermine prospects
for its enduring resolution.

The Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict
in the Republic of South Sudan, notably its provisions
on accountability and transitional justice, provides
useful elements in that regard. Chapter V, for example,
provides for the creation of a commission for truth,
reconciliation and healing, a hybrid court for South
Sudan, and a compensation and reparation authority.
However, to date, as we have just heard, the Transitional
Government of National Unity has not been put into
place, and those other mechanisms are therefore not
established, even though the African Union has taken
some steps towards discussing the establishment of the
hybrid court.

Transitional justice mechanisms should be
established in line with international norms and
standards. There must be genuine consultations based
on the informed participation of victims, civil society
actors, including women's groups, and all other relevant
stakeholders. There must be needs assessments to
inform efforts aimed at truth, reparations, reconciliation
and ensuring non-recurrence. If such consultations
are to be comprehensive, meaningful and inclusive,
they must be conducted over a significantly longer
period than the minimum one month stipulated in the
Agreement. Above all, the necessary preconditions
for the establishment of those transitional justice
mechanisms - a complete cessation of hostilities,
improved security, commensurate resources and a high
level of political commitment - must all be met.

At its recently concluded thirty-first session, the
Human Rights Council adopted a resolution establishing
a Commission on Human Rights in South Sudan. Its
mandate is to monitor and report on the situation of
human rights and provide guidance on transitional
justice, accountability, reconciliation and healing.
The Human Rights Council also mandated the new
Commission to make recommendations on technical
assistance to the Transitional Government to support
transitional justice, accountability, reconciliation and
healing. However, the mandate is predicated on the
Transitional Government being fully operational, fully
committed to ending the violence against the civilian
population and fully cooperative with the hybrid court
for South Sudan.

The formation of the accountability and transitional
justice mechanisms for South Sudan will not be without
their challenges, but they are essential. The High
Commissioner calls on the African Union to swiftly
establish the hybrid court, with a designated unit in
support of witnesses and victims, including children and
those subjected to sexual violence. However, he notes
with concern that the court will try only the most senior
officials responsible for human rights violations and
abuses. Many more perpetrators need to face the justice
that is so critical to lasting peace. That responsibility
will fall to South Sudan's courts, which currently do
not have the capacity to conduct such trials. Failure to
address the deeply ingrained disregard for human life
will only lead to further violations.
The only lasting and viable solution to the terror and
pain perpetrated against the people of South Sudan is
to dismantle the apparatus of violence, hold to account
those who have imposed such egregious suffering and
put an end to the cycle of impunity. Hostilities must
cease promptly and conclusively, and the international
community must do what is needed to support the
Transitional Government of National Unity, once
formed, so that these transitional justice mechanisms
can be instigated to function fully and effectively
throughout their necessary life span. Enduring peace
in South Sudan and justice for its people requires that
these steps be taken immediately and with urgency.

