Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): Today we celebrate the triumph of diplomacy
following an arduous and complex negotiating process
between the E-3+3 and Iran. I join in congratulating
all participants on their efforts and commitments.
I congratulate Iran, the United States, Russia, China
and our partners in the European Union, and of course
the United Kingdom, France and Germany. They have
demonstrated us that nothing is impossible where there
is political will. They have also given us new impetus
in addressing new challenges to international peace
and security, as we do daily here in the Council. Such
challenges can sometimes seem insurmountable in the
absence ofinspiration such as that provided in this case
today.

Plutarch, writing in Parallel Lives in the late
first century AD, ascribes to Alexander the Great a
statement that we here today could also endorse, to
the effect that dealing with the Persians on the basis
of dialogue rather than confrontation serves our
interests and benefits us and them. The benefits will
be undeniable - Iran can return to normality and the
world will be a safer place.
We are also seeing a demonstration of the Security
Council's effectiveness. In adopting resolution 1737
(2006), on 23 December 2006, the Council showed its
determination to place limits on Iran's development
of sensitive nuclear technologies that could serve to
support its nuclear and missile programmes. Today, the
Council followed through on that determination. The
Council's approach to the Iranian issue has undoubtedly
been decisive in reaching the agreement and shows
how, when we act united and with determination, we
can make the Council the most valuable guardian
of international peace and security. Moreover, in a
symbiotic process, the more effective this body is, the
stronger it is and the more capable it is to address future
challenges.

Before us now are opportunities and challenges.
The opportunities we now have stem from a balanced
agreement that strengthens the non-proliferation system
and offers an outstanding opportunity that should not
be missed. We also have the responsibility to take
advantage of the synergies the agreement offers. To that
end, we must ensure that the process is brought to an
optimal conclusion. Among the opportunities presented,
we must highlight the beneficial effect that the process
could have on the region because it will bring about an
element of stability, as the representative of the United
Kingdom just said. We must take advantage of this as as
a valuable basis to work towards combating the threat
of terrorism and bringing about the end of the conflict
in the Middle East.

But there are also challenges, which is why we
must implement what has been agreed to in a timely and
effective manner. Today, the Foreign Affairs Council of
the European Union will meet to take a decision about
the Union's role under the terms of the agreement. Now
that the hardest part has been achieved, we here in the
Council must continue to show unity and determination
in duly implementing the agreement and establish
follow-up and monitoring mechanisms that will replace
current ones. We must find the most effective way of
monitoring the restrictions that will remain in place for
a certain amount of time.

Accordingly, as Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006), I feel deeply involved in this process and I
can guarantee that I will make every effort to uphold
my role throughout the transition phase, being as
pragmatic as possible and assisting Member States
in the full implementation of the agreement in their
respective relationships with the current regime. As
I said on the day that the United States submitted the
draft resolution, the greatest source ofhappiness for me
would be to see the 1737 Committee simply disappear,
as that would mean we are fulfilling the message the
tapestry that floats above this Chamber delivers on a
daily basis: the 1737 Committee, like the phoenix, will
die only to light up a future of peace and security. As
we forge that future the Council can count on the full
support and commitment of Spain.

