Mr. Biaboroh-Iboro (Congo) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, my delegation would like to thank you
for having convened this timely open debate on the
situation in the Middle East. We thank also the
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr.
De Soto, for the information and analysis he provided
to the members of the Council.
Developments in the situation in the Middle East
continue to be a source of concern for my delegation.
With regard to Palestine, we regret the ongoing
suffering of the people of the occupied territories, who
are deprived of access to basic social services.

The sanctions to which the Palestinian Authority
has been subject owing to the suspension in April 2006
of direct financial assistance, as well as Israel's
withholding of Palestinian tax and customs revenues,
have worsened the already precarious humanitarian
situation. That catastrophic humanitarian situation has
no doubt contributed to a large extent to fuelling an
escalation of the fratricidal war in which the
Palestinians have been engaged.

Against that backdrop, my delegation has
consistently appealed to the various players in the
Palestinian crisis to show restraint and to refrain from
taking any unilateral measure that could aggravate the
situation.

We also express concern about the violence that
took place following the construction work carried out
by Israel - without prior consultation - around the
Al-Aqsa mosque, which led to considerable tension in
the Palestinian territories and in Muslim countries.

However, my delegation welcomes the current
initiatives aimed at relaunching the peace process, such
as the recent visit to the region by the United States
Secretary of State and the Quartet's 2 February meeting
on the Middle East. We are also looking forward to the
tripartite meeting between Ms. Rice, Mr. Olmert and
Mr. Abbas, planned for 19 February, and to the next
meeting of the Quartet, on 21 February.

In this context, we also welcome the agreement
reached on 8 February in Mecca between Hamas and
Fatah, with the mediation of Saudi Arabia, particularly
with regard to the commitment of the parties to respect
international law and agreements previously entered
into by the Palestine Liberation Organization,
including recognition of Israel and the renunciation of
violence.

That is a major achievement and a positive step
forward - one which we hope will lead to the
creation, as soon as possible, of a Palestinian
government of national unity. We believe that that
effort should be encouraged, in particular by lifting the
financial blockade, which is having such a harsh effect
on the Palestinian Authority.

The Quartet should take into account all of those
glimmers of hope so as to make progress in the peace
process within the context of the long-cherished vision
of two States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side
in peace and security, in accordance with the Road
Map, the principles of international law and the
relevant United Nations resolutions and agreed
mechanisms.

Turning to Lebanon, my delegation is particularly
concerned about the violence there, which is in danger
of leading that country one again into civil war. We
condemn the bomb attack that took place this morning
north of Beirut.

The war in Lebanon between Israel and Hizbollah
both exposed and accelerated a political, financial,
economic and social crisis that has been further
exacerbated by the enormous challenge of
reconstructing the devastated country.

We call upon the Lebanese people to continue, in
a responsible manner, the dialogue that is under way,
with a view to arriving at consensus-based solutions to
the various challenges confronting Lebanon and to
make optimal use of the assistance of the international
community, as manifested at the Paris conference,
where donors pledged contributions for the economic
recovery of the country through debt reduction and
economic reform.

We deplore the unilateral steps that led to the
serious incident that took place between the Lebanese
Armed Forces and Israeli forces along the Blue Line in
the area of Yaroun on 7 February. We remind all parties
that they have an obligation - in conformity with
resolution 1701 (2006) - to respect the Blue Line and
to refrain from any act that could further escalate the
situation and endanger the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon, which is deployed in the south of
the country.

In conclusion, my delegation believes that, if a
just, comprehensive and lasting peace is to be achieved
in the Middle East, all the actors concerned, including
regional players, must be involved. In this context,
Syria, Iran and others could help to stabilize the
situation and ensure a lasting cessation of hostilities by
participating in the peace effort.

