The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of the Russian Federation.

The situation in Somalia remains at the centre of
the Security Council's - and the international
community's - attention. Despite the efforts undertaken,
including the significant African Union peacekeeping
operation, the situation in the country remains
unstable. Its long-term normalization requires a
comprehensive approach, including the establishment
of a broad and representative political process under
the leadership of the Transitional Federal Government.
There is also a need to bolster the effectiveness of
regional peacekeeping efforts with appropriate
international support.

One serious factor fuelling instability in Somalia
and the subregion is the growing problem of piracy.
Resolving this problem effectively is closely linked to
achieving a comprehensive normalization of the
situation in the country. In that regard, there is a need
for concrete, independent efforts to suppress piracy,
including through the prosecution of pirates. It is for
this reason that the Russian Federation supported the
adoption of resolution 1918 (2010) and the convening
of today's meeting, which must lend momentum to
further improving the legal means to fight piracy off
the coast of Somalia.

I extend my thanks to the Secretary-General,
Ms. O'Brien and the members of the Council for their
valuable contributions to this discussion. We are
grateful to the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2010/394), which contains a detailed overview of
the advantages and disadvantages of various options
for organizing the prosecution of pirates, including the
creation of special judicial bodies. In our view, this is a
sound basis for further work.

We share the conclusion of the Secretary-General
that resolving the issue of impunity is an important
factor in combating the threat of piracy. If pirates
continue to escape justice, this will encourage them to
carry out ever more brazen acts. We agree that the final
aim of international efforts in this regard should be to
assist Somalia to build its capacity to prosecute those
responsible for acts of piracy and enforce sentences.

We note the efforts of States, especially those in
the region, and international organizations to bring
pirates to justice. The report's figures on the number of
pending piracy cases demonstrate some success in this
field. At the same time, and mindful of the scale of the
problem, we are forced to note that we are far from a
successful solution. There are many cases in which
detained suspected pirates have to be released, and not
so much as a result of the lack of evidence but rather
because of difficulties related to legal proceedings
against pirates. Recent verdicts in piracy cases,
including in States with developed judicial systems,
demonstrate how complex this task can be as a result
of, inter alia, the specificities of both legislation and
standing legal practices. Currently, those brought to
justice are mostly the rank-and-file perpetrators of
pirate attacks, who are often engaged in piracy as a
result of despair caused by poverty. In the meantime,
pirate masterminds, the key figures behind this
criminal activity, escape justice. This obvious gap must
be filled - otherwise, we can expect no serious
progress in the fight against piracy.

Regional States face the pressing problem of
limited judicial and correctional capacities, which
prevent them from finding appropriate responses at the
national level. Kenya is a telling example in that
regard. Investments into the development of the
judicial infrastructure of that country are beginning to
bear fruit, largely as a result of the support by the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, which we
value highly. However, as highlighted in the Secretary-
General's report, the region still does not have a strong
partner ready to assume the main burden for
prosecuting pirates. Attempts to share this burden have
not, as of yet, yielded tangible results. As we analyse
the emerging situation, we are increasingly convinced
that a comprehensive settlement of the problem of
pirates' impunity is impossible without expanding
international participation.

We call for continued work on reinforcing the
capacities of national law enforcement systems and
value contributions by States and international
organizations to finance such activity. At the same
time, a point of principle for us is to keep on the
agenda other options for the establishment of
additional mechanisms for the prosecution of pirates.
In our view, possible further steps in this area need to
be compared to the effectiveness of existing efforts. In
that regard, we advocate regular progress assessments
of legal proceedings against pirates in the national
courts of regional and other States.

We welcome the intention of the Secretary-
General to appoint a special adviser on legal issues
related to piracy off the coast of Somalia.

The Russian Federation continues to believe that,
from a long-term perspective, the best solution would
be to set up an international judicial mechanism at the
regional level, the competence of which would
complement national jurisdictions. This option would
not only provide for uniformity in the application of
the law and ensure respect for the procedural rights of
suspected pirates, but would also cover those
individuals involved in piracy who are today beyond
the reach ofjustice.

With regard to concerns related to a costly special
counter-piracy court, we would like to point out that
the costs related to its creation - currently estimated
to be approximately $50-60 million - are significantly
less than the current aggregate losses resulting from
piracy - $15 billion annually, according to some
assessments. We would like to see the Contact Group
on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia continue to address
this issue on the basis of, inter alia, the Secretary-
General's report.

In conclusion, we urge States to continue to focus
on the problem of the prosecution of pirates. An
important task in that regard remains the effort to
establish liability for acts of piracy in national
legislation, as well as the stepping up of international
cooperation in this area.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

Before giving the floor to the next speaker, I
would like to inform the members of the Council and
other participants that the presidency intends not to
break for lunch. I now give the floor to the
representative of Denmark.

