Mr. Shah (India): Mr. President, it gives us great
pleasure to see you preside over the Security Council as it
discusses an issue as important as the future of the peace
process in Angola.

We are deeply grateful to the ministerial delegation
from the Southern African Development Community
(SADC) for its briefing and assessment of the current
situation in Angola. We have the comprehensive and
thoughtful report of the Secretary-General, contained in
document S/1996/827 of 4 October 1996.

I would also like to place on record our appreciation
for the untiring efforts of the Secretary-General's Special
Representative for Angola, Ambassador Blondin Beye, who
only a couple of days ago provided detailed information to
the troop-contributing countries.

This meeting of the Security Council is not merely
about the question of the extension of the mandate of the
United Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III). It is about a clear signal being sent by the United
Nations and the international community regarding the need
for scrupulous adherence to the Lusaka Protocol of
November 1994 and the restoration of peace and amity in
Angola. This would also enable the implementation of
much-needed joint regional development initiatives.

The United Nations commitment to implementation of
the Lusaka Protocol was reflected in the establishment of
UNAVEM. III. The largest peacekeeping operation currently
mandated by the Security Council, it is to complete its
mandate by 8 February 1997. We had therefore expected
that by now peace and stability would have been restored
to Angola and that the process of national reconciliation
and post-conflict peace-building would have been firmly set
in motion.

Unfortunately, the Secretary-General in his report
provides a rather disconcerting picture when he states that

"the progress achieved towards the implementation of
the Lusaka Protocol has been disappointing."
(S/1997/827, para. 2)

He has listed a host of military and political issues that
remain unfulfilled. In the political sphere tangible progress
needs to be seen on issues relating to the special status of
the President of UNITA, the extension of State
administration throughout the country, the return of UNITA
deputies to the National Assembly, the formation of a
Government of National Unity and Reconciliation, and the

 

assumption by UNITA officials of their posts at the
national, provincial and other levels. We note that since
the release of the Secretary-General's report there has
been some movement in some of these areas. This
appears to be reflective only of what the Secretary-
General has characterized as a pattern of "grudging
compliance with the provisions of the Lusaka Protocol,
with protracted delays and last-minute concessions."
(ibid., para. 41)

In the military sphere, while the quartering of the
UNITA troops is nearly complete, it is a matter of
concern that as many as 30 per cent of the quartered have
deserted. In addition, as many as 40 per cent of the troops
were quartered without weapons. These factors, coupled
with the inability of five of the 10 UNITA generals to
join the Angolan Armed Forces and the procrastination of
UNITA personnel in joining those Forces, raise legitimate
concerns about the intentions of UNITA.

It is our view that dialogue between the parties
concerned is the best way to sort these issues out. We
commend the initiative taken by the Southern Africa
Development Community in convening the Luanda
meeting of 2 October, to which the leader of UNITA was
invited. UNITA's non-participation was most regrettable.
We share the Secretary-General's hope that a meeting
between President Dos Santos and Mr. Savimbi can be
held in the near future, and we join in the appeal to this
effect made by SADC.

Angola requires not only peace and stability but also
the support of the international community for its long-
term socio-economic development as well as for the task
of integrating an estimated 100,000 ex-combatants into
the civilian sector. The financial commitment of $70
million by the Government of Angola needs to be
supported by the donor community. The pledges made at
the 1995 Brussels Round Table Conference should be
fulfilled.

India's commitment to peace and stability in Angola
is demonstrated by the fact that we have provided more
than 1,100 troops to UNAVEM. III. It is a matter of pride
that Indian troops have been able to assist in all aspects
of the implementation of the mandate, whether it be in
traditional peacekeeping roles, in operational demining
and bridge-building, or support for the developmental
needs of local communities. As a measure of their humble
commitment to the common people of Angola, Indian
troops have voluntarily shared their regular rations with
the people of the areas in which they have been stationed.

 

The message that we would like the Security Council
to convey is that the commitment of the international
community to restore peace in Angola is firm. However,
such a commitment requires at least an equal response from
all parties concerned. In the latter context, at this stage a
clear signal needs to be sent that the international
community expects in particular UNITA to fulfil all the
commitments it has voluntarily entered into.

The members of SADC have, through their summit of
2 October 1996, expressed their commitment to assist in the
peace process in Angola. In its deliberations the Council
should seriously take into account the proposals made by
the summit before arriving at any final decision. My
delegation also associates itself with the statement issued
earlier today by the Non-Aligned Movement on the peace
process in Angola.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate once again that
the international community's commitment to the
restoration of peace and stability in Angola should not
waver.

