Mr. Shearman (United Kingdom): I thank you, Sir,
for convening today's debate. I would also like to thank
Ambassadors Drobnjak and Patriota for their briefings.

This meeting is a timely opportunity to reflect
on the experience of the United Nations in helping
countries recover from conflict with a particular focus
on the importance of preventing relapse into conflict.
There have been successes. The United Nations should
be proud of the central role it played in helping Sierra
Leone recover from its devastating civil war. That
is an example of how effective, tailored and well-
planned United Nations peacebuilding interventions
can improve people's lives. Similarly, in Cote d'Ivoire
and Liberia, the United Nations has helped put those
countries on paths towards more stable and peaceful
futures.

But, as Ambassador Patriota highlighted, alongside
those examples of success, we have also seen the tragic
recent relapses into conflict in both the Central African
Republic and South Sudan. That demonstrates that
we must continue to hone our approach to preventing
countries from slipping back into devastating spirals of
conflict. In both of those cases, the Security Council
and the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) cannot say
that there was no information on the potential for an
outbreak of violence. The early warning indicators
were there in both countries, but we collectively failed
by not taking early action.

We live in an age in which we have immediate
access to information about potential risks of instability
in countries around the world. We can no longer say
that we did not know about possible indicators of
future conflict, such as human rights abuses, political
repression or a rise in ethnic or religious tensions.
The challenge for the Council, the Peacebuilding
Commission and the whole United Nations system is
to find the appropriate response when we receive those
early warnings.

We all know that tackling potential risks to
stability early is the most effective approach. Early
action can prevent enormous human suffering, fear and
displacement. It also makes economic sense. It is far
more cost-effective to invest in conflict prevention and
de-escalation upstream than to pay the high human and
financial costs to responding to a relapse into conflict.

Effective early action requires political will and
commitment from the Council, the Peacebuilding
Commission and key regional actors, inter alia. We must
all be proactive in considering the most appropriate way
to mobilize the various tools at our disposal in order to
prevent relapse in each specific case. That could, for
example, include the use of good offices, sanctions
against potential spoilers or reconfiguring development
activities to ensure that they are conflict-sensitive and
contribute to stability. To take one country on the PBC's
agenda, the United Kingdom believes that the situation
in Burundi is a current example of where we should take
such an approach. We must work together to monitor
the situation and ensure that we do not allow worrying
political developments to reignite conflict, especially
in the run-up to Burundi's elections next year.

The issue of how we can work together to prevent
relapse into conflict will undoubtedly be a major theme

in the 2015 review of the peacebuilding architecture.
That important review will allow us to reflect on
progress and consider ways in which we can improve
our approach to peacebuilding. The United Kingdom
welcomes the ongoing informal consultations on
the scope of the review, in particular the emerging
consensus that the review needs to revisit the original
vision behind the creation of the architecture in 2005
and take stock of the developments in United Nations
peacebuilding over the last 10 years.

In that time, peacebuilding in the international
system has moved on. The key elements of peacebuilding
are now mainstreamed within operational entities in
the Secretariat and agencies, funds and programmes.
The gap or gaping hole in the international community
that was perceived to exist in 2005 has been filled by
an array of multilateral and regional entities, both from
the development and the political and security spheres.

The United Kingdom believes that the review must
therefore avoid a narrow focus on the Peacebuilding
Commission, Peacebuilding Fund and Peacebuilding
Support Office. It should not just tinker at the margins
of the architecture and there should be no sacred cows.
The United Kingdom believes it is important to have
a thorough and ambitious review that reconsiders the
architecture in the light of our common ambition to
improve the ability of the United Nations to support
countries recovering from conflict on their road to
peace.

