Mr. Rudolph (Germany): My delegation
cosponsored the draft resolution we have just adopted,
which requests the Secretary-General to set up an
international commission of inquiry to establish the facts
relating to the assassination of the President of Burundi
on 21 October 1993, as well as the massacres and other
related serious acts of violence which followed. We
welcome in particular the fact that the mandate of the
commission also includes making recommendations of a
legal, political or administrative nature. This will help the
people of Burundi to prevent any repetition of the
barbaric acts under investigation.

The resolution is based on recommendations by the
Secretary-General and takes into account the position of
the Burundi Government. In this respect, I should like to
call on all Burundi authorities, institutions and political
parties to cooperate fully with the work of the impartial
jurists to be appointed by the Secretary-General.

Justice is a prerequisite for national reconciliation. It
is our hope that the establishment of the Commission will
be a first step towards this goal by assisting Burundi to
break the vicious cycle of impunity which has so afflicted
the country. While it is the Burundi people who bear the
main responsibility for overcoming their difficult
situation, the international community will have to assist
them in their efforts. My country has substantially
increased its humanitarian assistance following the tragic
events in 1993. For this year, we have contributed the
sum of $6 million for humanitarian and rehabilitation
projects.

The establishment of the Commission of Inquiry
gives the Burundi people the opportunity to come to
terms with its past and to lay the groundwork for a better
future. The work of the Commission will be difficult. The
events to be investigated are recent, and emotions are still
running high. But the past has to be laid out in the open
in order to give the Burundi people the chance to work
for a better tomorrow.

