Mr. Lavald (Norway): History has shown us that
resources can become a curse rather than a blessing for
many countries. Wars are caused and conflicts are
fuelled by illegal exploitation and irresponsible
management of resources. This means that the issue of
natural resources and conflict is highly relevant to the
Security Council, and we welcome today's debate.

Managing natural resources such as diamonds,
minerals, oil, natural gas and timber in a fragile State
with a poor population is a difficult task. The illicit
extraction of resources can be enormously profitable
for militant groups and international criminal
networks, and weak Governments often fall victim to
these groups and their ambitions for power and
influence.

The battle for control over mineral wealth is a
problem that reaches far beyond national borders. It
affects regional stability and international security. We,
the Members of the United Nations, have not
sufficiently addressed this issue and its implications for
peace processes around the world.

We must recognize that the battle for natural
resources is a key part of our peace efforts. This means
that our peacekeepers must have clear directives and
resources to respond accordingly. Today, only a few
peacekeeping operations on the ground have the robust

mandate and capacity necessary to investigate, monitor
and arrest those responsible for illicit exploitation of
and trafficking in resources. The Council should seek
to address this issue as a matter of priority when
drafting future mandates.

Improved governance is crucial for better
management of natural resources. This means checks
and balances, anti-corruption programmes and proper
legislation, as well as external financial support and
sustained political will by host Governments.

We believe the peacebuilding architecture created
by the Peacebuilding Commission, the Fund and the
Support Office is a particularly relevant tool here as an
important step towards more sustained and coherent
international efforts in post-conflict situations.

Governments of resource-rich countries bear the
ultimate responsibility for translating those resources
into a blessing for their people. But the international
community has a responsibility to support fragile
States through mediation, peacekeeping, emergency
assistance and technical support. We also have a
responsibility to ensure that foreign companies
extracting natural resources from developing countries
comply with international rules and pay attention to the
needs of the local population.

We have recently seen the emergence of
voluntary tools that could be important safeguards,
such as the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme
and the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative
(EITI). The EITI aims to defeat the "resource curse" of
poverty, corruption and conflict through transparency
and accountability. This requires sound governance
systems and sufficient capacity to administer and
monitor the extractive industries sector.

Norway is host to the international secretariat for
the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative and
supports the Initiative politically and financially. We
welcome the implementation efforts taking place in
more than 20 countries and call for additional partners
to join this Initiative.

The Norwegian Oil for Development initiative is
another example. This initiative assists developing
countries in managing petroleum resources in a way
that generates economic growth, increases living
standards and promotes environmental sustainability.

Finally, Norway is also part of a group of
countries, corporations and non-governmental
organizations that have initiated another approach that
is relevant for our debate here today. These are the
Voluntary Principles on Security and Human Rights.
These Principles aim to balance the need for safety and
respect for human rights in conflict zones and other
challenging environments where extractive companies
operate.

