The President: I shall now make a statement in
my national capacity.

Allow me to start by expressing my appreciation
to all of you, and to His Excellency the Secretary
General, for participating in today's extraordinary
ministerial meeting of the Security Council to discuss
the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question, and to thank you for the kind
words addressed to me.

Greece fully subscribes to the statement that is to
be delivered later by the Foreign Minister of Finland
on behalf of the European Union.

It is a privilege for me to be presiding over this
extraordinary Council meeting, and I would like to
thank you all for having supported the efforts of the
presidency in making today's meeting a reality. This is
a great honour and, at the same time, a very humbling
experience.

All of us in this room are well aware of the
multifaceted challenges that we face in the Middle
East. Such is the nature of those challenges that they
affect not only the peoples of the region - not only the
Israelis, the Palestinians, the Lebanese, the Syrians, the
Jordanians, the Egyptians and others - but the entire
international community. All of our global partners,
whether they be the European Union, the Arab League
or the Non-Aligned Movement, to name but a few,
consistently place the question of the Middle East very
high on their agendas.

Despite the variances that we observe in the
statements and positions formulated in these forums,
there is one crucial element that is common to all, one
that has been uttered by all here in this Chamber, and
that is the need to achieve a comprehensive, just and
lasting peace in the Middle East. This is our common
goal, and this, I believe, constitutes the collective will
of all the peoples of the world, as expressed by their
representatives repeatedly during the opening of each
session of the General Assembly of the United Nations.

I cannot think of any other conflict that has held
the unwavering attention of so many for so long. And
yet, as years turn into decades, generations grow up
knowing nothing but hatred. Reason and understanding
give place to fundamentalism and extremism. Despite
the collective desire to see peace prevail, generations
of Israelis and Arabs have been denied the right to live
in freedom and security.

That is why my role here today is indeed
humbling. I am humbled by the suffering endured by
so many for so long, by the tears of mothers who have
lost sons and daughters to this conflict, and by the
courageous vision and commitment of those who,
throughout the history of this troubled region, have
genuinely sought to bring about peace and have paid
the ultimate price in the name of this cause.

To honour the innocent victims, and as an
obligation to the children yet unborn, we must ensure
that we will spare no effort, that we will leave no
option unexplored and that we will exhaust all
possibilities in pursuing and, ultimately, in achieving
this elusive peace. We all have our part to play, no
matter how small or how large, and we share a
collective responsibility to assist the peoples of the
Middle East to realize their aspirations to live in
dignity and in peace and to view their future with hope
and optimism.

As a citizen of Athens and guided by the spirit of
this city's ancient forefathers, I cannot but maintain my
firm belief in the prevalence of reason: reason,
tolerance, acceptance and even - to use a Greek
word - symbiosis, over force.

And what does all this tell us? It tells us that
peace cannot be served by refusing to recognize the
existence of one's neighbour, nor can it be served by
perpetuating a climate of fear and insecurity through a
combination of suicide and missile attacks: and nor can
peace be advanced by such practices as the abduction
of Corporal Gilad Shalit. Equally, it tells us that peace
cannot be achieved by denying an entire nation its
rightful place where it can live in dignity and freedom,
nor can it be achieved by imposing such restrictions,
which are both humiliating and disparaging,
constituting an acute obstacle to any prospect of
normalcy in one's daily life; and nor, indeed, can peace
be achieved by forcefully confiscating lands and by
erecting barriers.

Any settlement of the Middle East conflict needs
to conform to international law, including the
resolutions adopted by this Council. It has to be the
product of negotiations, the outcome of which should
not be prejudged by unilateral measures on the ground.
The principles that should form the basis for a
comprehensive and lasting peace in the region are well
known to all of us. They include all relevant Security
Council resolutions, in particular resolutions 242
(1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002) and 1515 (2003), the
terms of reference of the Madrid Conference, including
the principle of land for peace, and the Arab Peace
Initiative.

We expect the Quartet to continue its active
engagement in order to fulfil its specific role. We
welcome its recent decision to meet on a regular basis,
including with the parties and other regional partners,
to monitor developments and actions taken by the
parties and to discuss the way ahead. And we look
forward to concrete results arising out of this. We
support President Abbas's efforts to form a
Government of national unity that we hope will adhere
to the principles of the Quartet and promote the cause
of peace. And we should also realize that causes cannot
be promoted or achieved through violence and terror
and, at the same time, that security cannot be
guaranteed by military means alone.

I appeal to all sides to let reason and
understanding prevail. Let them prevail so that the
seeds of peace that have already been sown by the
international community may be given a chance to take
root and flourish on the fertile and historic lands of the
Middle East to the benefit of all the peoples of this
region and of the world as a whole.

I now resume my functions as President.

I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Erkki
Tuomioja, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Finland.
