Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to begin by thanking Mr. Lynn Pascoe for
the report he has introduced (see S/2012/42) and, at the
same time, underscore the joint work carried out by the
United Nations and the African Union through the
assessment mission and the preparation of the report
before us. It is clear proof of the necessary cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations.

The aspirations of the Libyan people to make
their country into a democracy based on the rule of law
and respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms
for its citizens ran up against the despotism of Colonel
Al-Qadhafi's dictatorship. Unfortunately, the crisis
unleashed by the violent response of the regime
negatively affected not only the Libyan population but
also neighbouring countries and the region in general.

The numerous manifestations and dimensions of
the impact of the Libyan crisis on the countries of the
Sahel region continue to be of concern. Therefore, we
believe it necessary to take prompt action in support of
the efforts and initiatives of States and regional and
subregional organizations to resolve the security
problems related to the situation.

The report of the assessment team offers specific
recommendations, a careful analysis of which will
enable us to move forward in formulating initiatives
and programmes based on the principle of national
ownership, the establishment of a clear division of
responsibilities among stakeholders, effective
coordination and coherence in activities, and the
identification of clear priorities.

A return to normalcy in Libya and a prompt
economic recovery are critical if the actions of the
Organization in the Sahel region are to be effective and
conducive to finding sustainable solutions. The entire
United Nations system, in particular the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya, must remain committed to
achieving a prosperous and peaceful Libya, which in
turn will be a factor of stability and well-being for the
entire region.

As pointed out in the mission's report, the crisis
in Libya further exacerbated an already precarious
security situation in the Sahel region. A number of
factors that threaten the stability of the countries in the
subregion have deteriorated. The Organization as a
whole must act to provide immediate assistance in
order to resolve current problems and at the same time
contribute to long-term solutions to structural problems.

Returnees and the proliferation of small arms and
light weapons are among the main repercussions on
which we need to focus our attention. As emphasized
by the authorities of the countries of the Sahel region,
the priority must be on establishing, developing and
improving the capacities of national institutions and
regional mechanisms to resolve these problems.

The human rights of returnees must be respected,
and they must be given economic alternatives that will
enable them to reintegrate themselves in their home
countries. At the same time, we must promote an
improvement of social conditions in the communities
so that the impact of returnees on the economies of the
countries in the region will be minimized, paying
particular attention to the relationship between security
and development.

The proliferation of small arms and light weapons
is a concern that requires decisive international
cooperation to achieve a sustainable solution.
Strengthening border control by providing technological

and financial resources; establishing effective judicial
cooperation agreements; the monitoring, marking and
tracing of small arms and light weapons; exchange of
information and assistance in implementing applicable
international norms in this area are specific areas
where we must prioritize our action in order to prevent
an exacerbation of these risk factors that could further
threaten the security of the States in the region.

The magnitude of the threats to security in the
countries of the subregion described in the report
requires the adoption of initiatives that recognize the
nexus between development and security in the
countries of the subregion. Such strategies will also
require the leadership of national authorities and close
cooperation with the international stakeholders, in
particular the United Nations through its offices to the
African Union, in Western Africa and Central Africa,
as well as such regional and subregional actors as the
African Union and the Economic Community of West
African States.

