Mr. Van Shalkwyk (South Africa): South Africa would like to thank Prime Minister Rama for his briefing in his capacity as Chairperson-in- Office of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). We wish to commend the good work that he continues to do in his region to support the maintenance of international peace and security. Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations in the area of peace and security remains a priority for my delegation, and we welcome all efforts made to strengthen the relationship between the OSCE and the United Nations. This year marks the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations - the Organization that we value as the embodiment of multilateralism and cooperation, particularly in upholding human rights and maintaining international peace and security, as well as promoting economic development. The three pillars of the United Nations are all bolstered through engagements with regional organizations that have insight into the local contexts in which they operate. South Africa's support for that relationship is rooted in our belief that multilateralism is strengthened through enhanced cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations. Article 54 of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, under which the OSCE 1s briefing the Council today, envisages strong cooperation between the Security Council and regional organizations in the maintenance of international peace and security. Every regional organization faces a unique set of peace and security challenges that are determined by the regions in which they operate and the manner in which such threats are addressed. Therefore, increased cooperation with the Security Council remains critical. My delegation does not believe that the efforts of regional organizations in maintaining international peace and security absolve the Council of its Charter-mandated responsibilities as the custodian of international peace and security. Their efforts complement each other, and it is for that reason that cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations remains so important. New and emerging security threats continue to undermine the ways in which we prevent and address challenges, which may be faced by more than one region. In that regard, it may be useful for regional bodies to also cooperate and share experiences, as well as best practices. Deeper cooperation between the African Union - and more specifically its Peace and Security Council - and the OSCE, for example, could contribute to achieving regional and cross-regional peace and security objectives and addressing challenges. Turning to one of the key areas of the OSCE's work, South Africa welcomes the meeting of the Foreign Ministers of the four Normandy format countries - Ukraine, Germany, France and Russia - held in Paris in December 2019. My delegation also wishes to commend the OSCE on its efforts in Ukraine, as it diligently executes its mandate in monitoring the implementation of the 2015 Minsk agreements endorsed by resolution 2202 (2015) on resolving the conflict in eastern Ukraine. In that regard, it remains necessary for all parties to implement their respective commitments under the Minsk agreements. It is important for the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine to have unhindered access to monitorand verify compliance with the Minsk agreements in terms of its mandate. In that regard, we also encourage all the parties to strengthen all diplomatic efforts to produce a sustainable and peaceful solution. Let me conclude by joining other Council members in commending Mr. Rama's efforts to prioritize the women and peace and security agenda, as that is also a priority for South Africa, and the full implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent resolutions.
