Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): I am speaking on behalf of the three African
members of the Security Council, Cote d'Ivoire, South
Africa and my own country, Equatorial Guinea.

At the outset, we would like to express our thanks
to Mr. Ghassan Salame, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL), for his detailed
and informative report. We also thank Ms. Rida Al
Tubuly for her briefing.

Eight years have already passed since the beginning
of the Libyan conflict. The three African members of
the Council remain concerned about the deadlock in the
current crisis, which owing to its particular nature is
far from being resolved. We therefore urge the parties
to establish a definitive ceasefire, and we reiterate that
there can be no military solution in Libya. The only way
forward is through negotiation and inclusive dialogue,
leading to a political solution that will enable the
achievement of a stable and lasting peace throughout the
country. We echo the calls for a ceasefire, negotiations,
reconciliation and the unification of the Libyan people,
with a view to ensuring a prosperous future in which the
Libyans themselves take ownership of their decisions.
Today we would like to focus on three issues.

First, we are concerned about the serious
consequences of this protracted conflict, especially on
the humanitarian and security fronts, which themselves
are likely to have grave consequences for sub-Saharan
Africa generally. We deplore the impact of the prolonged
conflict on the civilian population, which has left more
than 128,000 people displaced. We remain concerned
about the situation of migrants and refugees being
held in detention centres, and we hope that they are
being treated with humanity and dignity. Due attention
should be given to the large numbers of those who have
lost their lives off the coast of Libya. In that regard, we
welcome the efforts of Mr. Ghassan Salame' in seeking
an agreement to close the detention centres.

Secondly, we strongly condemn the attacks on
civilian areas and civilian infrastructure and on health-
care centres and their personnel. We want to remind
all parties to the conflict that such actions, as well as
the inhumane treatment of migrants and refugees, are
flagrant violations of international humanitarian law.

Thirdly, the continuing violations of the arms
embargo represent a blatant disregard for the
Council's authority. We therefore call on all parties, as
well as the international community, to comply with
and rigorously implement resolution 2491 (2019) and
the other relevant resolutions adopted by the Council.

With regard to this issue, it is worth highlighting
the repeated concerns expressed before the Council by
our respective delegations regarding ongoing foreign
interference, as has also been expressed by the African
Union High-Level Committee on Libya. We therefore
call on countries with influence over the parties and
the entire international community to act as brokers
and refocus the process in the pursuit for a genuine and
effective peaceful solution to the conflict. Furthermore,
we reiterate the African Union's call for the appointment
of a joint United Nations-African Union special envoy
for Libya in order to assist and strengthen the work of
Mr. Ghassan Salame.

We welcome Germany's initiative to support
Mr. Salame in the implementation of his three-step plan
by convening an international conference of influential
parties external to the conflict. We hope that the Berlin
conference will produce positive results that provide
urgent solutions to this serious crisis.

In turn, we take this opportunity to congratulate
Mr. Salame and UNSMIL for their tireless work and
firm commitment in seeking a political solution in
Libya. The three African countries reiterate their
unwavering support.

In that regard, we would like to urge the
international community to join forces in pursuit of
effective and peaceful solutions to the conflict, which
should be dealt with through a more objective and
constructive approach, while taking into account the
cultural, ideological and political aspects of the Libyan
people. We believe that the work of the Council should
not only consist of words but be implemented in specific
and effective actions.

In conclusion, in our national capacity, we would
like to point out that, as Mr. Salame has just mentioned,
the migrant and Libyan civilian communities have just
suffered another series of attacks that have claimed
many innocent lives. How long can we, as members of
the Security Council, allow such atrocities to continue?
In 2011, the assault by NATO forces was justified to
protect the Libyan people. Is there no civilian population
in Libya today?

