Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): First
of all, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing today's very timely debate. I would also like
to thank the Deputy Secretary-General, Ambassador
Gert Rosenthal and Mr. Youssef Mahmoud for their
analyses, which enable us to better understand this
particularly complicated issue.

I will address three main points on the action of
the Security Council. First of all, we have to continue
place sustaining peace at the heart of the goals of
peacekeeping operations. The goal of sustainable peace
is one of the major reasons for the development of
peacekeeping. It requires that we deal with immediate
and vital priorities, such as protection of the civilians
and human rights, as well as with long-term goals,
such as supporting political processes, security sector
reform and many others.

The emergence of integrated multidimensional
operations meets this need and shows how the United
Nations is adapting to this complex challenge. Today,
in many cases, peacekeeping operations * the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic and
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali, for example - support
the development of local capacity, in particular in such
areas as disarmament and security-sector reform. In
such areas as justice, the restoration of State authority,
weapons management and the fight against impunity,
peacekeeping operations provide valuable support for
the long term.

The Council has to fully play its role in that constant
adaptation. That means that operations have to have
mandates that are clearer but ambitious and realistic at
the same time, as well as comprehensive and targeted,
in order to enable missions to deal with emergencies
and prepare a peaceful future. We welcome the efforts
made by the Secretary-General to provide the Council
with comprehensive and operational analyses in order to
inform our decisions. We must collectively continue our
efforts aimed at prioritizing mandates and sequencing
their implementation in order to ensure that we are as
close as possible to the realities on the ground. We must
also, as stated by the Deputy Secretary-General, work
with the troop-contributing countries so as to make
sure that there are women in peacekeeping operations.
That is essential in order to enable us to make as great
an impact as possible on the ground.

Peacekeeping operations can therefore play a
decisive role for peace, but - and this is my second
point - they cannot do so by themselves. Peacekeeping
operations do not operate in a bubble. In order to be
successful they must be supported, complemented
and strengthened by peace partners. That applies first
and foremost to the host country. Its full cooperation
with the peacekeeping operation is a precondition
for the peacekeeping operation's success. Above and
beyond the emergency situation, the host country
has to invest in a relationship with the peacekeeping
operation in order to create the foundation for a long-
term partnership that will ultimately result in the exit
of the peacekeeping operation. Such a partnership must
be based on the will to initiate the necessary reforms
in areas such as governance, security and others. It is
through such reforms that Governments will be able to
take ownership of a sustainable peace.

Such support to peacekeeping operations must
also involve the political arena. Above and beyond the
specificities of each conflict, one thing we know for
sure is that a lasting settlement of a conflict cannot be
of a military nature alone. It must be political in nature.
The synergy of the political initiatives of the Council
with the neighbouring countries, regional organizations
and ad hoc mediators is key in order to end up with a
peace agreement that will put an end to the crisis.

A crucial area for long-term stability that is
frequently overlooked is the area of economic
development. The economic fragility of a country is
very frequently compounded by the conflict and feeds
it. We can see how in South Sudan, for example, the
collapse of the economy feeds the spiral of violence.
Working together in the country team, agencies, funds
and programmes contribute to the effort to deal with
the challenges. But there are other essential actors,
such as the World Bank, the International Monetary
Fund, regional banks and organizations, bilateral
donors and the private sector. In that area, which is
far from the mandate of the peacekeeping operations,
the international community must find the tools
that can enable it to coordinate its activities. As the
Deputy Secretary-General said, we have to invest in
the 2030 Agenda for Development and the system of
Resident Coordinators if we want to make sure that the
Sustainable Development Goals become a reality for
one and all.

In that context - and this is the third point I would
like to make - the transition towards peacebuilding
serves as a pivot to ensure that sustainable peace takes
root. Such a transition will only be successful if we
promote the ownership by the host countries of the
political and security challenges they face, as well as
the social and economic challenges relating to the exit
of the peacekeeping operation. That was the case in
Cote d'Ivoire in 2014, for example. The United Nations
Operation in C6te d'Ivore (UNOCI) changed the
paradigm there. It switched from a security mandate to
a mandate to support the capacities of Cote d'lvoire. The
drawdown in UNOCI personnel was carried out in such
a way as to ensure that the transition was orderly and
responsible. The transition plan was developed jointly
by the United Nations, the Government and major
partners, and in that way it was carried out successfully.

Today, in Liberia and in Haiti, similar developments
are under way. The international community, not only
through the country teams but also through the regional
organizations and bilateral donors, must accompany
the process, but there must also be full mobilization on
the part of the host countries. The authority of the State
can be restored only if it is based on real political will,
effective governance and the respect for human rights,
with a clear economic policy. On all of those points,
the international community, in particular the United
Nations, must remain mobilized after the departure
of the peacekeeping operation, in particular through
the Peacebuilding Commission, whose activities we
fully support.
Sustained peace is a hard longjourney with frequent
pitfalls. Such a complex undertaking will be successful
only ifit relies on a convergence of actors. Among them,
peacekeeping operations, of course, play a unique, but
not isolated, role. In order to be sustainable, peace has
to be the outcome of the mobilization of one and all.

