Ms. Dunlop (Brazil): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for the invitation to participate in this
debate, which is very timely. I also thank Under-
Secretaries-General Mr. Alain Le Roy and Ms. Susana
Malcorra for their informative briefings.

The considerable increase in the number of
deployed peacekeepers and the greater complexity of
missions show that Governments and peoples
worldwide trust United Nations peacekeeping
operations. Such constancy is a major political asset. It
reflects the observance of the principles of impartiality,
the consent of the parties and the use of force in self-
defence or in the implementation of a mandate.

However, those same features of today's
operations - larger contingents and greater
complexity - pose several challenges to the
Organization and its Member States. Chief among them
is the need for the Security Council to provide
sustained political attention and guidance, not only to
missions with acute responsibilities and needs but also
to the peace processes that they are requested to
support. As we all know, peacekeeping is no substitute
for the political processes by which parties to disputes
must resolve their differences, nor can or should the
international community lead national reconstruction
or development efforts. But support for and attention to
such efforts are crucial, not only for the countries
themselves but also for the long-term sustainability of
United Nations missions.
The above is also relevant to dealing with another
significant challenge, namely the scarcity of troop-
contributing countries. There is a real need to identify
new contributors, to encourage former contributors to
resume contributions and to persuade present ones to
increase their contributions.

Brazil has heeded the call. Since 2004, it has
multiplied its contribution tenfold, compared to a
fourfold increase in the overall number of United
Nations peacekeeping troops. It is worth noting that
more than 80 per cent of the troops in United Nations
missions today come from developing countries. It is
crucial that the general membership participate in the
collective response to meet the increased demand for
United Nations peacekeeping.

Although it is important to recognize those
challenges, it is equally necessary to refrain from
generating the sense of an impending crisis in
peacekeeping or from raising doubts about the ability
of the Organization to face such challenges. Rather, we
should strive to reform what must be reformed in a
systematic, inclusive and transparent manner, without
dispersing efforts in too many initiatives, however well
intended.

We should also focus on the full implementation
of decisions that have already been taken. In particular,
it does not seem appropriate to speak of a financial
crisis in peacekeeping. It is true that the budget has
increased considerably and that that is certainly a
burden on all Member States. However, higher
financial costs are but the logical consequence of
establishing new missions and enlarging existing ones,
which, in turn, derives from decisions made in the
Council.

In adopting resolutions, members are obviously
aware of the financial consequences. They should
ensure, in the Fifth Committee, that missions receive
the resources needed to implement their mandates.
Closing missions that are needed or avoiding
establishing missions that the Council considers
necessary to maintain or restore international peace and
security do not seem to be judicious responses to the
financial problem. Rather, host countries and the
United Nations must work together to create the
conditions that will allow for the timely drawdown and
closing of missions. In other words, firm commitment
by the host country to overcome the causes of conflict,
with the concurrent support of the United Nations, will
09-3860]
help to achieve or restore political stability and
security sooner rather later.

At the same time, it is important that the Security
Council continue to focus on drafting mandates that are
consistent with the needs on the ground. In that
connection, I would like to make a brief but important
conceptual remark. Brazil believes that the expression
"financial contributors" should not be used in
connection with peacekeeping, as it is contrary to the
letter and the spirit of the Charter. All Member States
contribute to the budget in accordance with their
capacity to pay. On an issue directly linked to
international peace and security that is in the interest of
the entire membership, no hierarchies should be
established or encouraged.

Brazil's experience as a troop-contributing
country started in the 1940s. Since then, it has involved
almost 30,000 troops. Our most recent contribution, in
Haiti, has confirmed our understanding that military
and police activities are insufficient to build long-term
stability. Sustainable peace requires that a
peacekeeping mission also assist in supporting national
reconciliation, strengthening national institutions and
promoting development. Our experience also indicates
that close interaction between the Security Council and
TCCs is essential.

Resolution 1353 (2001) established a wide range
of mechanisms for consultation with troop-contributing
countries. In our current reform efforts, it is preferable
to improve those mechanisms rather than to invent new
ones. The key for a mutually beneficial relationship
between the Security Council, the Secretariat and
troop-contributing countries is to give their views
extensive consideration. First and foremost, that should
translate into making better use of the discussions held
in meetings prior to the renewal of mandates. It
behoves the Council to show the political will to
mainstream suggestions and perspectives derived from
the valuable experience of TCCs. That is crucial to
ensure a convergence between the Council and the
countries with responsibilities on the ground. It is also
relevant to increase ownership of peacekeeping on the
part of States ready to provide troops, thereby
encouraging them to provide the resources needed to
respond to increased demand. In other words,
participation and inclusiveness will also help the
Organization to face the challenges that I have
mentioned.
09-38601

Another important step is to engage troop-
contributing countries in a consistent and sustained
manner, and not in a sporadic fashion, as has been the
case in the past. That is particularly true with regard to
reform initiatives. Attentive consideration to the
recommendations of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations is also needed.

Brazil stands ready to continue to contribute to
peacekeeping, not only in the field and at Headquarters
but also through participation in the debate on the
necessary measures for its improvement. Such an
endeavour is crucial to the future of the Organization.

