Ms. Tincopa (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, allow me to thank the delegation of France for
organizing this debate one year after the adoption of
resolution 1612 (2005). We believe that the resolution
represents progress on this issue by establishing a
comprehensive monitoring and reporting mechanism to
ensure the protection of boys and girls affected by
armed conflicts.

I would also like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, the Executive Director of
UNICEF, and the representatives of the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) and of the World
Bank for their very encouraging statements. We also
encourage them to continue to work together with a
view to ending the recruitment and use as soldiers of
children in armed conflicts and to protecting them
when they are involved in conflict, as in the current
crisis in the Middle East.

Resolution 1612 (2005), together with all prior
resolutions on the same topic, provides a formal and
detailed structure to govern the protection of children
affected by armed conflict and offers the key elements
in ensuring respect for the rights of children in the
field. Peru firmly supports the universal principle that
all parties to armed conflict should respect all the
rights of children in all circumstances.

In that regard, we welcome the progress made
since the adoption of resolution 1612 (2005), mainly in
the following areas. First, a new Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflicts, Ms. Coomaraswamy, has been appointed. We
believe that her appointment expresses the will of the
international community to contribute with permanent
and lasting solutions to the unacceptable situation of
children affected by armed conflict.

Secondly, the monitoring and reporting
mechanism on children and armed conflict has been
launched and the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict has been established under the
chairmanship of France, demonstrating the Security
Council's commitment to the promotion and defence of
the rights of children in armed conflict. The Security
Council is one of the key bodies for taking accountable
and concrete action in response to the serious
violations of the rights of the child.

Furthermore, I would like to make some
comments that could be taken into account as we
pursue the full implementation of resolution 1612
(2005). In addressing the topic of children in armed
conflict, we should integrate cooperation and technical
assistance to generate and increase national capacities
to formulate policies to prevent human rights
Violations. The international community should
continue to use all instruments and mechanisms
available to put an end to the violations of human
rights of children involved in armed conflict.

Impunity must end. Those responsible for grave
abuses against children should be brought to justice. In
that regard, I would like to highlight the case of
Thomas Lubanga, arrested by the International
Criminal Court last March for recruiting and using
boys and girls as soldiers in the hostilities in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. That case
represents important action taken against those
responsible for such acts.

United Nations peacekeeping missions,
international relevant bodies and non-governmental
organizations should include in their mandates the
provision of human rights education and training for all
those working on the implementation of the monitoring
and reporting mechanism. In particular, they should

include young people working towards that goal. We
should also support the work being carried out by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
her visits to the field. The parties to armed conflict
should cooperate with her work, as well as with that
carried out by UNICEF and other relevant United
Nations entities.

The Working Group of the Security Council
should play an important role in the implementation of
recommendations arising from the review of the
reports. The full application of the recommendations
will be important to prevent worse violations. The
Working Group should also finalize its review of the
reports of the monitoring and reporting mechanism
referred to in paragraph 3 of resolution 1612 (2005); it
could then consider the possibility of moving on to a
second phase and examining other situations in which
children are recruited and used as soldiers in hostilities
or conflicts.

We should urge the donors and financial
institutions to continue their support for Governments
or parties involved in order to implement resolution
1612 (2005).

Before ending, I would like to note that my
delegation supports the presidential statement to be
adopted at the end of this debate.

