Mr. Koonjul (Mauritius): Let me start by warmly
congratulating you, Madam President, and your
formidable team on a most successful presidency of the
Security Council during the month of November. The
agenda of the Security Council under the Jamaican
presidency has been most diverse in its range of issues
and has given us the opportunity to hear in this
Chamber the views of a very large number of ministers,
political leaders and other personalities on the subjects
on which the Council has been working.

Despite the very heavy schedule occasioned by
the unexpected - or, rather, I would say the expected
unexpected - the Jamaican delegation has indeed
fulfilled the objectives it had set out at the beginning of
the month. Conflicts in Africa, the situation in
Afghanistan and the predicament of civilians, in
particular children in armed conflict, have been fully
addressed during the month of November.

The focus on Africa in your programme of work,
Madam, clearly demonstrates the commitment of the
Jamaican delegation to advance the peace processes in
all situations of armed conflict on the African
continent. With the exception of Somalia, which was
dealt with in a most adequate manner under the Irish
presidency, not a single conflict situation in Africa was
left out. They all received the special attention they
deserved and that you, Madam, had intended for them.
My delegation is most grateful to you for that.

The private meeting of the Security Council on 8
November on Burundi will, no doubt, go down in the
history of the Security Council. On that day, the
Security Council, at your initiative, had the opportunity
to listen for the last time in this Chamber to former
President Nelson Mandela speaking in his capacity as
facilitator in the Burundi crisis. History will also
record that a meeting took place in the Security
Council with the Jamaican Minister for Foreign
Affairs, The Honourable Mr. Knight, in the Chair.

Equally important was the meeting of the
Security Council with the Ministers of the Arusha
Regional Peace Initiative on Burundi. That meeting
was timely, as it was held only a week after the
establishment of a Transitional Government in
Burundi. It allowed Council members to interact in a
positive manner with those engaged in the Regional
Initiative and encouraged them to pursue their efforts
in finding a lasting solution to the Burundi crisis.

The meeting of the Security Council with the
Lusaka Political Committee was opportune and fruitful.
Security Council resolution 1376 (2001), adopted at the
end of the meeting, enlists the commitments of the
parties to the conflict on various important issues, in
particular disarmament, demobilization, repatriation,
resettlement and reintegration (DDRRR), in order to
take forward the peace process.

By organizing meetings of the Security Council at
the ministerial level during the ministerial week of the
General Assembly, the Jamaican delegation, in a
remarkable manner, took optimum advantage of the
presence of the Ministers in New York to highlight
various issues pertaining to international peace and
security. This is a practice that indeed needs to be
maintained.

The large number of public meetings held under
your presidency, Madam, has contributed to making the
work of the Council more transparent. From the echo
we have had from outside this Chamber, the general
membership of the United Nations has been very
appreciative and has fully benefited from those
meetings. The two public meetings on children in
armed conflict and the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, on 20 and 21 November, indicate the genuine
commitment of your delegation to making its
contribution to the alleviation of the plight of civilians
in armed conflict. We note that your delegation has
been very consistent in its approach in this respect, be
it in informal consultations or formal meetings of the
Council. The adoption of a comprehensive resolution
on children in armed conflict under your presidency
could therefore not have been more appropriate.

The testimony given by the child soldier from
Sierra Leone provided the Security Council with a rare
opportunity to listen to firsthand evidence of the
atrocities and trauma suffered by children in armed
conflicts.

The ministerial meeting of the Security Council
on counter-terrorism was an excellent initiative and
provided our ministers with the opportunity to
exchange views in a frank and candid manner on an
issue of international importance. The meeting
undoubtedly sent a clear message that the Security
Council was determined to stem that scourge in all its
forms and wherever it is manifest. The adoption of
resolution 1377 (2001) was a further step in
reaffirming that determination.

We salute the initiative of the Jamaican
delegation in having persuaded the Secretariat to set up
a Web site for the presidency of the Security Council,
which we hope future presidencies will be able to
benefit from.

My delegation is grateful to you, Madam
President, for having tackled the very delicate issue of
the speakers' list. We note that the new system is
working well and without complaint from members of
the Council. We sincerely hope that this practice will
be continued under future presidencies.

Finally, I should like to state that the Jamaican
delegation has indeed, during its presidency of the
Security Council, used each opportunity to support and
advance the Council's initiatives in the promotion of
peace and security. I must say, Madam President, you
have set very high standards, which you have upheld
during your presidency despite the small size of your
team. Following presidencies, especially those with
equally small teams, will have to work very hard to
maintain those standards.

