Mr. Shearman (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Madam President, for convening this debate. I would
also like to thank the Deputy Secretary-General, the
Chairperson of the Peacebuilding Commission and
the Administrator of the United Nations Development
Programme for their briefings.

I would like to focus on three issues: first, improving
the ability of the United Nations to plan, adapt and
draw down its peacebuilding interventions; secondly,
the role of women in peacebuilding; and, thirdly, the
2015 review of the peacebuilding architecture.

As others have said, the Council will reach an
important milestone next week as we close the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra
Leone. The people of Sierra Leone have worked hard
to stabilize their country and, although they still
face many challenges, they are now on the path to a
brighter future. The United Nations should be proud
of the central role that it has played in helping Sierra
Leone to recover from its devastating civil war. That
is an example of how effective, tailored and well-
planned United Nations peacebuilding interventions
can improve people's lives.

In 1992, former Secretary-General Boutros-Ghali
introduced the concept of peacebuilding in "An Agenda
for Peace". Since then, the Council has launched
numerous missions with mandates that recognize the
importance not only of monitoring a ceasefire but
also of building an enduring peace. Countries such as
Liberia and Cote d'Ivoire, which once tore themselves
apart in civil wars, have made considerable progress
in building stability, aided by United Nations missions.
The experience of more than two decades of United
Nations peacebuilding has taught us that strong national
ownership of inclusive peacebuilding processes and a
focus on building national institutions are essential to
securing a sustainable peace.

However, recent relapses into conflict in the Central
African Republic and South Sudan demonstrate that we
must constantly review and improve our approaches
to peacebuilding. Peacebuilding is becoming more
complex and challenging for the United Nations as
new drivers of conflict, such as organized crime, drug
trafficking and the illicit trade in natural resources,
emerge. We must rise to those new challenges, The
United Nations must improve the way in which it
analyses conflict, plans and reviews missions and
prepares for transitions.

In each mission setting, the United Nations should
undertake a rigorous analysis of the conflict and its
causes in order to understand how to focus and prioritize
its peacebuilding activities. Missions must coordinate
closely with their partners on the ground, including the
United Nations country team. United Nations agencies,
funds and programmes play an important role in
delivering critical peacebuilding tasks. Arrangements
such as the joint global focal point for the police, justice
and corrections areas in the rule of law in post-conflict
and other crisis situations are essential to ensuring a
united "One UN" approach to peacebuilding.

In addition, we need systematic reviews of existing
missions to consider regularly whether a mission's
mix of military, police and civilian capacities remain
appropriate in the light of changing circumstances
in the field. Finally, we need to ensure that there is a
clear plan for drawing down each mission once we can
responsibly do so.

In turn, as Council members, we have the
responsibility to ensure that the mandates that we
provide to United Nations missions are focused, realistic
and prioritized. Such steps will allow United Nations
peacebuilding interventions to be more dynamic and
ensure that such interventions have the right focus and
capabilites to help host Governments and countries
build lasting peace.

I would like to turn to the issue of women and
peacebuilding, which is a high priority for the United
Kingdom. Since the end of the Cold War, women have
represented only 4 per cent of signatories to peace
agreements, less than 3 per cent of mediators at peace
talks and less than 10 per cent of those sitting at the
table to negotiate on behalf of a party to conflict. More
must be done to promote the role of women in post-
conflict peacebuilding processes.

In that regard, the adoption of resolution 2122
(2013), last October, was a positive step forward. Thye
full implementation of the resolution by all stakeholders
is now key. The United Kingdom, for its part, is
actively working to promote women's participation in
peacebuilding. For example, on Syria, we provided the
Syrian National Coalition with negotiation training
on gender issues and women's participation and
played a leading role in supporting increased women's
representation in the recent second Geneva Conference
on Syria.

We continue to call on the Special Representatives
of the Secretary-General and special envoys to establish
regular consultations with women's organizations and to
work with civil society to support women's leadership.
We also continue to call on the Secretary-General to
strengthen gender training and experts in mediation
teams and to support the appointment of senior women
as United Nations mediators. As the Ambassador of
Rwanda said, increasing women's participation and
leadership in peacebuilding is a practical necessity, not
a philosophical proposition.

I would like to conclude with a brief word on
the 2015 review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture. That will be an important moment for
all United Nations bodies involved in peacebuilding
activities. The United Kingdom believes that the review
should not only focus on the institutions established
in 2005, but also should consider the effectiveness of
all United Nations peacebuilding activities and the
contributions made by all United Nations operational
peacebuilding divisions, including the Secretariat
and agencies, funds and programmes. Since 2005,
peacebuilding has moved on and is now much more
mainstreamed into the day-to-day work of many parts
of the United Nations system. A narrow focus on the
Peacebuilding Commission, the Peacebuilding Fund
and the Peacebuilding Support Office will not provide
Member States with a full evaluation ofthe effectiveness
of the United Nations peacebuilding activities.

