Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would first like to express our sincere
gratitude to you personally, Mr. President, and to your
team, for the capable leadership and full programme of
work you brought to the Security Council this month.

A considerable amount of time has been allotted
in May to African issues and to discussing ways of
arriving at collaborative solutions to the crises on that
continent. As we have said in the Security Council
more than once, for us one of the key principles in
that context is finding African solutions to African
problems. In that regard, we truly appreciate the efforts
of the Egyptian and Angolan delegations in convening,
on 23 May, the scheduled consultative meeting between
the Council and the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union, and we commend the importance and
timeliness of the holding of an informal segment of the
meeting for the first time. It enabled us to conduct a
frank and constructive analysis of the current condition
of and prospects for cooperation between the two
Councils, as well as between the United Nations and the
African Union in general, in the maintenance of peace
and security. We also discussed country-specific topics
of interest.

It was not an easy discussion, but we value the fact
that there was no attempt to conceal the existence of
various problems in the relationship between the two
Councils and that suggestions were made for concrete
ways to overcome them. In particular, we acknowledged
the importance of ensuring that our consultative
meetings are more effective, including improving the
effectiveness of our mechanisms for implementing
decisions. One especially interesting discussion was on
the possibility of organizing joint missions of the two
Councils in the field.

The consultative meeting was organically
complemented by the holding the next day of an open
debate on the issue of cooperation on security between
the United Nations and the African Union (S/PV.7694),
in which about 50 delegations took part, and at which
we adopted presidential statement S/PRST/2016/8 on
the subject. In our View, such activities have become
a major milestone in our efforts to strengthen the
strategic partnership between the two organizations, as
well as between the Security Council and the African
Union Peace and Security Council, on the basis of
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations and
a foundation of genuine mutual respect. This assumes
the Security Council's primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security and
the complementarity between the work of the United
Nations and regional organizations, in which each can
capitalize on its relative advantages.

Your commitment to the quest for solutions for
Africa, Mr. President, was also apparent in full measure
in your organization of the Security Council's mission
to Kenya and Somalia. We are grateful to Cairo for the
hospitality shown to the members of the Council in the
Egyptian capital and at the headquarters of the League
of Arab States. During that visit, the members of the
Council met with the high political representation
of Somalia, Kenya and Egypt, received first-hand
information on the situation in those countries and in the
region as a whole and exchanged views and assessments
of many issues on the international agenda. All of the
meetings took place in a businesslike and constructive
manner and were very well organized.

I would like to say a few words about the situation
in Somalia and the challenges that country is facing.
We welcome the adoption of the election model, which
is aimed at ensuring national reconciliation and uniting
the country. The Council members' visit to Mogadishu
and the negotiations that took place there served to
encourage the Head of State to approve the election
model.

However, with regard to establishing a political
process in Somalia, we need to be cautious. We must
not be hasty in advancing dubious models that could
lead to a division of the country. In that context, we
should continue to strengthen the unity of Somalia and
help to establish an effective Government, army and
security force as well as economic reconstruction, in
addition to effective ways of combating terrorism.

The visit also demonstrated that Somalia has some
promising prospects, but the terrorist problem remains
very serious. Thanks to a coordinated, successful
operation by African peacekeepers, Al-Shabaab has
been contained. However, the terrorists continue to
control a significant part of the territory and key
roads. Clearly, terrorist groups are receiving external
assistance from many sources - material, technical,
military and man-power. Foreign terrorist fighters are
flocking to the country. That support is being provided
at a faster rate than support is being provided to the
central authorities and the Somali army and police.

Today the only effective mechanism in addressing
the terrorism challenge to the country is the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), whose mandate
was unanimously extended by resolution 2289 (2016)
until 8 July. We should take account also of the fact that
African peacekeepers must deal with broader problems
than provided for in their mandates, and with a risk to
their own lives. In that connection, we need vigorously
to address the issues ofAMISOM's capacity. We call for
further enhancement by the international community
of its support to the Mission in military, financial and
logistical terms.

The efforts by the international community to
resolve the problems in Somalia are a clear example of
practical cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union in ensuring peace and security. For
that reason, we consider the the Egyptian leadership
of the Security Council mission to the country and the
conceptual dialogue between the two organizations
to have been were very well organized and results-
oriented. We are confident that the Council's work
should be built on such approaches.

