Mr. Abibi (Congo) (interpretation from French): The
delegation of the Congo, Sir, has many reasons to be
pleased to see you presiding over the work of the Security
Council this month. Among these reasons we would
highlight your qualities as a seasoned diplomat, your
wisdom and your extensive experience and understanding
of United Nations affairs, as well as the very warm
fraternal relationship between our two delegations. We are
convinced that under your leadership the Security Council
will do remarkable work.

We wish also to convey to your predecessor,
Ambassador Madeleine Albright, hearty congratulations on
the highly professional manner in which she conducted the
Council's business and on the results achieved during the
month of February.

My delegation endorses the statement just made by the
Permanent Representative of Tunisia on behalf of the
African Group.

Burundi and Congo have many common ties; our
location on the same continent and in the same subregion,
central Africa. Our mottoes are the same: "Unity -
work - progress". Congo, like other countries of the
subregion, stands behind the efforts of the people of
Burundi, with the active support of the international
community and the Organization of African Unity (OAU),
to overcome their current difficulties and to start out on an
authentic process of national reconciliation.

This was the principal concern of the representatives
of the States of our subregion when they met a few months
ago in Brazzaville within the framework of the United
Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security
Questions in Central Africa, a Committee currently under
the chairmanship of the Foreign Minister of the Congo. In
the statement - the Brazzaville declaration - which they
adopted then, the States members of the Committee
expressed their deep concern at the ongoing tension and
violence in the central African subregion. They noted that
the situation has caused immense loss of human life and
undesirable suffering for the population, including
massive flows of refugees. The resulting insecurity is
undermining the development efforts of the Governments
and peoples of the subregion, despite their wealth of
resources.

My country is of the View that this is still a valid
analysis and believes that the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of peace and security in the subregion
rests with the peoples and Governments of the countries
concerned. That is why we have always encouraged
efforts along these lines, specifically, in the case of
Burundi, those which help our brothers in that country to
consolidate the process of national reconciliation and the
restoration of peace.

From this point of view, in our opinion the
Convention on Governance remains, in the current
circumstances, an essential element in laying the
foundations of an effective national reconciliation. But
any lasting solution, if it is to survive the challenges
facing Burundi and other countries of the subregion, will
need close cooperation between the international
community, the OAU, the subregional institutions and the
countries concerned.

My country welcomes the efforts of the Secretary-
General and his Special Representative and strongly
supports the initiatives of the OAU, former President
Nyerere and others of good will to promote political
dialogue between our brothers in Burundi despite all the
odds against them. The path of dialogue is indeed the
only course that will allow Burundi to renounce once and
for all the mindset of confrontation, violence and
exclusion and promote true national reconciliation and
guarantee the stability and security necessary to improve
living conditions for the people.

That is the fraternal message which we send once
again to our brothers in Burundi on the occasion of the
Security Council's adoption of a draft resolution which,
in our opinion, takes into account every aspect of the
current situation in Burundi.

