Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt): I would like to express my
appreciation to the President of the Council for holding
this debate on a topic that is of paramount importance.

Egypt, as a founding Member of the United Nations,
has always been a strong proponent of the principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, which
commit all Member States to the peaceful settlement of
disputes to prevent armed conflicts.

As everyone here is well aware, Egypt is in a region
that is, unfortunately, no stranger to armed strife. The
conflicts occurring in our region have been the subject
of numerous Security Council resolutions. Many of them
have yet to be fully implemented, thus contributing to
the continuation of decades-old conflicts. The conflict
in Gaza, which Egypt is currently exerting strenuous
efforts to mediate and resolve, is one such example.
The continued occupation of land is a leading cause of
conflicts. Therefore, in addition to exploring new ways
for the Security Council to utilize the tools available
to it under Chapter VI, it is also imperative to explore
ways to implement pre-existing resolutions.

As the presidency's concept paper accurately notes,
conflict today "is driven by a wide range of factors"
(S/2014/572, annex, p. 2) Egypt believes that there are
indeed clear root causes for many of the conflicts under
way in the world. The failure to eradicate poverty, to
achieve development and to arrest the proliferation of
organized crime groups should be addressed as among
the underlying root causes of many conflicts.

Another factor driving conflict today is terrorism.
Egypt has long been a victim of that scourge and has
long been at the forefront of the global effort to combat
it. The case of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
is a clear example of the type of threats that a terrorist
group can pose to international peace and security.
There are also other aspects of conflicts. In Africa,
drought has disrupted traditional ways of life and has
led to several severe conflicts as a result of the adverse
impacts of climate change.

Sometimes indicators may be less clear-cut, but
nonetheless very salient. In that context, Egypt believes
that the early detection of signs warning of potential
conflicts, such as the marginalization of some ethnic
groups, tribal-based clashes and the erosion or absence
of State institutions, should be the basis for the effective
containment of such conflicts at their early stages. We
have seen that in the Central African Republic and
Somalia, to name just two places.

While all those factors require a serious effort on
the part of the United Nations and the Security Council
in order to forestall armed conflicts, it is also important
not to lose sight of the key components and cardinal
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. With
the exception of matters pertinent to the preservation
of international peace and security, the Charter clearly
prohibits intervention in matters that are essentially
within the domestic jurisdiction of States. We recall
that, when that principle has been violated, conflicts
have ensued, and some continue unabated until today.
Therefore, the consent of the States that might be
subject to conflict-prevention measures should always
be sought and secured before undertaking due action.
