Mr. Rogachev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I wish to join others in thanking Mr. Luis
Moreno-Ocampo, Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), for his briefing and for his six-
monthly report on the work done by his Office in
investigating the situation in Darfur.

The Russian delegation commends the efforts of
the Prosecutor's Office to resolve the very difficult
issue of bringing to justice those accused of
committing crimes in Darfur. However, it would
probably be a mistake to limit the work of the ICC in
the Sudan to combating impunity. We regard that work
in broader terms, as part of the overall efforts to
resolve the situation in the region.

It is with great regret that we have learned that
cooperation between the ICC and the Government of
the Sudan is now in a state of near collapse. Clearly,
the current atmosphere of mistrust between the Sudan
and the ICC is not helping the investigation. We need
to step up our efforts to promote a constructive
dialogue between the parties. We call on the Sudanese
authorities to take the necessary measures in that
regard, including within the framework of existing
legal procedures and mechanisms.

An important aspect of creating an atmosphere of
trust would be for the investigation to focus on crimes
committed by rebels. Efforts by the Prosecutor to that
end would assist the peace process and encourage all
parties to the conflict to seek dialogue and a cessation
of violence. Another important aspect would be full
involvement by the Sudanese legal system in
investigating the crimes committed. Further promotion
of dialogue between the ICC and the African Union
could also facilitate the situation.

Monitoring the humanitarian situation in Darfur
is an important part of the work of the Prosecutor's
Office. We are grateful to the Prosecutor for the

information that he has given us. Although this subject
is addressed in other reports and discussed separately
in the Security Council, it would be desirable, in terms
of the implementation of resolution 1593 (2005), to
devote attention to situations that obviously involve
crimes: for example, attacks against civilians and
peacekeeping convoys. We believe it is regrettable that
the investigation has not yet managed to fully address
the attack on peacekeepers in Haskanita.

The report presented in the briefing describes a
shift to a new, politically sensitive phase in the
investigation in Darfur. At this juncture, we must act
with extreme caution to promote the Hybrid Operation
in the region, fully mindful of the consequences that
any actions regarding the situation in the region could
have for hundreds of thousands of people.

