Mr. Tiirk (Slovenia): The Security Council is opening
a new and potentially important chapter in its effort to
maintain peace and security in the Balkans. The situation in
Kosovo in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia has the
potential for serious destabilization in the region. On the
other hand, if managed towards a genuine political solution
it could represent an important building block in the
structure of security and political stability in the Balkans.
Today both options are open, and the future depends not
only on the action of those directly involved but also on the
international community as a whole, including the Security
Council. The accuracy of political analysis and assessment
and the correct choice of the first steps are of critical
importance.

There are, in our opinion, three essential political
lessons, based upon recent experience and common sense,
which need to be borne in mind while approaching the
issue of Kosovo.

First, there is no reason to expect quick fixes. The
situation is difficult and the capacities for a quick political
settlement limited. Kosovo is one of those places where
history has cast some of its longest and darkest shadows.
Too much violence and too little readiness for genuine
compromise have characterized the situation for years.

However, it would be wrong to conclude that violence
will be inevitable in the future. Much will depend on the
ability of the international actors to guide future
developments towards genuine political solutions. These
solutions will have to include arrangements that will satisfy
the needs of both the Albanian majority population and the
Serb population in Kosovo. While the path to success could
be long and exhausting, it is important that the right steps
be taken from the beginning.

Secondly, the principles upon which the solutions are
sought should be sufficiently broad and sufficiently
fundamental. It is essential that the political process be
started on the basis of broad and fundamental principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and the Helsinki
Final Act of 1975. These principles include everything
that is essential. Moreover, they are not constrained by
the specificities that are meant for other types of
situations and that characterize some of the more recent
international instruments.

Let me give an example. A range of recent
instruments on the rights of persons belonging to various
kinds of minorities does not seem particularly useful in
the process of searching for a potential political solution
for Kosovo, except, of course, to the extent that the
parties directly involved recognize them as useful. Let us
not forget that not long ago Kosovo enjoyed a degree of
autonomy that far exceeded the limits set out in some
recent instruments on the rights of minorities - that is,
instruments that were developed for situations different
from and easier than that of Kosovo.

Thirdly, it is essential to ensure that intellectual and
moral accuracy prevail in the international efforts to help
resolve the situation. It is extremely important that the
problems at hand are defined accurately and honestly. The
degree to which the issues are used for other political
reasons besides the search for solutions needs to be
conscientiously reduced to the minimum.

In the past, the unilateral dismantling of Kosovo's
autonomy represented one of the major sources of
political deterioration and instability in the region. At
present, the use of force against the Albanians of Kosovo
represents the most important source of instability and a
threat to international peace and security. Consequently,
efforts must be directed towards the elimination of that
threat. The attempts to obscure that threat by various
techniques of what commentators call "an even
distribution of guilt" - techniques that were amply on
display in international discussions on some other
situations in the recent past - would again bring only
harm and suffering and would delay the solutions. The
techniques of "an even distribution of guilt" say little
about the actual facts of the situation concerned and speak
volumes about the lack of agreement at the level of the
international community. What is needed is the clear

 

identification of facts and a responsible judgement
regarding their consequences.

In this context, I wish to refer to a specific question
that requires attention at this stage, namely, the issue of
terrorism and the danger of political misuse of the word
"terrorism". There is a clear need to avoid the trap set by
those who use the label of terrorism for reasons of political
convenience and without proper factual foundation.

It is clear that violent acts, such as the taking of
hostages, attacks against the safety of civilian air traffic,
terrorist bombings and other attacks against civilian targets
are properly defined as terrorism. And it is clear that
terrorism has to be condemned and combated.

On the other hand, however, there are forms of
struggle that, albeit undesirable, are not terrorism and ought
not to be labelled as such. This is particularly relevant to
the situation in Kosovo, where the characteristics of an
armed conflict have, unfortunately, already assumed serious
proportions.

Permit me now to make a few observations on the text
of the draft resolution submitted to the Security Council for
action today.

The situation in Kosovo has been giving rise to
legitimate international concern for quite some time now.
Thus, it can no longer be described as an internal affair.
Serious violations of human rights have been reported for
years, and the use of force in recent weeks has triggered a
wave of expressions of concern from the neighbouring
States and the international community at large.

Slovenia shares the concern expressed at the meetings
of the Contact Group in London on 9 March 1998 and in
Bonn on 25 March 1998. Moreover, we generally agree
with the decisions taken at those meetings, including the
decisions regarding action by the Security Council. Such
action is necessary since the situation in Kosovo has
already developed into a threat to international peace and
security in the region. This is the reason for action based on
Chapter VII of the Charter, as envisaged in the draft
resolution.

Slovenia supports the draft resolution as proposed by
the sponsors and will vote in favour of it. The draft
resolution contains important elements, including the
prevention of the flow of arms to the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia. The draft resolution represents an additional
piece in the mosaic of international pressure on the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia to start immediately and without
conditions serious negotiations on the final status of
Kosovo. The draft resolution should demonstrate the
determination of the international community that this is
the time to act and to prevent a massive humanitarian
tragedy and the outbreak of war.

The draft resolution condemns the recent Violence in
Kosovo, which resulted in numerous fatalities among
innocent civilians.

The draft resolution calls upon both sides - namely,
the authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and
the leadership of the Kosovar Albanians to enter without
preconditions into a meaningful dialogue on an enhanced
status for Kosovo, which would include a substantially
greater degree of autonomy and meaningful self-
administration.

The draft resolution imposes an embargo on the sale
and supply to the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia -
including, but not only, Kosovo - of arms and related
materiel of all types. It provides clear conditions for the
lifting of the embargo, as well as additional measures in
case of failure to make constructive progress towards a
peaceful resolution.
The draft resolution also notes that possible concrete
progress to resolve the crisis in Kosovo could improve the
prospects for participation of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia in international institutions. It goes without
saying that the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia could
participate in the work of those institutions only in
accordance with the rules and decisions of those
institutions, including the ones applicable to new
members. It should be recalled that the current non-
participation of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in
international institutions is largely a consequence of its
unwillingness to apply for membership.

A solution to the Kosovo crisis can be found only by
the parties themselves - but not by themselves alone.
The animosities between them and tensions in the broader
region are already too high. The international community
should help the parties by applying pressure and by
providing mediation during the forthcoming negotiations.
The efforts of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the Personal
Representative of the Chairrnan-in-Office are supported
also by the Security Council in this draft resolution.

 

The success of the draft resolution submitted for
action today should be assessed on how it will, together
with other measures and actions by other international and
regional institutions, succeed in leading to serious progress
in negotiations on the final status of Kosovo; deterring the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia from using force again in
Kosovo and encouraging it, rather, to make use of peaceful
means to solve the problems; and giving the Albanians
much-needed confidence in the efforts of the international
community.

The present draft resolution can be a step in the right
direction. The Security Council should very soon be ready
to evaluate its real effects and those of the specific
measures envisaged in it. It is known from recent
experience that the political message of an arms embargo
may not be properly understood and that the application of
the embargo may leave much to be desired. Therefore, the
Security Council should remain actively seized of the
matter in an effort to help resolve the situation and to
maintain peace and security in the region.

