Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Mr.
President, allow me at the outset to extend our thanks
to you for organizing this meeting and for giving States
that are not members of the Security Council the
opportunity to express their views on the situation in
Somalia and on the collective role that we must play in
order to assist this friendly Arab African country to
regain its natural place in the fold of the international
community. Permit me also to express our appreciation
to the Secretary-General for the important report that
we are deliberating today. Our appreciation also goes to
his Representative in Somalia, Mr. David Stephen, for
his exemplary efforts in support of the national
reconciliation process there and for his valuable
briefing to the Council this morning.

Almost six and a half years have passed since the
departure from Somalia of the United Nations
peacekeeping troops serving in the United Nations
Operation in Somalia II (UNOSOM. II). Unfortunately,
since then the international community has remained
idle and excessively hesitant in addressing the situation
in that country, in shouldering its collective
responsibility to bring about lasting peace in Somalia,
in preserving the country's sovereignty and territorial
integrity and in putting an end to the crisis raging there
for over 10 years.

We understand the specific circumstances of the
problematic situation in Somalia, which would
discourage the Council from displaying the political
will to support the country, as provided for under the
Charter. We also find, however, that the time has come
for us to take courage from the numerous positive
developments in Somalia following the peace process,
and since the Transitional National Government
(TNG), led by President Abdikassim Salad Hassan, was
established. We have to build upon the momentum
generated by the Arta Conference and its results.

In addressing the proposals made by the
Secretary-General in his report, I wish to make some
specific comments that we think we should highlight.

First, before addressing the specific steps that the
international community should take towards Somalia,
we must remind the Security Council of what it has
previously pledged in such circumstances.

In the declaration it adopted at the Summit
meeting in September of last year, the Council
reaffirmed its determination to give equal priority to
the maintenance of international peace and security in
every region of the world, while paying special
attention to the promotion of durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa, in view of the
special needs of the continent and the specific
characteristics of the conflicts raging on its territories.
In its presidential statement on peace-building, adopted
last February, the Council also reiterated that efforts to
ensure lasting solutions to conflicts and to maintain the
momentum for peace in any given country or region
require increased solidarity, sustained political will and
timely and adequate resources on the part of the
international community.

Secondly, while we support all that the Council
has pledged to undertake in this regard and, in fact,
welcome the efforts it undertakes in relevant fields, we
find that the Council has completely failed to
implement these pledges in the case of Somalia.
Somalia did not receive the same priority that the
Council has given to other conflicts within or outside
Africa. The Council did not give special attention to
the specific peculiarities characterizing the Somali
conflict. The international community did not display
the increased solidarity or necessary political will to
maintain the momentum towards peace in Somalia and
the attainment of a lasting settlement to the conflict
there.

Thirdly, all these observations lead us to renew
our appeal to the Security Council to assume its
responsibilities under the Charter and to undertake a
more positive and effective role in resolving the
conflict in Somalia, and not to merely rely on the role
played by neighbouring and interested States or on the
efforts that the relevant regional organizations are keen
to undertake. The Council must throw its weight
behind the Transitional National Government and
compel the rest of the Somali factions that remain
outside the Arta process, including the members of the
so-called Somalia Reconciliation and Restoration
Council, to join the national reconciliation efforts
currently under way and cooperate with President
Hassan in his efforts to rebuild and rehabilitate the
governmental institutions destroyed by the civil war.
President Hassan should be helped in establishing a
credible police force and in disarming and
demobilizing the militias operating in the capital,
Mogadishu. From this standpoint, Egypt welcomes the
statement in the Secretary-General's report that the
completion of the Arta process remains the most viable
option and expresses its hope that this conviction will
serve as the point of departure for the efforts that the
United Nations must undertake from this time onwards
to assist and support the Transitional National
Government.

Fourthly, at the same time, the Council cannot
ignore the fact that there is an arms embargo imposed
on Somalia, under resolution 733 (1992), which has not
been respected for many years and whose enforcement
the Council has not taken any concrete measures to
ensure. No lasting peace can be attained in Somalia
when any of the factions opposed to peace can obtain
arms and ammunition, which allow them to sabotage
the current reconciliation efforts and resist the popular
yearning for peace and security. We have seen that the
Security Council is indeed capable of enforcing the
sanctions regimes it has imposed in different areas if it
has the necessary political determination and
willingness to do so. This was the case in Sierra Leone,
when the Council established a Panel of Experts to
investigate the extent of the implementation of the
sanctions imposed on the Revolutionary United Front;
in Angola, with the establishment of the Monitoring
Mechanism for the sanctions imposed on UNITA; and
in Afghanistan, with the creation of a specific
mechanism to monitor the implementation of the
measures imposed against the Taliban. We therefore
see no justification for the Council to stand back, evade
its responsibilities and not take the appropriate
measures to ensure the implementation of the embargo
imposed on Somalia and the enforcement of the
relevant resolutions that the Council itself has adopted.

Fifthly, the delegation of Egypt takes note of
what was mentioned in the Secretary-General's report
on the establishment of a post-conflict peace-building
mission in Somalia. While we appreciate the reasons
and justifications that led the Secretary-General not to
recommend the deployment of such a mission at this
stage, we would also like to reiterate that the United
Nations must be ready to confront the challenges and
dangers that it may face in Somalia, just as it does in
other regions or States where United Nations personnel
are present. We cannot wait until perfect security
conditions prevail before deploying the mission,
especially since such a logic will only lead us into a
vicious cycle in which any real hopes of providing
security and peace to the Somali people will
evaporate - a people who have known only war and
poverty for the last decade.
Finally, on the other hand, Egypt welcomes the
proposal put forward by the Secretary-General to
establish a Committee of Friends for Somalia to
explore ways and means of drawing attention to
Somalia's needs in the area of national reconciliation
and to mobilize the required funds for the rehabilitation
and development process. We therefore look forward to
the consultations the Secretary-General intends to hold
to implement this initiative. There is no doubt that such
a mechanism will enhance coordination among the
external States and organizations that have a role in the
reconciliation process and have influence over the
Somali parties. Egypt, for its part, will be fully ready to
participate in this mechanism, not only because of the
historical relations and strategic interests that bind it
with Somalia but also because of the efforts it is keen
to undertake at the national level and within the League
of Arab States, the Organization of African Unity and
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
Partners Forum.

