Mr. Toure (Mali) (spoke in French): Like
previous speakers, I would like to thank the Secretary-
General for his report of 2 October 2001 on the
activities of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). I also wish to thank Mr.
Hans Haekkerup, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and head of UNMIK, for his very
detailed briefing on that report.

Despite the difficulties inherent in any human
activity, we note that the information provided this
morning by Mr. Haekkerup on the work of UNMIK is
good and encouraging. UNMIK activities during this
reporting period are another decisive step in the
implementation of resolution 1244 (1999). We
welcome this outstanding progress and strongly support
the Special Representative's ongoing efforts to
establish democratic, multi-ethnic institutions in
Kosovo.

The report of the Secretary-General is very
explicit about the preparation for the 17 November
elections - the establishment of the Constitutional
Framework for Provisional Self-Government and the
forming of the public administrative capacities that are
necessary before handing power over to the people of
Kosovo. In view of this I wish to make the following
comments.

With regard to the lead-up to the 17 November
elections for the Kosovo Assembly, my delegation
welcomes the good preparations for this and the
registration of civil status documents. We consider that
the establishment of inclusive, reliable electoral rolls is
crucial for honest, transparent elections. We urge all
those on the electoral rolls to participate en masse on
17 November. Each elector must know that his vote
counts and that he can change the course of history in
Kosovo by voting for leaders who really want to build
a multi-ethnic, tolerant society in Kosovo. In order to
do that, everything should be done so that the elections
take place in secure conditions.

My delegation welcomes the inclusion of
minority communities, particularly Kosovo Serbs, on
the lists. Their participation in the elections and in the
institutions of the autonomous government to be
established is a major challenge that UNMIK, KFOR
and the entire international community must overcome.
We welcome the public information programmes
directed towards the Serbian minorities to try to
encourage the formation of Kosovo Serb parties and to
encourage their electors to put their names on the
electoral rolls and certainly to participate in the
elections. The cooperation by the authorities of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia is something to be
welcomed. We support steps taken by UNMIK to
encourage participation by the Serb minority in the
election, as set out in paragraphs 35 through 37 of this
report.

Furthermore, my delegation welcomes the
launching of the electoral campaign on 2 October
throughout Kosovo. We call on all citizens to
participate in a free, fair campaign and to abandon any
acts of violence. We wish to point out that UNMIK and
KFOR are doing everything they can to ensure security
during the elections.

With regard to cooperation between UNMIK and
KFOR and the Government of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, we believe that the constructive dialogue
between the parties should continue and be
strengthened.

Turning to the painful questions of missing
persons, which remains one of the chief obstacles to
reconciliation, my delegation welcomes progress made
in this regard with the blessing of the Belgrade
authorities. We support UNMIK and the parties
concerned as they seek to implement decisions taken
on this fundamental issue. We have no doubt that
constructive, open dialogue among the parties involved
will make it possible to overcome the last obstacles.

In conclusion, my delegation pays tribute to Hans
Haekkerup for his action at the head of UNMIK and to
the entire staff, local and international, of UNMIK and
KFOR for their resolve to implement resolution 1244
(1999). The international community must increase its
support to UNMIK in this crucial stage of its
commitment to Kosovo in order to make possible the
realization of its peace, security and development
objectives, as well as the building of a multi-ethnic
society.

