President Kerekou (spoke in French): We are
grateful to you, Madam, for having taken the
exceptional opportunity of the commemoration of the
sixtieth anniversary of the United Nations to convene
the Security Council to discuss essential matters
arising from its statutory powers and functions.

Thanks to the highly commendable initiatives of
the Secretary-General, we have a clear picture of the
threats and challenges that the Council faces at this
decisive juncture in the life of the Organization. The
two resolutions that we have just adopted duly reflect
our perception of the current threats to international
peace and security. Among those threats, terrorism and
armed conflict have attained a level of destructiveness
that is fraught with consequences. It is therefore up to
the Security Council to identify specific and
appropriate measures, both at the State level and within
the United Nations and the international community as
a whole, to enhance prevention.

The terrible attacks of 11 September 2001, the
fourth anniversary of which we recently
commemorated, proved that the inconceivable is now
possible. We welcome the significant progress made by
the United Nations in fostering and providing strategic
guidance for multilateral cooperation in combating
terrorism, in scrupulous respect for the sovereignty of
States, international law, and the protection of human
rights and humanitarian law.

The activities of the Council's committees have
allowed us to devise an effective monitoring apparatus
that will enhance the coordination, coherence and
efficiency of activities already under way.

As regards the prevention of armed conflict,
Council action has been less evident and less visible
for reasons that are associated with a certain inertia
that is both historical and conceptual in nature. It is
important that the Council endow itself with the
necessary means to enhance its capacity to act to
prevent and eradicate crises in concert with regional
and subregional organizations.

The major concern in this area should be to
shorten the time frame for coordinated intervention by
the international community so as to ensure better
protection for populations. The Council should
organize itself so as to revitalize the political field of
action, mobilizing other parts of the international
community with a View to helping to restore normality
and working together with local actors, by means of
operational, structural and systemic measures at the
appropriate level. We are thinking here of the setting
up, jointly with regional organizations, as appropriate,
of high-level political missions that would make it
possible for the Council to bring its full weight to bear
on the course of events and to enhance the value of
regional initiatives.

We need not wait for the completion of the
United Nations reform effort, which seems to be
marking time. Beginning right now, the arrangements
for preventive diplomacy promoted by the Secretary-
General should be strengthened by the establishment of
new capacities in various regions of the world. In due
course, it will be appropriate for the Security Council
to put in place a process for regular global risk
assessment with a view to evaluating existing threats.

Africa deserves particular attention, given the
internal pressures that African countries face as a result
of the compound effect of endemic poverty and the
globalization of the economy. Rapid response systems
need to be strengthened so as to make it possible to
identify and interpret correctly the earliest warning
signs for the effective prevention of crises and conflicts
and to promote stability through the development of
integrated strategies.

The Security Council should, whenever
necessary, set forth recommendations for coordinated
political action by the competent organs of the United
Nations and the international community. We believe
that in that way the Council will truly be able to move
from a culture of reaction to a realistic approach of
strategic watchfulness, which will make it possible to
monitor risks and better manage crises and, as a result,
to prevent acts and events that might result in the
breakdown of international peace and security.

