Ms. Kuburovic' (Serbia): I thank the Security
Council for this opportunity to address it today on
behalf of the Republic of Serbia.

Serbia fulfils all its obligations regarding
cooperation with the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. After the closing
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), only one first-instance case and
two appeal cases remain before the Mechanism.

My country has harmonized its legislation with
the relevant standards and facilitated cooperation with
the Mechanism with regard to all acts recognized by
the Security Council in the ICTY statute as serious
international crimes. By doing so Serbia has proved that
it is committed to fighting impunity. That commitment
is also reflected also in the number and rank of accused
persons processed by the Tribunal.

Serbia continues to facilitate the Mechanism's
Office of the Prosecutor's free access to all evidence,
documents, archives and witnesses; evidently, the
completion of the work of the Tribunal has had no
impact on cooperation with the Mechanism. The
cooperation takes place unencumbered. All requests
have been addressed, including those of the Office of
the Prosecutor, the Chambers and the Registry. And
the documents from the archives of State organs are
forwarded expeditiously.

The ongoing cooperation is centred on the case
Prosecutor v. Petar Jojic and Vjerica Radeta. On
two occasions, the Office of the Prosecutor requested
1,677 documents comprising several thousand pages.
In responding to the requests and proceeding from the
recommendations of the competent institutions, Serbia
asked for the application of Trial Chamber protective
measures. Requests to testify by two persons, who
are members of Serbia's security services, have also
been made and approval has been granted. They, too,
have been relieved of their obligations with respect to
State, military and/or official secrets. Trial Chamber
protective measures have been requested in that case
as well.

Over more than 20 years, Serbia has handed
over to the Tribunal's Office of the Prosecutor, its
Chambers and defence teams hundreds of thousands
of documents, many of which, however, have not been
used in the proceedings. Notwithstanding the promise
that the unused documents that do not belong to the
court records will be returned to Serbia, that has not
happened yet. In that context, let me point out that
the general question of the Tribunal's archives has
not been resolved; its fate and use are related to the
establishment of information centres in the States that
emerged from the former Yugoslavia. During the latest
visit of the Tribunal's President Agius to Belgrade,
Serbia indicated its readiness to establish such a centre
in Belgrade and designated a representative to a joint
working group that would also include representatives
of the Tribunal. Yet, despite two overtures, no response
has been received in that regard to date.

In its continuous efforts to improve its judicial
system, Serbia has followed the guidelines defined,
among others, by its national strategy for the prosecution
of war crimes. The strategy was adopted by the
Government of the Republic of Serbia on 20 February
2016 in full support of all judicial and executive bodies
included in investigations, as well as the organizations
monitoring and reporting on those proceedings as
independent observers.

On 26 August 2017, the Government established
a body to monitor the implementation of the strategy.
It consists of representatives from all the relevant
institutions, including the War Crimes Prosecutor,
and is chaired by the Minister of Justice. Two reports
had been adopted by 31 March, while a third is being
prepared for adoption in July. The reports are published
in both Serbian and English on the website of the
Ministry of Justice.

The Mechanism's Office of the Prosecutor has
extended full support to Serbia's draft prosecutorial
strategy for the investigation and prosecution of war
crimes for the period 2018-2023. In supporting the draft
strategy, the Prosecutor stated that the Office reiterates
its full commitment to supporting Serbia's Prosecutor's
Office in carrying out its important mandate to fight

impunity for war crimes in Serbia. Serbia's Prosecutor's
Office for War Crimes adopted the strategy on 4 April.
In the context of the implementation of the national
and prosecution strategies, as well as of the capacity
of the Prosecutor's Office for War Crimes of Serbia, it
is important to point out that a Deputy Prosecutor was
appointed recently and that the election of two other
deputies is expected to take place within a month. In
addition, the Government allocated funds to capacity
improvements last May, while the Ministry of Justice
increased the number of Prosecutor's assistants by four
and approved the appointment of three more deputies.

In addition, the Judicial Academy is preparing a
curriculum to train prosecutors and judges to update
their knowledge of techniques for investigating and
trying war crimes and for protecting victims and
witnesses. The training will take place in cooperation
with the Mechanism's Office of the Prosecutor.

In his report (S/2018/347, annex), the Mechanism's
Prosecutor welcomes the number of cases processed in
Croatia, the majority ofwhich were tried in absentia. Let
me recall that Serbia's Office of the Prosecutor for War
Crimes has suspended 30 cases, involving more than
70 indicted persons, because their whereabouts were
unknown. Are we to understand that Serbia should have
recourse to instituting trials in absentia in order to make
the number of cases tried and resolved satisfactory?

The Prosecutor goes on to say in his report that
Serbia has not yet taken meaningful steps against high-
level suspectsln that regard, it should be borne in mind
that many of them were sentenced before the Tribunal
and that its practice related to the acquittal of the
indictees impacts the prosecution criteria and standards
of the Serbian side. Furthermore, Serbia cannot process
the war crimes committed against the Serbs in Kosovo
and Metohija because of Pristina's continued refusal to
cooperate with Belgrade and respond to the requests
of the Office of the Prosecutor for War Crimes, as also
reflected in the report.

After the Mechanism took over from the Tribunal
the case Prosecutor v. Petar Jojic' and Vjerica Radeta,
Single Judge Aydin Sefa Akay requested Serbia to
confirm that it could process that case. Proceeding
from the opinion of the competent court and the Office
of the Prosecutor, and with a commitment to providing
all procedural guarantees for a fair trial, Serbia in fact
confirmed its ability and readiness to take over the case.
The Amicus Curiae Prosecutor requested to be
actively included in the proceeding and the Single Judge
approved her request; she submitted her protestations
to the Single Judge of the takeover of the case by
Serbia. The Judge forwarded the submissions in the
form of a court order to Serbia requesting it to state its
position thereon within a certain period. The Ministry
of Justice replied to the Judge on three occasions, in
April and May.

The purpose of including the Amicus Curiae
Prosecutor in that case is not clear, unless it is intended
to delay the proceedings. We are concerned about the
Amicus Curiae Prosecutor's comments in that regard.
She questions the competence of Serbian judicial
institutions and the parliamentary immunity of Jojie
and Radeta and analyses public opinion in Serbia.
That exercise is irrelevant to the conduct of judicial
proceedings before independent courts.

It is in Serbia's interests to process that case. I
confirm once again Serbia's readiness to take it over.

We expect the Mechanism to avoid the practice of
the Tribunal of procrastinating on some cases, and to
complete the remaining cases within a reasonable time.

Serbia continues to be committed to processing war
crimes irrespective of the nationality of the perpetrators
of grievous crimes against humanity.

Successful proceedings also depend upon regional
cooperation, most evident at the moment with Bosnia
and Herzegovina. Serbia's judicial institutions have
recognized judgements handed down in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and have taken over the prosecution of
certain cases in which all process requirements had
been complied with. In 2017 and 2018, judgements
of Bosnia and Herzegovina courts were recognized
in seven cases, with Serbian courts sentencing the
defendants to 104 years in prison on the basis of those
judgements. All those convicted are Serbs. However,
one case, which is still pending, should not be used to
dispute the cooperation with Bosnia and Herzegovina,
as is done in the report.

In the context of cooperation with Croatia, a
meeting of the Ministers of Justice in Belgrade last
March resulted in the establishment oftwo commissions
charged, respectively, with the task of exchanging
lists of persons accused or sentenced for war crimes
and with preparing a bilateral treaty to address war
crimes processing. The first commission convened on
26 April to exchange lists and agree on the modalities
for future cooperation. It is expected that the other
commission will commence it swork next month, which
is of paramount importance for the two countries to
address outstanding bilateral issues. Serbia will do its
utmost to achieve visible progress in resolving the issue
of missing persons in Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
and Kosovo and Metohija, and bring closure to their
families. The joint commissions of Serbia, Croatia and
Bosnia and Herzegovina are charged with that task.

As I said in my previous statement to the Security
Council (see S/PV.8120), my country's initiative
related to the enforcement of sentences in persons'
countries of origin will help to achieve the purpose of
punishment and resocialization, which the enforcement
of the sentences in faraway countries fails to do.
Convicted persons do not understand the language of
distant countries and cannot meet their families and
other relatives. More often than not, they are kept
in inadequate conditions and receive substandard
health care, which was brought out in the letters of
Judge Meron, the Mechanism's President, to Estonian
authorities, the most recent of which was sent at the
beginning ofMay. Serbia is ready to provide guarantees
that all security measures will be taken in the event that
sentences are served in the country of origin. It also
accepts international monitoring.

We are concerned about the health of some accused
and convicted persons. Despite Serbia's guarantees,
the Mechanism rejected some requests to temporarily
release certain persons for treatment. After months of
delay, prison doctors eventually prescribed therapy to a
convicted person identical to that proposed by Serbian
doctors long before. I wish to draw the attention of the
Council to inadequate medical care in certain cases. I
am doing so on this occasion since I believe that the
provision of adequate health care must not be contingent
on goodwill or subject to manipulation; it is, in short, a
basic human right.

In conclusion, I would like to point out that Serbia
has no outstanding issues with the Mechanism and
that its cooperation with it will continue to take place
unhindered. We expect this fact to be reflected in
future reports.

