Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French):
Bulgaria would like to join you, Mr. President, in
thanking Ambassador Brahimi and his team for the
excellent work they are doing in Afghanistan on behalf
of the United Nations and the international community.

The Loya Jirga was a great success and attests to
the resolve of the Afghan people to take control of their
country once again. That success was due also to
Ambassador Brahimi's ability and skills, and we would
like warmly to thank him.

Bulgaria, a country associated with the European
Union, fully aligns itself with the statement that will be
made shortly by the Ambassador of Denmark on behalf
of the European Union.
Allow me to make a few observations in my
national capacity.

As I said earlier, the key event in Afghanistan
that made us optimistic about the future of that long-
suffering country was the success of the Loya Jirga, a
traditional Afghan structure and an expression of the
will of the Afghan people to live in peace and harmony.
The impressive success of the Loya Jirga, despite
various attempts at intimidation and even direct attacks
on the political process, must be commended.

There was, indeed, a genuine political debate
among the Afghans themselves during the Loya Jirga.
The election of Hamid Karzai to head the Transitional
Administration was a very positive development.
President Karzai is certainly the right person for the job
in Afghanistan at this time, and we wish him every
success in his work of reconstructing the country.

The role of the International Security Assistance
Force (ISAF) in ensuring security in Kabul can hardly
be overemphasized. We wish to pay tribute to the
United Kingdom's orderly handover to Turkey as lead
country. We believe that General Zorlu's order to
establish control over the region to the north of Kabul
is positive and will contribute to enhancing security in
the capital of Afghanistan and in particular the security
of the international airport.

As Ambassador Brahimi has said, now is the time
for building Afghan institutions. This is very important
work. The international community should assist in the
creation of a genuine national army and a genuine
national police - security forces worthy of the name.
Bulgaria is participating in this international effort, and
I should like to inform the Council that yesterday the
Bulgarian Government took a decision to that effect,
namely to provide military equipment to the re-
emerging Afghan army. My country will continue its
assistance in future.

Let me note in passing that we support the
approach taken by the United Nations to the Afghan
security forces, that is, that they should be
representative, multi-ethnic, balanced, and that these
criteria should apply also to the major institutions of
Afghanistan.

Bulgaria unreservedly condemns the terrorist act
that led to the death of Vice-President Haji Abdul
Qadir. This assassination illustrates just how fragile the
political process in Afghanistan is. It also shows that
the international community must remain engaged to
lend assistance to that process.
We would once again like to draw the Council's
attention to the importance of combating drug
production. My country is on the trafficking route for
drugs, which are coming mostly from Afghanistan. We
have seen some initial success in this area, at which we
are pleased.

In conclusion, I would like to recall that Bulgaria
has decided to extend the mandate of its contingent in
the International Security Assistance Force for six
months beginning on 20 June. Two months ago,
Bulgaria re-established a permanent diplomatic
presence in Kabul. Bulgaria is also making bilateral
efforts to provide further assistance to our Afghan
friends, particularly in the area of energy. We are
establishing significant cooperation in that area, and a
delegation of Bulgarian experts is currently in Kabul to
study plans in that regard.

