Mr. Quinlan (Australia): Ithank you, Mr. President,
for convening this debate and I thank Special
Coordinator Robert Serry for his report.

I would first like to join others in expressing
Australia's strong condemnation of the appalling
bombing in Bulgaria on 18 July. As we know,
such terrorist attacks are not acceptable under any
circumstances, and we express our condolences to the
people of Israel and Bulgaria.

Like many countries, Australia is greatly concerned
about the current standstill in the Middle East peace
process. The world has repeatedly called for a two-State
solution, which allows for a secure Israel and a viable
and independent Palestinian State living side by side.
But the mere repetition of that essential goal, which
remains the only credible solution to the conflict, will
not achieve results on the ground.

The year 2012 has seen some modest progress
towards negotiations, led first by Jordan's King
Al Hussein and Foreign Minister Judeh, and then
by the parties themselves, through an exchange of
letters between President Abbas and Prime Minister
Netanyahu. However, those encouraging signs have
not been followed by what is the only path to realizing
a just solution to the conflict, namely, an immediate
resumption of direct negotiations on the basis of the
1967 boundaries, with agreed land swaps.

To achieve that, both sides must refrain from
actions that are damaging to the peace process. In
particular - and as nearly all who participate in
these debates, including Australia, have consistently
said - the expansion of Israeli settlements must end.
Australia is also especially concerned that all violence
against civilians, including rocket attacks from Gaza
that target Israeli civilians, must cease immediately.

We must also continue to support Palestinian
efforts to build their institutions and to enhance their
governance capacity. The progress made in that area
must not be wound back. To that end, my own country
signed a five-year multi- million-dollar partnership
agreement with the Palestinian Authority as a means of
promoting a degree of certainty to Palestinian finances.
In May, we signed an Australian $90-million multi-year
partnership with the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency (UNRWA). UNRWA's focus on education
and health-care programmes, in particular, is a vital
investment in the human capital essential to building a
successful Palestinian State. The final realization ofthe
two-State solution is in the long-term interest of both
parties in that it enables the Palestinians to achieve their
inalienable right to self-determination and provides for
Israel's long-term security.

The terrible and worsening situation in Syria is,
obviously, of grave concern to us all. The violence has
moved to a new level of brutality. It is Syrian civilians,
including women and children, who have borne the
brunt of that Violence and who must remain at the
forefront of our collective efforts to find a peaceful
solution.

Like others, Australia was greatly disappointed by
the Council's failure to adopt a Chapter VII resolution,
which would have fulfilled the call of the Joint Special
Envoy of the United Nations and the League of Arab
States to Syria, Mr. Kofi Annan, to ensure that there
were real consequences for non-compliance with
resolutions 2042 (2012) and 2043 (2012). It is incumbent
on all of us not to protect a brutal regime that has lost
all legitimacy. President Al-Assad must reverse course,
must live up to his obligations under Mr. Annan's peace
plan, and must end the violence immediately, including
the use of heavy weapons against civilians.

The humanitarian dimension of the conflict looms
particularly large, including forthehundreds of thousands
who have been displaced. The regional implications
of this conflict are serious, and we acknowledge the
heavy burden borne by Lebanon, Turkey and Jordan
in providing assistance. To help alleviate this burden,
we will continue to provide humanitarian assistance to
agencies and non-governmental organizations.

To conclude, we have seen elsewhere in the
region - including, most recently, in Libya - that
the most effective means for balancing the competing
interests inherent in any society is the establishment of
fair and inclusive democratic processes that enable all
citizens and groups to give voice to their Views and to
select a Government that can represent them. Similarly,
our collective efforts on Syria must be directed towards
an immediate end to violence and the realization of a
political solution that meets the legitimate aspirations
of all of Syria's citizens.

