Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for scheduling the vote on
resolution 2451 (2018) at this time. I also thank my
colleagues, members of the Security Council, for their
collegiality and cooperation, allowing us to adopt a
unanimous resolution - the first resolution on this kind
of subject - a political settlement and humanitarian
issue - in more than two years.

The resolution we have just passed will hopefully
give the maximum possible backing to the outcomes of
the Stockholm meeting and the Stockholm agreement.
Once again, I would like to thank our friends in Sweden
for everything that they have done to help bring that
moment about. We also salute the United Nations for
the work of the Special Envoy, the Secretary-General
and Mark Lowcock, who have been instrumental in
trying to bring about progress, including on the ground.
As we get to the end of 2018 in the Council under your
presidency, Mr. President, it is good that the Council
was able to show unanimity on this very important
issue that has affected so many millions of citizens in
Yemen today.

Resolution 2451 (2018) endorses all the agreements
reached by the parties at Stockholm, which critically
include a ceasefire and a mutual redeployment of forces
from Hudaydah city and port, which came into force
on 18 December. It authorizes the United Nations to
deploy support for implementation of those agreements,
including monitors. As we heard from the Secretary-
General the other day, he is working on an advance
team that will go to Yemen in the next few days.

The resolution also sets out the Council's support
for the remaining urgent steps needed to address the
humanitarian situation. We have heard from Mark
Lowcock and David Beasley in this Chamber that
despite the progress made at Stockholm the situation
remains precarious, and work is urgently needed to
mitigate the risk of famine (see S/PV.8404).

The resolution sets out the Council's clear
expectations with respect to the need for the parties
to comply with international humanitarian law.
The United Kingdom attaches great importance
to international humanitarian law, accountability
and the need to investigate alleged violations of
international humanitarian law and hold those
responsible accountable.

Finally, resolution 2451 (2018) obviously reiterates
our full support for the United Nations Special Envoy
and the political process that he is driving, and it looks
ahead to the next steps in that process. I am sure the
Council will want to join me in looking forward to
further progress in January. The most important matter
now is that we turn to urgent implementation. It is vital
that the parties follow through on their commitments
to pave the way for a formal relaunch of negotiations
and, at the same time, deliver real improvements on
the ground that make a tangible difference to ordinary
Yemenis. We have asked the United Nations to update
the Council on a weekly basis for the foreseeable future,
and I look forward to further action and unity from the
Council on one of the most important dossiers we have.

