Miss Durrant (Jamaica): My delegation thanks the
Secretary-General for his report on the situation in
Tajikistan, and the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Ivo Petrov, for his briefing.

Jamaica applauds the resolution of the conflict and the
establishment of peace in Tajikistan. This is an important
step towards achieving stability in Central Asia. We
commend the United Nations Mission of Observers in
Tajikistan (UNMOT) for the implementation of its mandate,
in accordance with the 1997 Agreement on the
Establishment of Peace and National Accord in Tajikistan.

The Mission has reached a successful conclusion. We
wish to acknowledge the contribution of the Secretary-
General and his Special Representatives, and of those
countries and international organizations which supported
the peace efforts of the United Nations. We also wish to
take this opportunity to pay tribute to those who gave their
lives in the cause of peace.

The commitment of the Tajik people and Government
to the creation of a pluralistic democracy is clear. The
country is now well on the road to peace and national
reconciliation, and the international community must
support the efforts of the Government aimed at economic,
political and military reforms. Existing political institutions
must be strengthened in order to ensure the creation of a
sustainable system of governance in collaboration with the
Tajik people.

We believe that the United Nations must remain
involved in order to cement the gains made in the peace
process, to foster greater democracy in the region and to
ensure that continuing instability does not jeopardize the
peace achieved.

My delegation therefore welcomes the intention of the
Secretary-General to establish a post-conflict peace-building
mission following the withdrawal of UNMOT. While
United Nations programmes and agencies in Tajikistan will
have new priorities, they will have a crucial role to play in
the years ahead. The long-term economic and social
development of Tajikistan must be addressed by
strengthening local institutions and through capacity-
building. Humanitarian activities must continue to be given
prominence. Increased emphasis must now be placed on
ensuring the return of refugees from neighbouring countries
and internally displaced persons to their places of origin, as
well as on the reintegration of ex-combatants. But if United
Nations personnel are to operate effectively, their security
must be assured and not threatened by armed elements
operating outside of the control of the Government.

In conclusion, I wish to express my delegation's
support for the presidential statement initiated by the
Russian Federation.

