Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): The
Algerian delegation is delighted to see a man of your
stature and experience presiding over the Council,
particularly at a time when it is discussing ways and
means of preventing and resolving the conflicts that
continue to beset Africa.

In this connection, my delegation wishes to
express its full gratitude and consideration to
Ambassador Koonjul, Permanent Representative of
Mauritius, for having initiated this debate on African
conflicts and for his enlightened chairmanship of the
working group on this subject.

Before contributing to the important debate begun
this morning, and which, we are convinced, will be
concluded successfully, my delegation wishes to pay a
heartfelt tribute to Ambassador Sergey Lavrov,
Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation,
for the remarkable way he conducted the work of the
Security Council during a month in which international
upheaval required the constant attention ofthe Council.

It is a fact that for a year now Africa has been
showing a more serene face, bloody internal or trans-
border conflicts having become less common or having
diminished considerably in their intensity. It has been a
long time since Africa reproached the Council for not
showing enough determination in resolving African
problems. However, it is important to remain cautious
and to work resolutely to attack the real causes of
conflicts, which steep their roots in the extreme
poverty still being fought in the continent.

The relative abatement of conflicts is
unquestionably the fruit of collective awareness at the
African and international levels of the tragic problems
faced by the continent and the results ofjoint efforts of
the Africans themselves and the international
community for peace and security in the continent, a
condition that is crucial to efforts to curb its economic
problems and to achieve sustainable development.

Since the beginning ofthe past decade, Africa has
been aware of the burden placed by conflicts of
different types and origin on its economic expansion
and the living conditions of its peoples. This early
diagnosis led the Organization of African Unity,
meeting at the summit level in 1993, to establish a
central organ for conflict prevention, management and
resolution, which has made a great contribution to
promoting and spreading the culture of peace that
Africans naturally cherish.

Since then the multitude of efforts on the part of
African leaders and their active commitment to
preventing and settling conflicts has attested in many
cases to the irreversible nature of this awareness. In
parallel, this effort has enjoyed the international
community's support, which has been expressed in two
ways; first, through the active support for efforts aimed
at mediation, conciliation and good offices conducted
by eminent African leaders, illustrated in particular by
the support given by the Organization and member
States to the mediation by my country in seeking to
resolve the conflict between Ethiopia and Eritrea; and
secondly, by the interest and the equal and unequivocal
attention paid to the affairs of the African continent by
the main bodies of the Organization - the General
Assembly, the Security Council, the Secretary-General
and the Economic and Social Council - which have
helped to strengthen the analysis of the causes of
conflicts and the economic backwardness of Africa,
thus giving African leaders decisive encouragement to
put the continent on the sure path of peace, security
and sustainable development, on which they had
embarked with conviction oftheir own initiative.

Since the endorsement by the OAU Summit, held
at Algiers in 1999, of the principle of democratic
change through constitutional means, up to the
adoption by the Lusaka Summit in July 2001 of the
truly African initiative of the New Partnership for
Africa's Development (NEPAD), Africa has been in
full agreement with the international community
regarding measures to be taken at the political and
economic levels.

Africa has adopted an integrated approach, which
establishes the interrelationship between questions of
democratization and political participation, respect for
universal norms on human rights, good management of
public affairs and healthy economic policies on how to
deal with the underlying, structural causes of conflicts
and the obstacles to sustainable development at the
economic, social and human levels.

Now we need to see how the international
community intends to buttress this approach. I am
grateful to members of the Security Council
collectively for having established this ad hoc Working
Group on conflict prevention and resolution in Africa,
about which I would like to make some comments.

Regarding the role of the Economic and Social
Council, it is worth recalling that under the
prerogatives conferred by the Charter, much of its
action on the causes of conflict in Africa fall to the
Economic and Social Council. It is therefore natural
that the Security Council act closely with the Economic
and Social Council, pursuant to Article 65 of the
Charter, to implement central integrated strategies for
conflict prevention or post-conflict peace-building after
conflicts have ended. We welcome the fact that the
President of the Economic and Social Council
participated in the public meeting of the Security
Council on the situation in Africa on 29 January 2002
and that he is taking an active part today in the Council
meeting.

A stronger relationship, including joint meetings,
as has been mentioned before, would allow these two
bodies to better coordinate their actions and to avoid
unnecessary overlap or conflict of competence.

In the matter of prevention and early warning, the
Economic and Social Council has an unequal body of
information regarding the underlying causes of
conflicts in Africa and elsewhere, accumulated through
its funds and programmes, as well as because of its
close involvement in these questions, which make it a
vigilant observer of the structural causes that could
degenerate into violent conflict.

With regard to NEPAD, the ad hoc Working
Group of the Security Council definitely has a role to
play in implementing the goals of the Partnership.

Despite the Security Council's primary role in
aspects of conflict settlement and peacekeeping, it is
called on, through its ad hoc Working Group, to give
valuable assistance to the Economic and Social Council
to contribute to political mobilization at a high political
level at a time when it is preparing to receive a
mandate from Member States to translate the support of
the United Nations into specific projects. This will take
place against the background of a high-level debate on
Africa, to be held by the General Assembly on 16
September 2002, and of the final review of the United
Nations New Agenda for the Development of Africa,
which will take place a few days before that date.

The ad hoc Working Group could become
actively involved, particularly in the United Nations
Development Group and the Office of Executive
Directors in preparing these crucial events to mobilize
enough resources for Africa and help the Security
Council accept the validity of the preventive approach
at this time of scant resources and dwindling official
development assistance. These resources are far below
the resources given to peacekeeping operations, but
they are so necessary for development programmes.

In this context, I wish to point out that the
member countries of the NEPAD Steering Committee
have undertaken to organize a preparatory meeting
leading up to this high-level dialogue in the form of a
seminar, to be held in New York in mid-July 2002,
where the participation and contribution of the ad hoc
Working Group would be highly appropriate.

With regard to peace-building, coordination with
the Economic and Social Council ad hoc Group for
African countries emerging from conflicts is crucial.

At the request of a country or of the countries
concerned, the Economic and Social Council could,
while setting up its ad hoc Group and during the
Group's work, discuss with the Security Council's ad
hoc Working Group the potential usefulness of
extending the mandate of a peacekeeping operation or
of mounting a preventive deployment operation until
causes identified as inflammatory disappear. We
wonder whether the Economic and Social Council
should not invite the Chairman of the ad hoc Working
Group of the Security Council to nominate a
representative to participate in the work oftheir Group.

Concerning cooperation with the OAU and
subregional organizations - Ambassador Kebe spoke
about this very ably - the provisions of Chapter VIII
ofthe Charter and those of paragraphs 16 and 25 of the
OAU Summit Declaration, which in 1993 led to the
establishment of the OAU Mechanism on Conflict
Prevention, Management and Resolution, indicate that
the Central Organ of the OAU Mechanism is a
counterpart to the ad hoc Working Group of the
Security Council on conflict prevention and resolution
for African conflicts. So we welcome the fact that this
Central Organ has undertaken to reform its work in
order to have a better handle on events.

The regular meetings of the Central Organ, which
are annual meetings at the head of State level, every six
months at the ministerial level and monthly at the
ambassadorial level, definitely have a body of
information and facts that the ad hoc Working Group
could use. This, together with the Central Organ's
knowledge of African realities, would make it possible
for the Working Group to do the job for which it was
created, particularly in the early warning area. The ad
hoc Working Group could, likewise, draw on the work
of the subcommittee for peace and security set up by
the New Partnership for Africa's Development
(NEPAD) Steering Committee; the subcommittee
consists of the heads of State of Algeria, Gabon, Mali,
Mauritius and South Africa.

Turning now to the role of the Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General in Africa, we
recall here that preventive diplomacy is particularly
desirable and necessary to ease tensions before they
degenerate into conflict. In order to be effective, it is
important, however, for there to be prior consent and
active cooperation on the part of the parties concerned.
In the case of early warning, the ad hoc Working Group
could take joint preventive action with the Security
Council and the Secretary-General by nominating or
dispatching special representatives responsible for
conducting or coordinating missions of enquiry or fact-
finding missions.

It seems appropriate to me to recall the initiative
that was taken jointly a few years by the Secretaries-
General of the United Nations and the OAU in
appointing a Special Joint Representative for the Great
Lakes region, which make it possible for both
organizations to reach a better understanding of the
situation in that part of Africa.

Finally, on the establishment of groups of friends
for specific conflict situations, this practice may be
useful for gathering information about specific
situations, for coming up with appropriate solutions
where members of the group are from neighbouring
countries or from countries that have special interests
in the State concerned, or for mediation or good offices
missions between the parties to a conflict. It is
important, however, to understand this practice as
being one merely to assist the Security Council in its
quest for a solution; that kind of group cannot take the
place ofthe Council.

These are the comments that I wanted to share
with the Council at this stage. I hope that the Council
and the Working Group will find the comments useful.

