I thank Mark Lowcock for his briefing today. The United Kingdom remains deeply concerned about the potentially catastrophic impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) in Syria. We have heard today that there are 43 confirmed cases, and there are likely already many more that are unknown because of the lack of testing capacity. The 6.2 million internally displaced Syrians face a particularly severe risk. Almost 940,000 of those are living in appalling conditions in the north-west. The United Kingdom is committed to playing its part to tackle the spread and impact of the coronavirus in Syria and other vulnerable countries across the globe. So far we have pledged more than $900 million to the international response to help end the pandemic. Of that funding, $350 million is helping to reduce mass infections in vulnerable countries. Our money will install new hand-washing stations and isolation and treatment centres in refugee camps and increase access to clean water for those living in areas of armed conflict. As the third-largest bilateral humanitarian donor to the Syrian response, with more than $4 billion spent since the conflict began, we are urgently working to ensure that our significant humanitarian programme across Syria, including, of course, in those areas under the regime's control, can most effectively address the direct and indirect consequences of the pandemic. We welcome the recent increase in cross-border aid into north-west Syria and the maintenance of the ceasefire agreed between Russia and Turkey on 5 March. That is helping humanitarian agencies to meet huge needs in Idlib and to focus on the threat of COVID-19. The evidence is clear that the United Nations cross-border mandate must continue past July. The coronavirus knows no borders. It knows no front lines. It is a threat to all in Syria and beyond. Preventing it is a matter of humanity, not politics. We must ensure that no part of Syria is neglected in the effort to prevent, and prepare for, the potential spread of the virus. That is why we are so concerned about north-east Syria. Both the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and the World Health Organization have highlighted a dangerous void. The World Health Organization has confirmed the first death from COVID-19 in that area, and we know from what we have learned everywhere else in the world that community transmission is surely ongoing. Yet there are apparently only 35 intensive care unit beds in the whole of the region. As OCHA told us in the Security Council on 24 April, humanitarian assistance delivered by land or air has reached only 31 per cent of the health facilities previously supplied across the border via Al-Yarubiyah. That means 69 per cent of health facilities are not receiving the supplies that they need. Moreover, the urgency to address the pandemic is not reflected in the pace of approvals for cross-line assistance. As noted in the Secretary-General's report (S/2020/327), the authorities in Damascus continue to take three to four months to respond to medical delivery requests to the north-east. With such a pressing need, we must work together. We must put aside previous political differences. We must enable the United Nations to use all modalities for the specific purpose of preventing a health disaster for as long as the coronavirus poses such a threat. The United Kingdom is proud to stand with many others around the Council table as part of a decisive and coordinated action to tackle the spread and impact of the coronavirus in vulnerable countries across the globe. We must work together to do the same for Syria. We must give the United Nations and its humanitarian partners the best chance of being able to respond to the outbreak in all areas through all necessary modalities. Tackling this global pandemic invokes our common humanity. We should all think carefully about the actions and decisions that we can take.
