Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, I would like
to thank Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for
his briefing and Ms. Tania Hary for her input.

Regrettably, the situation on the ground continues
to deteriorate. Last week we saw another escalation.
Israel conducted an operation in Gaza targeting a
senior leader of the Palestinian Islamic Jihad. In
response, rockets were fired from Gaza on southern
and central Israel. Thankfully, owing to the United
Nations and Egypt's hard work, we were able to prevent
one of the most dangerous escalations in and around
Gaza from degenerating into full-fledged war. Luckily,
the situation was stabilized to safeguard the lives and
security of Palestinian and Israeli civilians. But it was
yet another example of how volatile the situation on the
ground is.

The cornerstone of our policy on the Middle East
peace process is the idea of a negotiated two-State
solution. Unfortunately, it continues to be dismantled
piece by piece, particularly through the expansion of
Israeli settlements. Poland's position on the Israeli
settlement policy in the occupied Palestinian territory
is clear and remains unchanged. It is also the European
Union's position. The adoption of resolution 2334
(2016) was a strong reaffirmation of the international
consensus on the matter.

I will now turn to the situation in Gaza, which
remains dire and continues to fuel extremism and
radicalization and foster instability. We call on all to
take urgent steps to achieve fundamental change in the
humanitarian, political, security and economic situation
in Gaza, as well as to end the closure policy and ensure
the sustained opening of the crossing points that are
important for Gazans' daily lives, while at the same
time addressing Israel's legitimate security concerns.
On the political track, the intra-Palestinian division
only aggravates the situation of the people of Gaza
and weakens the national aspirations of Palestinians.
We urgently need to relaunch the intra-Palestinian
reconciliation process. Everyone must commit to
Egypt's efforts in that connection. We have taken note
of President Abbas's announcement that elections will
be held, and a date should be set very soon for a vote
in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and in the
Gaza Strip. We call on all the Palestinian factions to
commit to that process.

The only way forward for Palestinians and Israelis
is the negotiation of a two-State solution, with the
State of Israel and an independent, democratic and
viable Palestinian State living side by side in peace and
security. Our main aim today should be to restore the
political horizon for the resumption of a meaningful
peace process.

I want to conclude with a few words about the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, which remains a key
contributor to the stability and security of the region.
In that context, Poland supports a technical rollover of
the Agency's current mandate.

