Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation wishes to thank the
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. David
Stephen, and the Permanent Representative of South
Africa, Ambassador Kumalo, for their briefings.

I listened very closely to the statement made by
the representative of Guinea-Bissau. The report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Guinea-Bissau
(S/2003/621) is very comprehensive and provides the
Council with a wealth of timely information. We agree
with the Secretary-General's assessment of the
situation in Guinea-Bissau as set forth in his report.

Guinea-Bissau, where the situation had seemed
very promising as the country embarked on the path to
rehabilitation, reconstruction and peace-building,
following the end of the armed conflict of 1998 and
1999 and the holding of general elections, has recently
witnessed mounting tension and finds itself at a critical

juncture. We hope that all parties concerned in Guinea-
Bissau will put the fundamental interests of the nation
and the people above all other considerations and will
take effective measures to ensure that Guinea-Bissau
does not relapse into turmoil and strife. We also believe
that the international community is duty-bound to pay
greater attention to the question of Guinea-Bissau and
to help its Government consolidate the hard-won
achievements of peace of two years ago.

China commends the United Nations Peace-
building Support Office in Guinea-Bissau, the Security
Council's Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa, the Economic and
Social Council's Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Guinea-
Bissau, the Group of Friends of Guinea-Bissau, the
Economic Community of West African States and the
Organization of Portuguese-speaking African States for
their efforts to promote stability and to consolidate
peace in Guinea-Bissau. We earnestly hope that those
bodies and organizations will continue to enhance their
cooperation with one another. China also appeals to the
members of the international community, particularly
of the donor community, to fulfil and increase their
pledges of assistance to Guinea-Bissau in a timely
manner.

The Security Council will soon send a mission to
Guinea-Bissau. We wish it success, and we believe that
it will be a successful mission contributing to moving
the situation in Guinea-Bissau towards stability.

The Chinese delegation supports the presidential
statement prepared by the French delegation, whose
work we appreciate.

