Mr. Wibisono (Indonesia): I should like first of all to
join other colleagues in welcoming the presence in our
midst of the Foreign Minister of Mozambique, His
Excellency Mr. Leonardo Santos Simao. My delegation
would like to thank him for enlightening us, in a very
comprehensive and detailed manner, on the recent important
developments in Mozambique, as well as for the kind
words addressed to the members of the Council.

My delegation commends the efforts made by the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative in
overcoming the obstacles to a peaceful solution to the
question of Mozambique. Indeed, their untiring efforts have
contributed to the accomplishment of the mandate of the
United Nations Operation in Mozambique (ONUMOZ), and
the successful conclusion of the free and fair elections in
Mozambique held at the end of October 1994.

My delegation pays special tribute to all the United
Nations personnel serving under the ONUMOZ mandate,
especially because this has been successfully carried out
from the inception of the mission.

We welcome the final report of the Secretary-
General on the United Nations Operation in Mozambique,
contained in document S/1994/l449 of 23 December
1994, and we fully agree with the "Observations" section
of this report. Here, I should like to further emphasize
two key factors as contributing to the remarkable
achievement of peace in Mozambique: the strong
commitment to peace and reconciliation shown by the
Mozambican people and their leaders; and the special
capability of the United Nations to promote favourable
outcomes

"when all forces join together in one common
endeavour towards a common goa ". (5/1994/1449, para. 35)

I also wish to express my delegation's appreciation
of and respect for the positive role played by the
Government of Italy in facilitating the signing of the
General Peace Agreement on 4 October 1992. This
Agreement became an important basis for the peaceful
settlement of Mozambique's protracted conflict. In effect,
the Mozambican peace process culminated in the peaceful
and orderly election of 27 to 29 October 1994, because
the conflicting parties had decided to cooperate, and
subsequently participated in electing a new, representative
and mutually acceptable Government. My Government
finds that these outcomes are evidence that political will,
expressed as the sustained determination to cooperate
between or among conflicting parties, is the essential
element required for attaining peace. Therefore, my
delegation welcomes the contribution to peace made by
all parties, and calls upon them to continue working
together towards their country's reconstruction and future
development.

At the same time, on behalf of the Government and
people of Indonesia, I should like to applaud the
installation on 9 December 1994 of His Excellency
Mr. Joaquim Alberto Chissano as the new President of
Mozambique. He has gained office following the first
Mozambican multi-party elections conducted in a fair
manner, and those elections have brought results accepted
by all the country's political parties.

It is our sincere hope that the Government of
Mozambique will succeed in all these endeavours.
Meanwhile, my Government urges support for the current
troop demobilization scheme being implemented by the

 

United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) with a
focus on soldiers' reintegration into Mozambican society.

We also support the establishment of a national bureau
to coordinate various de-mining activities and to ensure the
continuance of a national de-mining programme as long as
would prove necessary.

As stated by the Secretary-General in his last report,
some issues remain to be pursued, such as the elimination
of all armed caches and the safekeeping of collected
weapons. The fundamental issue now facing Mozambique's
leaders is how to further consolidate democracy so as to
ensure the post-election stability and national reconciliation
that will lead to a lasting peace.

As the peace process in Mozambique has come to a
successful conclusion, the expectation of the Indonesian
people and Government, as well as of the international
community, is that those remarkable achievements can be
followed by a concrete effort to improve the well being of
all the Mozambican people.

