Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The vote that just took place should not
have taken place at all. The sponsors of the draft
resolution just rejected (S/2012/538) were well aware
that it simply stood no chance of being adopted. The
Russian delegation had very clearly and consistently
explained that we simply cannot accept a document,
under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations,
that would open the way for the pressure of sanctions
and later for external military involvement in Syrian
domestic affairs.

The Western members of the Security Council
denied such intentions, but for some reason refused
to exclude military intervention. Their calculations
to use the Security Council of the United Nations to
further their plans of imposing their own designs on
sovereign States will not prevail. Instead of levelling
crude insinuations against the policy of the Russian
Federation, which for the whole period of the conflict
in Syria has never slackened in its efforts to find a
political solution to the situation and provide key
support for the mission of the United Nations-Arab
League Joint Special Envoy, Mr. Kofi Annan, the
Western members of the Council, which today made
unacceptable statements, could have done something,
anything, to promote dialogue between the Syrian
parties and prevent the further militarization of the
Syrian crisis, rather than fan the flames of extremists,
including terrorist groups.

These Pharisees have been pushing their own
geopolitical intentions, which have nothing in common
with the legitimate interests of the Syrian people. This
has led to an escalation of the conflict - one that has
reached such tragic proportions. Instead of contributing
to enhancing the efforts of the international community
to settle the crisis in Syria, as provided for in the
Geneva document of 30 June 2012 (S/2021/523, annex),
the sponsors of the draft resolution that just failed have
attempted to fan the flames of confrontation in the
Security Council. The draft just voted on was biased.
The threats of sanctions were levelled exclusively
at the Government of Syria. That runs counter to the
spirit of the Geneva document and does not reflect
the realities in the country today. Their approach is
especially ambiguous given what took place yesterday
in Damascus. I am referring to the grave terrorist attack.

The Western members of the Council have refused
to work on the text of the draft resolution (S/2012/547, Rev.2) submitted by the Russian delegation. Its thrust is
to bring the members of the Security Council together
to further back the Kofi Annan peace plan and to extend
the mandate of the Supervision Mission in Syria.

We believe that continued confrontation in the
Security Council is useless and counter-productive, and
for that reason, we will not submit our draft resolution
to a vote. In the present conditions, we would consider
it right for the Security Council to adopt a brief
de-politicized resolution on a technical extension of the
United Nations Supervision Mission in Syria mandate
for a specific period of time. It would be useful to
preserve the useful potential of the Mission, even if it
is limited in its time. It is important to continue to have
the international community back the Special Envoys
so they can continue their work on settling the crisis in
Syria.

As far as the political basis for the Special Envoy's
work is concerned, that is covered by the outcome
document of the Geneva conference (S/2012/523, annex),
which all responsible members of the international
community, as well as the Syrian parties, should be
guided by.

