Mr. Christian (Ghana): I wish to congratulate
Ambassador Joachim Rucker on his appointment as the
new Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), and also add my word of
appreciation for his briefing. As the former Deputy
Special Representative and head of the Economic
Reconstruction Programme of UNMIK, Ambassador
Rficker no doubt has the requisite experience to help
the people of Kosovo along the path towards a more
peaceful, united and stable future.

UNMIK remains, as ever, an indispensable bridge
to peaceful coexistence and reconciliation between the
Kosovo Albanians and their Serbian counterparts and
other minorities. We take this opportunity also to
acknowledge the invaluable contribution of the former
Special Representative, Mr. Saren Jessen-Petersen, in
laying the foundation for Kosovo's future progress.

The overall improvement in the security situation
is most welcome, especially the marked reduction in
inter-ethnic conflicts, as well as the strengthening of
border and boundary controls.

The transfer of further competencies to the
Kosovo ministries of internal affairs and justice and
related initiatives are an essential part of the
institutional capacity-building necessary for good
governance.

At the same time, we must commend the Special
Envoy for the future status process for Kosovo,
Mr. Martti Ahtisaari, for having worked hard to ensure
that the summit-level meeting between the authorities
in Serbia and Kosovo took place in Vienna on 24 July.
We believe that the convening of the summit was a
very significant step forward, in spite of the seemingly
irreconcilable differences between the parties as to
whether Kosovo should emerge from the talks a fully
independent country or an autonomous province within
Serbia but with substantial powers of self-government.

My delegation recognizes that the question is an
exceedingly complex and delicate one. Therefore we
can only encourage the two sides to show flexibility in
their positions and continue negotiating in good faith,
in order to reach a settlement that neither glosses over
the realities on the ground - not least the rights of all
ethnic groups in Kosovo - nor takes for granted the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Serbia.

In that connection, we reiterate our previous calls
on the Kosovo Serbs and other ethnic minorities to take
an active part in shaping the future of their homeland
by participating in the Provisional Institutions.

We are also hopeful that the ongoing wide-
ranging talks on matters such as the decentralization of
governmental functions in Kosovo, municipal
boundaries, community rights, cultural heritage and
religious sites, as well as economic issues, will help
bring greater clarity to the future status talks and assist
the parties to weigh their options with the necessary
pragmatism.

The implementation of standards is designed to
help Kosovo to make a clean break with its unfortunate
past and is critical to its long-term unity and stability,
whatever the outcome of the final status process. It is
only through a rigorous implementation of the
standards, which have now been realigned with the
European Partnership Action Plan, that a new culture
of tolerance, respect for human rights, the rule of law,
inclusiveness and mutual respect among the various
ethnic groups can be fostered. The standards must be
woven into the social fabric of Kosovo if they are to
make the desired impact.

We therefore urge the Government of Kosovo not
to relent in its efforts to implement the standards and
also to reach out to the Kosovo Serbs and make them
partners in the transformation of Kosovo into a gentler
and kinder society. For their part, the Kosovo Serbs
and the authorities in Belgrade likewise may wish to
keep in mind that what matters most, ultimately, is the
kind of society that Kosovo turns out to be after the
dust has settled on the current political process.

