Mr. Valero Briceflo (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on behalf of my
delegation, on having organized this debate on a
subject of such pertinence.

The Government of Colombia, according to
official statements broadly published in the press, has
brought to the Security Council accusations against the
Government of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
under President Hugo Chavez Frias. This was
confirmed to the EFE news agency by the President of
the Council, Ambassador Thomas Mayr-Harting,
Permanent Representative of Austria to the United
Nations.

Since today we are discussing the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, the Bolivarian Government
would like to take this opportunity not only to refer to
the subject at hand, but also to the installation of seven
foreign military bases in Colombia and its implications
for the protection of civilians and peace and security in
our region.

Venezuela, fortunately, has no armed conflict
requiring the protection of civilians. Our country,
however, has a progressive policy of protection for
civilians from other countries: displaced persons and
refugees alike. Venezuela has received the greatest
number of displaced persons and refugees as a direct
result of the uninterrupted internal armed conflict that
has plagued Colombia for more than 60 years. A
significant number of the 4 million Colombian men,
women and children in Venezuela have fled violence in
their country. According to the "2008 Global Trends"
report of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), Colombia has
more than 3 million internally displaced persons and
"continues to have one of the largest IDP populations
in the world".

The Government of Venezuela therefore signed,
on 18 January 2008, an agreement with UNHCR to
provide microcredit to Colombian refugees who are in
our country, benefiting more than 200,000 people.
Colombians coming to Venezuela are offered all of
these Government social programmes free of charge.

The establishment of United States military bases
in Colombia threatens peace in the region and extends
the Colombian diaspora into many countries, in
particular neighbouring countries. The establishment of
these military bases cannot be separated from the
impact that they will have in terms of increasing the
number of refugees and displaced persons.

The countries of our region, despite our
differences, live in peace, a peace that has only been
interrupted in recent years, when Colombian military
forces invaded Ecuador. That invasion was
categorically condemned by the twentieth Summit of
Heads of State and Government of the Rio Group, held
in Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic, on 6 and
7 March 2008. The President of Colombia, Alvaro
Uribe, in an alleged act of repentance, pledged that his
Government would never again engage in belligerent
action against any country on the continent. The
leaders of the Rio Group therefore stated:

"We note, with satisfaction, the full apology
that President Alvaro Uribe offered to the
Government and people of Ecuador, for the
violation on March 1, 2008, of the territory and
sovereignty of this sister nation by Colombian
security forces."

I would like to inform you, Sir, and all the other
members of the Council that the establishment of the
United States military bases in Colombia is disrupting
the peaceful coexistence of nations by creating a
dangerous geo-strategic reality that may provoke
conflict on a massive, continent-wide scale. These
military bases will turn Colombia, as stated by
Commander Fidel Castro, into an overseas territory. An
official document of the United States Air Force from
May 2009 states that the Palenquero base, one of the
seven military bases that will be installed in Colombia,
will help with the task of mobility by ensuring access
to the entire continent of South America, with the
exception of Cape Horn, if fuel is available, and over
half of the continent without having to refuel.

Venezuela would like to state here the danger that
this expansionist plan of the United States Government
represents, which aims to transform Colombia into an
enclave for political, economic, cultural and military
domination over the entire continent. The United States
military presence in Colombia claims to be justified by
the fight against drug trafficking and terrorism.
However, the former President of Colombia,
Mr. Ernesto Samper Pizarro, claims that "these bases
are not to combat terrorism and drug trafficking in
Colombia". With regard to the C-17, P-3 Orion and
AWAT aircraft that the United States Government will
transport to its military bases in Colombia, President
Samper said,

"My God! This is a carrier for electronic
surveillance for the hemisphere. That is what not
only Venezuela but also Brazil and the countries
of the Union of South American Nations
(UNASUR) fear, with reason."

The South American Governments have
expressed concern about the establishment of United
States bases in Colombia. At the UNASUR summit
held in Bariloche, Argentina, on 28 August 2009, heads
of State stated that,

"The presence of foreign military forces
cannot, with the means and resources dedicated to
their stated objectives, threaten the sovereignty
and integrity of any South American nation and
therefore peace and security in the region."

This is also cause for concern in the United
States, as evidenced by the letter dated 28 July 2009
that Senators Patrick Leahy and Christopher Dodd sent
to Secretary of State Hillary Clinton.

Venezuela and Colombia were born at the same
moment in the history of the Americas, after the battles
of Boyaca and Carabobo, under the leadership of our
liberator, Simon Bolivar. The Bolivarian Government
yearns for peace in Colombia and throughout the
region. That is why President Hugo Chavez Frias has
always offered his assistance to achieve peace in this
neighbouring country.

Plan Colombia has failed. Drug trafficking has
increased its influence in Colombia and has cornered
major levels of the Colombian State and its institutions.
If our Central American brothers, who lived through
bloody armed conflicts, were able to achieve peace,
how is it that the people of Colombia continue to suffer
under this painful military confrontation?

The answer is very simple. Central Americans
opted for dialogue and political negotiations as a
means of reaching peace. The Colombian Government,
however, persists in waging war. That Government
would rather give up its sovereignty than accept that
there is an internal armed conflict in their country that
is causing horrific displacements of human beings. The
armed conflict in Colombia has left over 100,000 dead.

Allow me to conclude by stating that the
Bolivarian Government is a Government of peace.
Only once in our history has our army gone beyond the
borders of our country, and it was to contribute to the
struggle for independence and freedom of our
neighbouring countries.

