Mrs. Papadopoulou (Greece): At this important
stage, when the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL) is successfully completing its
peacekeeping mandate, we would like to express our
gratitude to the Secretary-General and to his Special
Representatives, as well as to the personnel of the
Mission, who have spared no effort in promoting peace
and stability in the country and have enabled the
people of Sierra Leone to face the future with hope.

As UNAMSIL withdraws, we would like to
commend the innovative methods and practices it has
introduced over the past six years to ensure the best
possible outcome for its operations. UNAMSIL
brought together the efforts and resources of the United
Nations family as well as of humanitarian
organizations, in pursuit of a common goal.

Sierra Leone has already embarked on a serious
effort towards economic and democratic reform. The
progress made so far cannot be easily sustained unless
considerable efforts are made by the Government to
address the root causes of the problems that led to the
civil war in the first place.

Emphasis should be placed on fighting
corruption, improving the economy and the living
standards of the population in general, dealing with
unemployment and improving public services,
continuing security sector Reform, and remedying the
weaknesses that exist in the judiciary system and in the

administration of justice. With regard to the last point
in particular, we would stress that civil unrest and a
culture of impunity are major threats to the political
stability and to the long-term prospects of the country.
In that respect, we would like to express our
appreciation for the work of the Special Court for
Sierra Leone, which aims at ending impunity,
strengthening the rule of law and promoting national
reconciliation.

Organizing peaceful and credible elections
constitutes the next crucial step towards completing the
process of peace consolidation and making Sierra
Leone a true success story. The newly established
United Nations Integrated Office in Sierra Leone
(UNIOSIL) should work to ensure that the country will
achieve sustainable development and will break out of
the vicious circle of successive internal conflicts and
economic crises.

Greece hopes that UNIOSIL will draft a strategy
to support in an effective and coordinated manner the
Government of Sierra Leone in enhancing its capacity
to pursue policies aiming at social and economic
development in order to address the remaining
challenges and eliminate the possibility of future
conflicts, in particular through a poverty reduction
strategy.

I would like to reiterate our strong conviction that
only through a close and coordinated partnership of all
those involved, including civil society, will it be
possible for the international community to reconcile
immediate requirements with long-term goals and to
rally all the resources required to capitalize on the
efforts made so far and consolidate peace, stability,
security and prosperity in the country. The
international community should stand by Sierra Leone
in this critical phase and provide all the necessary
support in this regard, including through the
Peacebuilding Commission, which has been
established.

