Mr. Annabi: I will, of course, convey to the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) and Mr. Kouchner the expressions
of appreciation for his work as well as the concerns
that have been expressed today around the table
regarding the activities of UNMIK. I do not have an
answer to all the questions that have been raised, but I
will try to provide briefly some clarifications on some
of the issues that have been raised.

First, regarding the regulation that was signed by
Mr. Kouchner on 18 August on the status of privileges
and immunities of the Kosovo Force (KFOR) and
UNMIK in Kosovo: since UMNIK has been asked
under resolution 1244 (1999) to establish an interim
civilian administration, it was felt, after a careful legal
review of the matter, that it was necessary to enable
this personnel, whether they are from KFOR, UNMIK,
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) or from the European Union, to carry
out their functions under normal conditions, that it was
necessary to grant them the basic privileges and
immunities that are normally granted in such situations.

It is for that purpose that this regulation has been
adopted, and it has been adopted with one major
concern in mind, which is to protect the personnel of
these various organizations as needed in the local
courts. This regulation also ensures and clarifies that
the OSCE and European Union pillars, which are
integral components of UNMIK, and their personnel,
have similar privileges and immunities, so it applies
not only to KFOR but also to OSCE and European
Union personnel who are part of UNMIK.

Finally, it clarifies matters such as liability and
procedures for waiver of immunity in Kosovo. It
should be seen in that light, and it is in no way meant
to detract from the sovereignty or territorial integrity of
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.

As regards the closure of the Zvecan lead smelter,
Mr. Kouchner has stressed that this is a temporary
measure. He has made it clear in a press conference
that there is no intention to close it indefinitely. In fact,
the intention is to reopen it as soon as it can be repaired
and brought into conformity with basic health and anti-
pollution standards.

The 1,500 or so workers employed in the factory
are being paid by UNMIK, as I indicated in my
briefing, and will be, of course, given the opportunity
to resume their work there as soon as conditions
permit the reopening of the factory.

Regarding the origins of the weapons which
are recovered by KFOR, we will seek additional
information. KFOR has provided some information
in the periodic report that has been circulated
recently to Council members on KFOR activities.
We will seek additional information from KFOR as
to the origin of these weapons and bring that
information to the attention of the Council when we
receive it.

Regarding the appointment of a special envoy
for missing persons, it is my understanding that the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights is finalizing arrangements for the
appointment of such a special envoy and that this
will be done shortly.

I will have to seek further information on the
activities of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia and come back to the
Council with that information when we receive it.

Finally, on the issue of the conduct of elections
in areas where there is a strong presence of Serbs
and members of the Turk minority, as members of
the Council are aware, UNMIK has made great
efforts to try to ensure that all those who are willing
to participate in these elections have an opportunity
to do so. The registration process has now been
completed, and it is not technically possible to
reopen the registration process. The regulation on
the elections allows the Special Representative to
appoint representatives of minorities to the
municipal councils to ensure their adequate
representation in those bodies. I suspect that in the
light of the level of participation in the elections,
Mr. Kouchner will take the necessary action to
ensure adequate representation for the various
minorities in the municipal councils.

