Mr. Cunningham (United States of America): I
want to thank the Special Representative for that
exceptionally thoughtful and thought-provoking
briefing, which I think sets out a very interesting
context in which to look at the future of the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH) and of Bosnia and Herzegovina, quite apart
from the progress that is being made by UNMIBH and
the problems that remain.

We, of course, support renewal of the mandate for
an additional 12 months, as recommended by the
Secretary-General. UNMIBH is clearly achieving
results in circumstances that remain difficult, as we
have heard in the briefing, but it is succeeding in
promoting effective, democratic and multi-ethnic law
enforcement and institutions, which are essential for
the future. I was especially encouraged by the remarks
on truth and reconciliation commissions and by
Mr. Klein's eloquent comments on the necessity of
facing history in order to deal with the future. That is a
lesson that needs to be learned not only in Bosnia, but
in many other places.

A number of significant steps have been taken in
the recent past, and I just want to mention some that we
think are particularly important.

First, we note the progress being made on the
International Police Task Force - reducing the
Bosnian police force to just half of its previous size
and then training those people in democratic policing.

We are also pleased with the progress that has
been made with regard to the State Border Service. We
think that is a very important step forward, and the fact
that the Service is being effective is even more
heartening.
We also want to commend UNMIBH for initiating
a Joint Entity Task Force on illegal immigration and
organized crime and for working with the International
Organization for Migration to repatriate women who
had been trafficked to Bosnia for prostitution.

I also want to note, in response to Mr. Klein's
plea, that we support the appointment of professional
non-political police commissioners at the canton level,
and we encourage UNMIBH to move ahead with this.
We will provide whatever encouragement we can.

Finally, the United States supports the timely and
effective conclusion of UNMIBH's core mandate,
which Mr. Klein has plans to complete by December
2002. I took note also of the circumstances that he
explained will allow that timetable to be met.

We urge UNMIBH to continue to refine the
IPTF's task to allow for a gradual reduction in its force
size, to the extent possible, as we move towards the
conclusion of the mandate.

Most importantly, looking to the end of 2002, I
urge all Council members and Governments present
today to take heed of Mr. Klein's comments about the
need to plan ahead and to ensure the most effective
international and regional cooperation possible, for
that, indeed, will be central not just to meeting that
goal but to meeting the aspirations that we have set for
ourselves in supporting Dayton and in supporting
Bosnia.

