Mr. Wlosowicz (Poland): Let me begin by indicating
that we associate ourselves with the statement made by
Italy on behalf of the European Union.

The draft resolution before the Security Council today,
which, if adopted, will extend the mandate of the United
Nations Preventive Deployment Force (UNPREDEP) in its
present configuration for a further period of six months, is
an important one, and in the light of all the efforts of the
United Nations to stabilize the situation in the Balkans, it
is also a proper one.

There is not much doubt that the deployment of
UNPREDEP in the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia has greatly contributed to peace and stability in
the southern Balkans. The operation has proved that
preventive deployment may be an effective form of peace-
keeping and that good results can be achieved even with a
relatively small number of personnel, when it is carried out
at the right time and with a clear mandate.

We are of the opinion that UNPREDEP, in dealing
with multiple aspects of the country's internal and external
situation, performs its task in a very efficient manner. It is
involved in good offices, early warning, fact-finding and
monitoring activities, and it certainly facilitates dialogue
between various political forces and ethnic groups in the
country, thus promoting internal peace and stability.

The Polish delegation fully agrees with the
assessments contained in the report of the Secretary-General
of 23 May 1996, according to which one of the important
roles UNPREDEP plays is in helping the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia establish its statehood and
consolidate its security.

Indeed, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
gaining the confidence and respect of other countries, has
become a member of such international and regional
organizations as the United Nations, the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe and the Council of
Europe, and thus has found its place in the international
community.

The threats to the stability of the country are
certainly less dangerous now than they were when the
Security Council decided in 1992 to deploy the operation
in the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. We note
positive developments in the situation, such as the major
step forward in the process of normalization of relations
between the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia that has been taken
with the signing of the Agreement on the Regulation of
Relations and the Promotion of Cooperation between the
two countries on 8 April 1996. However, the process
needs to be completed as regards, inter alia, the
demarcation of their States' common border.

It must not be overlooked that the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia still faces many difficulties.
Processes of economic reform and restructuring are hard
to carry out and are painful to the people. Internal
political, ethnic and social tensions endure.

Recently, the Security Council has discussed the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina on the basis of the
report of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO).
It is evident that there is still much to be done, especially
as far as the implementation of civilian aspects of the
Dayton Agreement is concerned. We must bear in mind
that this might also influence the fragile stability in the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.

Taking into consideration all aspects of the situation
in the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, our
delegation considers the extension of the mandate of
UNPREDEP a step contributing further to peace in the
region. The presence of the United Nations Force will
undoubtedly have a reassuring, stabilizing and confidence-
building effect.

Let me take this opportunity to reiterate our gratitude
to the troop-contributing countries participating in the
UNPREDEP operation. I also wish to pay a tribute to its

 

personnel for the dedication they show in the performance
of their tasks and duties.

