Mr. Satoh (Japan): I deeply appreciate the initiative
of the Security Council to hold this open debate today, for
all members of the international community are worried
about the dispute in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

It is especially meaningful that the Security Council is
listening to the voices of the African States concerned. We
commend the efforts of the Council and hope that other
matters of similar significance will be taken up in an open
debate in future.

Japan remains most concerned about the situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It has been eight
months since that country was drawn into the quicksand
of war. Many deaths and casualties have reportedly
occurred, and grave human rights violations have been
reported in various parts of the region. Moreover, a large
number of men, women and children have been forced to
abandon their homes to live in poverty and in misery.
According to the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, 58,000 Congolese have fled to Tanzania and
another 6,000 to Zambia. There are also many internally
displaced persons.

The people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
are in urgent need of humanitarian assistance. However,
the ongoing conflict is preventing the international
community from effectively extending such assistance.
We therefore call upon all parties involved to stop
fighting immediately and vigorously seek ways to reach
a ceasefire agreement. It is also imperative that they
protect Congolese civilians and respect their basic human
rights.

The conflict must be resolved through dialogue and
negotiation, not through coercion. Durable peace can be
obtained only by agreement through negotiations. The
recurrence of conflicts is damaging to all concerned. For
regional stability, it is also imperative for all States
concerned to respect each other's political independence
and refrain from interfering in each other's internal affairs.

Japan appreciates the efforts of neighbouring
countries, including those made by Zambia, which is
playing an active role under the able leadership of
President Chiluba, as well as those made by the Southern
African Development Community (SADC) and the
Organization of African Unity (OAU). We are, however,
disheartened by the fact that this regional mediation
process seems to be too slow in taking effect.

We want to call once again upon all parties
involved, as well as on SADC and the OAU, to further
intensify their efforts to bring this conflict to a peaceful
resolution. It is also our sincere hope that the Security
Council will continue to help improve the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The initiatives of the
three African members of the Security Council on this
issue are particularly commendable and welcome. Japan
is determined to work with other countries to provide

 

continued support for the arduous efforts of African nations
to restore peace to the region.

The importance of achieving an early ceasefire through
dialogue cannot be overemphasized. But the dispute will
not be fully resolved unless the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is helped to get back on its feet. The international
community must not focus solely on bringing the fighting
to an end, but also on ensuring that post-conflict
rehabilitation is successful in the context of both the
reconstruction of the economy and reconciliation between
peoples. Both goals must be pursued simultaneously in
order to establish a solid foundation for peace and
development.

We know that in African eyes, poverty is the most
serious threat to human security and that the promotion of
development is what many African countries want most. As
African countries themselves recognize, efforts to prevent,
manage and resolve conflicts are essential for the stability
and development of Africa. The OAU Peace Fund needs
much support to this end, and the Japanese Government
recently decided to contribute an additional $254,000 to that
Fund.

Finally, I would like to stress that none of us here
today can dissociate ourselves from the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, or, for that matter, from
the situation of the African continent as a whole. One
problem I would like to point out is the fact that the parties
involved in African disputes, which do not have the ability
to produce weapons, nevertheless possess vast quantities of
them. As a country that prohibits the export of any
weapons, Japan requests all States to ask themselves
whether their own actions might not be leading to the
intensification of conflicts in Africa.

