Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I would
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for
his briefing.

The United States adds its condemnation to the
attacks in Burkina Faso, as well as our condolences to
the families of the victims. We are deeply concerned
about an increase in violent attacks targeting civilians
in Burkina Faso.

The United States recognizes the courageous work
ofthe Blue Helmets in conflict zones around the world.
Their service and sacrifice help countries navigate
the path from conflict to peace. We welcome this
opportunity, one year after the unanimous adoption
of resolution 2436 (2018), to discuss how the Security
Council can help peacekeepers effectively implement
mandates, protect civilians, restore peace and return
home safely to their families. Equally important,
we seek to partner with the Secretariat to improve
reporting, accountability and transparency efforts, as
outlined in resolution 2436 (2018).

We support the Organization's efforts to implement
reforms that advance a culture of accountability in
United Nations peacekeeping. Those reforms will
enhance the safety and security of peacekeepers and
civilians alike, increase the operational effectiveness
of missions and hold peacekeepers accountable for
underperformance. We appreciate and support Under-
Secretary-General Lacroix's regular meetings with the
Department of Operational Support and the Department
of Management Strategy, Policy and Compliance
to discuss peacekeeping performance in individual
missions. We would be grateful if the Department of
Peace Operations would provide the Council with regular
and formal briefings on outstanding performance in
the field and examples of where peacekeepers could
benefit from increased training. Those briefings
could highlight many examples of significant progress
towards developing peacekeeping guidelines, doctrine,
standards and training materials, instituting a United
Nations performance assessment framework and
integrating and analysing performance data. Those
briefings would align with the call of resolution 2436
(2018) for a more transparent and inclusive approach
to improving peacekeeping performance. They would
also allow Council members to better align our training
efforts and receive feedback on the impact of the
training we provide.

The United States calls on the Secretariat to provide
mission performance assessment summaries in its
written reports to the Council on individual missions.
Those assessments should document examples of
high performance as well as underperformance and

accountability measures taken to rectify it. Now is the
time, one year after the unanimous adoption of resolution
2436 (2018), to ensure its rigorous implementation.
We strongly support the Secretary-General's
efforts to implement his zero-tolerance policy on
sexual exploitation and abuse. We urge all troop- and
police-contributing countries to enforce it and swiftly
address any criminal allegations. The United States
supports the United Nations in the repatriation of
individuals who commit sexual exploitation and abuse,
and of units that partake in abusive behaviour, including
in cases were troop- and police-contributing countries
do not fulfil their obligations under the zero-tolerance
policy. Although there has been some movement in this
area, we have not seen enough progress. The instances
of peacekeepers engaging in sexual exploitation and
abuse and the lack of information on accountability
measures undertaken by their home countries erode
trust and degrade the credibility of United Nations
peacekeeping. Hearing about those cases in regular,
formal briefings would allow us to address them before
they become larger problems or recur.

We also recognize that smart and adequate
resourcing is essential to make peacekeeping effective.
As you know, Mr. President, the United States is
the largest financial contributor to United Nations
peacekeeping. Our long-term partnerships with troop-
and police-contributing countries helped develop their
institutional capabilities and better prepare, deploy and
support peacekeepers.

Peacekeeping is a shared responsibility that comes
with shared costs. It is the responsibility of all Member
States to step up their efforts to make sure peacekeepers
are well-trained and well-equipped, and we encourage
our partners to match our level of commitment. When
we discuss peacekeeping performance, it is not about
politics or pointing fingers. It is about improving
peacekeeping on the part of stakeholders, including
Member States and the Secretariat. We must all do our
part to make peacekeeping as effective as it can be. The
United States, along with all of our partners around the
table here today, are committed to fulfilling that goal.

