Mr. Tiirk (Slovenia): We would like to begin by
thanking the Secretary-General for his detailed report on
the United Nations Observer Mission in Angola
(MONUA) and also would like to express our
appreciation to his Special Representative, Maitre Blondin
Beye, for his untiring work and important
accomplishments.

The situation in Angola has been a matter of
international concern for a long time. Although the
conflict has been raging for decades, the two-year
resumption of internecine hostilities after the November
1992 elections alone consumed an estimated 150,000
civilian lives. Slovenia is therefore heartened that the
peace process in Angola has clearly shown progress, as
stated in paragraph 24 of the Secretary-General's recent
report.

We are especially encouraged by the agreement of
9 January 1998 on the new implementation timetable that
was reached by both parties. We thus look forward to the
fulfilment of the obligations stemming from the timetable,
in particular the promises made by UNITA concerning the
relocation of its headquarters to the Angolan capital by
the end of February. We expect that the accompanying
relinquishment of control over its strongholds in Andulo
and Bailundo will finally conclude the otherwise slow
process of consolidation of State administration
throughout Angola.

We also attach the highest importance to the
legalization of UNITA as a political party. We hope that
the necessary conditions will soon be met in accordance
with the timetable.

Slovenia recognizes that the progress made in the
peace process thus far is in large part the result of
persistent efforts of Secretary-General's Special
Representative to maintain an active dialogue between the
Angolan authorities and UNITA. We hope that this
process will continue and that President Dos Santos and
Mr. Savimbi will meet in person as soon as possible.

While the progress towards peace in Angola is no
doubt encouraging, there are unfortunately obstacles
which still impede the implementation of some important
aspects of the Lusaka Protocol.

 

Slovenia is particularly disquieted by the allegations
that UNITA continues to regroup its military elements in
some parts of the country. In this connection, we are also
concerned by the reported desertion from the quartering
areas of approximately 25,000 former troops. Incomplete
demobilization was, after all, one of the main reasons for
the previous breakdowns of the peace process in Angola.
Hence our concern. It is therefore imperative that the
deserters take advantage of the opportunity to be
demobilized under different arrangements by June 1998.

We also note with regret the verification by MONUA
of the attacks on UNITA supporters by local government
forces. Such incidents complicate the process of
administrative normalization and undermine the modicum
of mutual trust between the two parties. They may also fuel
ethnic anxieties at the grass-roots level in a country where
ethnicity has become an increasingly significant political
factor.

All this points to the importance of properly
functioning State institutions and mechanisms for the
protection of human rights in Angola. Slovenia therefore
supports the recommendations of the Secretary-General
regarding the expansion of the number of human rights
observers and the increase in the overall strength of the
civilian police component of MONUA.

We also support the resumption of the training
programme for the Angolan National Police. A properly
trained local police force represents an important safeguard
against the violation of civil and political rights in this
sensitive period of transition. Training of the local police in
the universally accepted standards of police conduct and
support by the United Nations Civilian Police (UNCIVPOL)
are thus among the important ingredients of post-conflict
peace-building.

Slovenia believes that the current momentum must be
seized and carried to completion. We therefore support the
Secretary-General's recommendations to extend the
mandate of MONUA for three months, until 30 April 1998.
We also support the proposed request that the Secretary-
General submit a comprehensive report on the situation in
Angola by 13 March 1998. We are glad that all these
elements and many other important thoughts are
incorporated in the draft resolution now under
consideration, and Slovenia will vote in favour of it.

Let me, in conclusion, say the following. The conflict
in Angola has been long and bitter. After many years
stability is finally within reach. We support the efforts of
the Angolan people to create a durable and lasting peace.
Persons belonging to the Ovimbundu, Bakongo and
Mbundu peoples, as well as others, have suffered
tremendously. It is therefore important to ensure that the
last obstacles to the peace are removed.

