Portugal aligns itself with the statement submitted by the European Union (see annex 18). As a member of the Group of Friends on Climate and Security, Portugal also wishes to align itself with the joint statement submitted by the Group (see annex 21). In the midst of a global health crisis, which is rapidly unfolding to become a major humanitarian, economic and social crisis, the time when we recognized that climate change was the defining challenge of our time may seem distant. However, the climate crisis is still here. It will still be here when we defeat this pandemic, and it will continue to have an impact on international peace and security. This global pandemic should in fact remind us that we have to continue to look beyond the factors that we traditionally associated with peace and security. We need to understand peace and security in a holistic manner, taking into due account cross-cutting and multidimensional themes such as migration, women and youth, health and climate. Climate change is a major threat multiplier, particularly in already fragile regions. Competition over diminishing natural resources adds fuel to existing conflicts. Existing vulnerabilities are amplified by sea-level rise, excessive rainfall and prolonged drought, thereby increasing social and economic instability, which often leads people to move in search of better living conditions. Overrecent years, the United Nations system has made progress in incorporating climate-related security risks into its analysis and actions. The Climate Security Mechanism is a good example of the progress achieved and the holistic approach that is needed. The Security Council itself has integrated the implications of the effects of climate change on peace and stability into a number of resolutions, and it has discussed this threat multiplier at a number of thematic debates and informal meetings. We believe that the time is ripe for the Security Council to deal with the climate and security nexus in a more systematic way. We encourage the Council to continue to mandate peacekeeping operations to consider climate-related risks in their activities. The United Nations and Member States should also strengthen capacity-building of the United Nations staff involved in those operations, thereby enabling them to better identify and deal with climate-related security risks. In parallel, the Climate Security Mechanism should be further strengthened in order to scale up its role in mobilizing knowledge and contributing to mainstreaming it across the United Nations system. Data gathering and analysis are key to ensuring that the Security Council has authoritative information on the impact of climate- related security risks in conflict settings and can develop tools, partnerships and early-warning capabilities that would support the timely assessment of, and response to, climate-related security risks in order to prevent the escalation of conflict. Closer involvement by United Nations agencies, funds and programmes would be added value. Additionally, analysis and awareness of climate-related security risks should be better integrated into the efforts of the United Nations and Member States towards preventive diplomacy and peacebuilding, understanding the interlinkages between climate change, conflict prevention and sustaining peace, and establishing adequate early-warning, risk prevention and management strategies. For a more coherent approach, whereby the peace and security and development pillars of the United Nations work closer together, we must factor in the role of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). Taking advantage of the PBC's advisory role to the Security Council, and of the welcome commitment of country- specific configurations to providing written advice in advance of Security Council discussions, could also be a way to feed the climate and security nexus into the concrete discussions on peace and security. Lastly, we should reach beyond the United Nations system towards civil society and academic organizations that have been gathering data and developing a thorough analysis of this nexus, as well as towards the field, in particular countries that are on the front lines of climate-related security risks and have access to invaluable empirical evidence.
