Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Poland for taking the initiative to convene
this high-level debate and welcomes the Minister for
Foreign Affairs on his return to New York to preside
over this meeting. China also thanks Ms. Viotti, Chef
de Cabinet of the Secretary-General, for her briefing.

Peace and Security in the Middle East does not
only affect the fundamental interests of the countries
in the region, but also global stability and development.
China has always closely followed peace and security
in the Middle East and has upheld an objective and
impartial position advocating for a new security
concept featuring common threads of cooperative and
sustainable security in an effort to build a community
with a shared future for humankind. I would like to
make the following points.

The first concerns intensifying efforts to achieve
political solutions to regional hotspot issues. The hotspot
issues in the Middle East are complex and intertwined
with one another. The international community should
support the United Nations in playing a central role
through its good offices, commit to reaching political
solutions, promote dialogue and negotiations, adhere
to constructive situation control and consistently take
into account the legitimate rights and interests of all
parties. The sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity of the countries concerned should
be respected. China is firmly opposed to the wilful use
or the threat of use of force. China opposes external
intervention, power politics and bullying.

The question of Palestine is at the core of the Middle
East issue. It is the root problem in the Middle East.
Upholding the legitimate rights of the Palestinians is a
shared responsibility of the international community.
The two-State solution is the sole way to address the
Palestinian-Israel issue. The relevant United Nations
resolutions, the Iand-for-peace principle and the Arab
Peace Initiative are the fundamental principles to be
followed to defuse the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. The
international community should hold up the banner of
multilateralism, adhere to the principles of fairness and
justice, advance the timely resumption of peace talks
between the Palestinians and the Israelis and create the
necessary conditions for resuming talks.

Secondly, with regard to helping countries of the
Middle East achieve sustainable development, the
turmoil in the Middle East is rooted in poverty and
underdevelopment, and its resolution ultimately lies in
achieving sustainable development. Development has
an impact on the livelihood and dignity of people and is
an essential guarantee to achieving social stability and
lasting peace.

Focus should be placed on youth education,
employment and poverty reduction, the importance
of which Ms. Viotti just mentioned. Only when young
people achieve dignity through development will we be
able to see the hope of a future. We should be open-
minded in our support of countries of the region in
exploring development paths in line with their national
situations and building mutually beneficial and win-win
partnerships to achieve economic and social progress.
Thirdly, with regard to building synergies to
respond to the threat of terrorism, the Middle East is
faced with a dire situation involving counter-terrorism
and deradicalization, while countries ofthe region suffer
acutely from terrorism. The international community
should build consensus, unify standards, integrate
policies and address the root causes and symptoms of
the problems in resolutely countering terrorism and
extremist forces.

The countries of the region should be able to enjoy
policy dialogue, information sharing and strengthened
cooperation with regard to technical cooperation,
personnel training, cutting off sources of terrorist
financing, combating cross-border organized crime and
exchanging lessons learned in deradicalization in an
effort to maintain shared security and restore regional
stability and order.

Fourthly, with regard to preventing the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction, efforts should be
made to uphold the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action (JCPOA) and ensure its full and effective
implementation, which was set forth in the relevant
Security Council resolutions. It is also the only realistic
and effective way to address the Iranian nuclear
issue and conforms to the common interests of the
international community. The parties should proceed
from the overall and long-term perspective, stay the
general course of political and diplomatic solutions,
ensure the balance of rights and obligations under the
JCPOA and facilitate the reduction of tension over the
Iranian nuclear issue.

China will continue to make efforts to achieve the
comprehensive and effective implementation of the Plan
of Action, while firmly maintaining its own legitimate
rights and interests. China supports the establishment
ofa Middle East zone free of nuclear weapons and other
weapons of mass destruction.

At present, the Middle East situation remains
complex and continues to evolve with ever-increasing
security challenges. The challenge of responding to it
has surpassed the ability of any single country. The
United Nations should deepen its cooperation with
regional and subregional organizations, such as the
League of Arab States, and consolidate and strengthen
collective security mechanisms.

We support countries in the region in developing
good-neighbourly relations based on mutual respect
and non-interference in others' internal affairs. Parties
should commit themselves to resolving conflicts
through dialogue and consultations, facilitating the
de-escalation of tensions and maintaining regional
security and international energy security in order to
avoid igniting new crises. We welcome any and all
dialogue initiatives conducive to achieving peace and
security in the Middle East. We embrace the concept of
collective security in the Gulf as proposed by Russia.
China would like to maintain communications with all
the relevant parties to that end.

China has always been committed to playing a
constructive role in facilitating political solutions
to hotspot issues in the region. We maintain contact
and communication with the countries concerned in
the region, support mutual confidence-building and
promote peace talks. China has actively participated in
various efforts under the auspices of the United Nations
to promote peace in the Middle East. We are engaged
in peacekeeping missions in places such as Lebanon
and provide substantial humanitarian assistance to
refugees from the relevant countries so that they can be
hopeful of rebuilding their homes. We have contributed
to the economic and social development of the region.
We are committed to strengthening cooperation with
the countries of the region through the Belt and Road
Initiative in order to create new opportunities for the
development of the region.

We have always cooperated with other parties on
Iranian issues. We are committed to preserving the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action as part of our
efforts to address the Iranian issue. China will continue
to make unrelenting efforts for the long-term security
and prosperous development of the Middle East.

