Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): I wish to thank the
Nigerian presidency for organizing this public briefing.
I would also like to convey my appreciation to Assistant
Secretary-General for Human Rights Ivan Simonovie
for his briefing.

The report presented on 15 April by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
squarely refutes Russia's inflammatory narrative,
which it uses to justify its illegal actions in Ukraine.
While the report points out that Ukraine suffered
from human rights violations, lack of accountability,
corruption and mismanagement of resources, as well as
a lack of a system of checks and balances and a lack
of free elections, the blame is placed on the previous
regime.
The report indicates that underlying human
rights violations were among the root causes of the
popular protests that led to a change in Government.
The adoption of restrictive anti-protest laws and the
excessive use of force by Berkut special police and
other security forces under Yanukovich transformed
a peaceful demonstration and led to the violence and
deaths that ensued. The report indicates, however, that
since the current Government took power at the end
of February, tensions have decreased, along with the
allegations of human rights violations.

In Crimea, the main concerns are linked to the
Russian-sponsored developments leading to and the
situation after the so-called referendum, which has
had a direct impact on the enjoyment of human rights
by local inhabitants, especially the indigenous Tatar
community, who chose to boycott the referendum. Their
situation has just been described. Many people may be
forced to leave their homes and face other consequences
arising from Crimea's takeover. That is also confirmed
by the special monitoring mission of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).

The report also highlights the highly questionable
character of the referendum, which was held in an
environment of intimidation by armed groups and a
total lack of media freedom. As Council members will
recall, the plebiscite was organized in a particularly
hurried manner, in the absence of established election
practices and election observation, without a public
debate on its merits and provided exclusively for a
secessionist option.

The report indicates too that in eastern Ukraine
grievances with regard to the failure of the central
Government to represent interests have a history long
predating the current Government. The report also
states that violations of the human rights of the ethnic
minorities in eastern Ukraine, Crimea and elsewhere in
Ukraine have been neither widespread nor systematic.
That is clearly confirmed by the most recent statement by
United Nations Special Rapporteur on minority issues,
Rita lzsak, who has concluded that the overwhelming
majority of minorities and others described harmonious
inter-ethnic and interfaith relations and conditions of
non-discrimination in all spheres oflife. She stated that

"The current human rights situation of minorities

in Ukraine and the civil and political, economic,

social and cultural conditions cannot justify
any violent actions or incitement by any party,
national or international".

That is exactly what we have been saying all along.
Whatever the issues regarding the human and minority
rights situation in Ukraine, Crimea or eastern Ukraine
in particular, none of those issues can ever justify the
invasion and annexation of Crimea or the ongoing
destabilization of eastern Ukraine. Those issues could,
and should have been, resolved by way of established
and well-tried peaceful instruments, with the assistance
of regional organizations such as the OSCE and the
Council of Europe, as well as the United Nations.

Furthermore, the report notes that there are today
positive changes under way in Ukraine, or under
consideration, such as a willingness to break with
past injustices and to elaborate a new vision of the
country. Those conclusions, contained in the report,
are confirmed by the current Government's efforts to
strengthen the rule of law, combat corruption, ensure
minority rights and address the issue of decentralization.
In fact, acting President Turchynov recently proposed
holding a referendum on the decentralization of the
country together with the national elections to be held
on 25 May.

All of the foregoing points to the fact that the crisis
provoked in Ukraine is not about the protection of
one particular ethnic minority or language minority,
or about Ukraine's alleged extremist radicalism. But
we knew that all along as well, as various previous
conclusions by senior international representatives,
including those of the OSCE, have repeatedly
repudiated such allegations. Among other things,
this is about Ukraine's destabilization with a View to
obstructing and preventing the 25 May elections, which
the interim Government in Kyiv announced the minute
it was appointed, for fear that power may slip out of
the fingers of the likes of Yanukovic and his corrupt
cronies.

This is also about a naked land grab and Russia's
greater political and military ambitions. In a disturbing
instance of deja vu, once again in clear violation
of Ukraine's Constitution and accepted norms of
international behaviour, heavily armed militants
without any insignia are occupying local Government
buildings and declaring independence, which is a sad
caricature of self-determination in defiance of national
and international law.

Furthermore, the systematic and well-oiled
propaganda war against Ukraine and its provisional
leadership is an extremely dangerous game, because as
we have seen time and again from various situations
around the world, including recently in the Central
African Republic, it is much too easy to release
the arms-wielding genie out of the bottle, a genie of
incitement and hate, but infinitely more difficult to
contain it afterwards.

We therefore urge the Russian side to stop its
disinformation and anti-Ukrainian and anti-European
propaganda campaign before it is too late. International
bodies, Europe and Ukraine have repeatedly called for
the path of restraint and dialogue. The way towards
that path are still open as we await the holding of
the quadrilateral meeting to take place in Geneva on
17 April. We once again call on the Russian Federation
to pursue that path.

Much remains to be done for the current and future
Governments of Ukraine. Fighting corruption - and
we welcome the fact that the relevant legislation is
now being put in place to improve access to education,
health and social services - providing real equality for
all its citizens, addressing the deficiencies of the justice
system and combating impunity, which was so common
in the country, are the main issues of concern where the
international community, including the United Nations,
the OSCE and the Council of Europe again can readily
provide further assistance.

Impartial reporting on human rights violations
will help to prevent the manipulation of information by
whomever. We therefore support continuous reporting
by the United Nations human rights monitoring mission
in Ukraine to ensure a regular and continuous flow of
updates on the situation in the country. We also have
to provide necessary mid- and long-term funding for
the mission going well beyond June. The mission must
continue its work throughout the entire territory of
Ukraine, including Crimea.

Other human rights monitoring instruments are also
necessary. We look forward to receiving the findings
of the visit to Ukraine by the United Nations Special
Rapporteur on minority issues from 7 to 13 April. We
welcome equests by other thematic mandate holders
under the special procedures of the Human Rights
Council, such as the Special Rapporteur on internally
displaced persons, to visit Ukraine and report on their
findings.
It is also crucial to ensure independent monitoring
of the human rights situation in Crimea specifically.
We call on the occupying authorities to allow the
human rights monitoring mission in Ukraine to work
in Crimea, including the opening of a sub-office in
Simferopol. United Nations officials should continue to
visit Crimea and report on the situation of all ethnic
minorities, on media freedom and human rights.

The people of Russia and Ukraine have become
victims of the propaganda and disinformation that
provoked and fanned unconstitutional actions by local
militants, with external assistance. The situation is
very tense, but a reversal of course is still possible. It
is time to heed the countless calls to de-escalate and
for Moscow to stop interfering into Ukraine's internal
affairs.

The current Government is set to address human
rights violations, language policy, the rights of ethnic
minorities, the decentralization of power and corruption,
and to strengthen accountability and the rule of law. It
is in our common interests that this Government and
the future Government of Ukraine should be allowed to
carry out that work unobstructed. We must also support
its efforts to ensure that a free and fair election on
25 May, with the participation of all Ukraine in all its
rich diversity, can take place.

