Mr. Serrano: Thank you very much,
Mr. President, for giving the floor to the European
Union. The candidate countries Croatia and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the countries of the
Stabilisation and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia, as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves
with this statement.

Let me join others in welcoming the first briefing
by Special Representative Staffan de Mistura to the
Security Council, as well as the Secretary-General's
latest report (S/2010/318). Let me also thank
Ambassador Tanin for his important statement, and
Ambassador Apakan for his presentation on the
Security Council's recent trip to Afghanistan.

During the past few months, as mentioned by
Mr. de Mistura, the European Union (EU) has
continued its excellent cooperation with the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).
The EU Special Representative, Mr. Usackas, has taken
up his duties and is working closely with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. The European
Union commends the efforts by the Afghan
Government since the last debate of the Security
Council, on 18 March, to further advance the agenda
agreed at the London Conference, particularly since
they were pursued against the background of an
increasingly deteriorating security situation that
particularly affected the civilian population.

The European Union agrees that the Peace Jirga
held in Kabul was successful and notes in particular
that participation was high and from a wide spectrum
of Afghan society, with 20 per cent of the delegates
being female. As the steps towards reconciliation and
reintegration take shape, the EU wishes to stress that
those processes should remain Afghan-led, based on
renunciation of any form of violence and in conformity
with the Constitution, as well as on Afghanistan's
international commitments, including to human rights.
Strengthened regional cooperation also remains
essential. In that context, we welcome the renewed
diplomatic engagement between Afghanistan and
countries in the region, and look forward to the next
session of the Regional Economic Cooperation
Conference on Afghanistan.

The EU agrees that the Kabul Conference on
20 July should not be a pledging conference but an
occasion for the international community to lend
support to the Government's renewed commitments to
its people. We also welcome the co-chairing of the
Conference buy the United Nations. We look forward
to the presentation of a peace and reintegration
programme and national priority programmes on
security, governance and the three development
clusters, as well as the joint Afghan-International
Security Assistance Force way forward for the
transition to Afghan security. The EU welcomes
Afghanistan's determination to set priorities at the
Conference and supports increasing the proportion of
aid delivered through the Afghan Government.

Since governance, the rule of law, respect for
human rights and Afghan institution-building are also
the bases for progress in other areas, including security
and development, we strongly believe that the Kabul
Conference should give explicit political support to
achieving progress in all of these areas, including the
fight against corruption under the governance cluster.
In particular, there is a need to advance the
development of the formal justice sector and police
reform, which the European Union supports through
the European Union Police Mission in Afghanistan and
its contribution to the Law and Order Trust Fund.

The Kabul Conference will also provide an
opportunity to give a much higher profile to issues
such as human rights, gender equality, freedom of
expression and transitional justice. We note with
concern reports that the space for human rights
defenders has become increasingly limited, and not
only because of the deteriorating security situation.

Turning to the upcoming elections on
18 September, we commend the work done by the
Independent Electoral Commission and the Electoral
Complaints Commission, with support from UNAMA,
to prepare for elections, building on lessons learned
from 2009. Holding credible, fair, inclusive and secure
elections, reflecting the will of the Afghan people, is in
the interests of the Afghan Government. In View of
that, we note with satisfaction that the registration of
candidates has concluded without incident and that the
number of female candidates, compared with the 2005
parliamentary elections, has significantly increased.
Ensuring adequate security will be crucial to the whole
electoral process, particularly for female candidates. As
the Secretary-General indicates in his report, we would
also like to underline the need for more comprehensive
and long-term electoral reform.
In the European Union's View, UNAMA is well
on track with the implementation of its refocused
mandate. Yet we note that recruitment continues to be a
matter of concern, mainly for security reasons. Against
this background, we commend the commitment of
UNAMA's staff and would like to express our
condolences for the recent loss of one of its members.
As stated in the European Union action plan for
Afghanistan, the EU will continue its support for
UNAMA and the role of the United Nations in the
region.

In closing, let me reiterate that the European
Union welcomes the Government's intention to make a
new contract with the Afghan people, and stands ready
to lend strong support to this endeavour. The European
Union remains fully committed to a secure and
democratic future for the Afghan people.

