Ms. Willson (United States of America): The
United States remains strongly committed to providing
significant financial and diplomatic support to the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and appreciates the work of its
President, Prosecutor and Registrar to bring to justice
those most responsible for serious violations of
international humanitarian law.

We regret Slobodan Milosevic's death as his trial
was nearing completion. However, the accumulation of
testimony and evidence brought to light has helped to
ensure accountability for the atrocities committed in
the Balkans and reconciliation for those who have
suffered as a result of such crimes.

We welcome the Tribunal President's report on
the conclusions of the investigations looking into the
circumstances of Milosevic's death. We believe that the
three inquiries initiated by the ICTY were thorough
and appropriate responses. We commend the
President's handling of this issue and his commitment
to implement the recommendations of the inquiries.

The focus of the Tribunal and the international
community should now be on the road ahead.
Milosevic's death makes more urgent the successful
completion of trials already in progress and the
apprehension and transfer of those still at large.

In this regard, the United States appreciates the
work of the President and the Prosecutor to increase
Tribunal efficiency and meet the Tribunal's completion
strategy targets of concluding trials by 2008 and all
work by 2010, as endorsed by the Security Council.
For example, we welcome the initiatives detailed in the
President's report aimed at increasing the efficiency of
pre-trial proceedings. We would also welcome
attention to ensuring that the existing indictments are
sufficiently focused.

The success of the completion strategy does not
depend solely on the Tribunal, however. The
international community can help by supporting the
Tribunal's efforts to help create the capacity for
domestic trials of low- and mid-level cases. We note
the significant work being done in Sarajevo, Belgrade
and Zagreb in that regard, and urge other States to
contribute to domestic war crimes prosecutions through
either direct financial assistance or in-kind
contributions.

We call on all States to fulfil their legal
obligations to cooperate fully with the ICTY. Such
cooperation includes access to relevant and necessary
information, as well as the apprehension of all fugitive
indictees within their territory and their transfer to The
Hague without further delay.

The United States calls on Serbia and
Montenegro and the Bosnian Serb authorities to fulfil
their obligations to the ICTY, in particular through the
apprehension and transfer to the Tribunal of Radovan
Karadzic and Ratko Mladic, for whom the Tribunal's
doors will always remain open. The United States and
others in the international community have made clear
to Serbia and Montenegro and the Bosnian Serb
authorities that upholding international obligations to
the ICTY is a prerequisite for further integration into
the Euro-Atlantic community. As long as Karadzic and
Mladic remain at large, Serbia and Montenegro and
Bosnia and Herzegovina will not be able to engage
fully with Euro-Atlantic institutions.

We are disappointed that, despite many
statements of intent from the Government of Serbia,
progress has not been made on the apprehension of
Mladic. We call on Serbian Prime Minister Kostunica
as head of Government and on Defence Minister
Stankovic to intensify their efforts to apprehend and
deliver Mladic and all other fugitive indictees to The
Hague. Efforts will be judged not only by words, but
by results. The international community must continue
to exercise additional scrutiny of Serbia and
Montenegro and the Bosnian Serb authorities to ensure
their full cooperation with the Tribunal.

The United States also expresses its appreciation
to President Mose and Mr. Jallow for their reports to
the Council. The United States remains strongly
committed to the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda and is pleased to note the increased pace of
trials under the leadership of President Mose. We must
all continue to work together to ensure the success of
the Tribunals completion strategy, which seeks to
conclude trials by 2008 and all work by 2010, as was
previously endorsed by the Security Council.

To facilitate the implementation of the
completion strategy, President Mose has recommended
that the terms of office of the Tribunal's current
permanent judges be extended to 31 December 2008.
The United States supports that proposal and agrees
with President Mose that that measure will provide
continuity and avoid delays that would necessarily
result if new judges were to be elected in 2007.

We again call on all States, particularly Kenya
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, to fulfil
their international obligations to apprehend and
transfer to the International tribunal all persons
indicted for war crimes by the Tribunal who are within
their territory. Those fugitives continue to foment
conflict in the Great Lakes region and must be actively
pursued and apprehended, consistent with numerous
Security Council resolutions adopted under Chapter
VII of the Charter, including resolution 1534 (2004)
and resolution 1503 (2003).

