Mr. Spatafora (Italy): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). The acceding
countries Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, the Slovak
Republic and Slovenia; the associated countries
Bulgaria, Romania, Turkey and the European Free
Trade Association (EFTA) countries members of the
European Economic Area Iceland and Norway declare
that they align themselves with this statement.

The European Union unequivocally condemns all
acts of terrorism as criminal and remains deeply
convinced that no terrorism is justifiable, irrespective
of its motivations, objectives, forms or manifestation.
The European Union, along with all its member States,
is strongly committed to defeating this threat, so that
succeeding generations can live in a safer and more
peaceful world.

The need to fight against terrorist attacks of all
kinds gives us the opportunity strongly to reaffirm the
importance we attach to those values which are the
cornerstone of the European Union and of the vast
majority of the international community: respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms, humanitarian
law, and the rule of law.

We believe that efforts to combat the scourge of
terrorism must be conducted in full respect for our
common values. In its internal anti-terrorist legislation,
the European Union has set high standards for the
protection of human rights, which facilitate social
consensus and rallying around the cause.

The European Union recognizes and supports the
central role of the United Nations in the fight against
terrorism everywhere. In that regard, we wish to
reaffirm the high priority attributed by the European
Union to the signature and ratification by all member
States of the 12 United Nations conventions against
terrorism in all its forms. The EU members and the
acceding countries are now parties to the vast majority
of those conventions.

We are backing the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC) with the same firmness and resolve. The
Committee, since it was established under resolution
1373 (2001), has, through its continued and consistent
work, provided the international community with a
solid, valuable and shared basis to counteract terrorism.

Resolution 1456 (2003) stresses the need for
closer cooperation between the CTC and regional and
subregional organizations in the fight against terrorism.
As we stated in the EU report submitted at the meeting
of the CTC with international, regional and subregional
organizations that took place in New York on 6 March
last, the European Union has introduced a wide range
of legislative and political measures in all the areas
covered by resolution 1373 (2001).

Mr. President, I should like also to commend your
able leadership of the Committee and its highly
focused and proactive approach, and to say that we
strongly support you.

The European Union works in close coordination
with international, regional and subregional
organizations and forums supporting and participating
in many of the counter-terrorism activities that are
carried out within these frameworks. The EU is
actively collaborating with the United Nations and its
main bodies operating in the field of fighting terrorism
and, at the same time, maintains its close cooperation
with the relevant United Nations specialized agencies.

Moreover, with the aim of giving substantive and
effective support to third countries in implementing
their commitments under resolution 1373 (2001) and
other international obligations, the EU has established
a strategy for providing those countries with additional
and streamlined technical assistance projects. These
have been specifically designed to help selected
countries to fulfil their obligations under resolution
1373 (2001).

The fight against the financing of terrorism
remains a top priority for the EU. We have increased
our efforts and effectiveness in this field, focusing our
attention on cutting financial flows and other forms of
support for terrorist organizations. We are committed to
strengthening internal procedures in order to prevent
groups from obtaining or diverting funds that are
directed towards charitable purposes.

Further work has been undertaken as regards the
freezing of funds and economic resources in order to
prevent terrorism funding. The legislation targeting Al
Qaeda and the Taliban has been updated several times
so as to bring it in line with the amendments decided
by the competent Security Council sanctions
Committee, as well as with the exceptions foreseen in
resolution 1452 (2002).

The EU believes that special attention should be
devoted to the possible links between terrorism,
organized crime and drug trafficking. We have to be
aware that terrorist organizations may exploit
migration flows in order to penetrate borders and
disseminate their members so as to implement their
criminal plans. A specific Council decision has been
adopted to address these problems by stressing the
need for simultaneous investigation.

The EU also recognizes the role of the Terrorism
Prevention Branch of the Centre for International
Crime Prevention in strengthening the capabilities of
the United Nations in the prevention of terrorism and
to offer advice on the implementation of both the
pertinent Security Council resolutions and the United
Nations legal instruments against terrorism.

As is stated in the conclusions reached at the
European Council in Thessalonica, the European Union
is fully aware that the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and their means of delivery constitutes a
threat to international peace and security. The
acquisition of weapons of mass destruction or related
materials by terrorists would represent an additional
threat to the international system with potentially
uncontrollable consequences.

The EU is committed to further elaborating,
before the end of the year, a coherent strategy to
address the threat of proliferation, and to continuing to
develop and implement the EU action plan as a matter
of priority. Our starting point will be a comprehensive
and regularly updated threat analysis. Our approach
will be guided by our commitment to uphold and
implement multilateral disarmament and non-
proliferation treaties and agreements; our support for
the multilateral institutions charged, respectively, with
verifying and upholding compliance with those
treaties; our commitment to strong national and
internationally coordinated export controls; and,
finally, our commitment to cooperate with the United
States and other partners that share our objectives.

