The President (spoke in Spanish): I would like
to warmly welcome to the Security Council the
Secretary-General, Ministers and other representatives
whose presence in the Chamber today underscores the
importance of the subject we are discussing.

In accordance with rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representatives
of Albania, Algeria, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bangladesh, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Cuba, Cyprus, Ecuador, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Georgia, Germany, Guatemala, Guyana, Hungary,
India, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel,
Italy, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Maldives, Morocco, the Netherlands, Nicaragua,
Nigeria, Pakistan, Panama, Peru, Poland, the Republic
of Korea, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Sweden, the
Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey, the
United Arab Emirates and Viet Nam to participate in
this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following to
participate in this meeting: His Excellency Mr. Ioannis
Vrailas, Deputy Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations; His Excellency Mr. Tete
Antonio, Permanent Observer of the African Union to
the United Nations; His Excellency Mr. Ahmed Fathalla,
Permanent Observer for the League of Arab States to
the United Nations; and His Excellency Mr. Gonzalo
Koncke, Permanent Observer of the Organization of
American States to the United Nations.

I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in this meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
previous practice in that regard.
It is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2016/103, which contains the text of
a letter dated 1 February 2016 from the Permanent
Representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-
General, transmitting a concept note on the item under
consideration.

I now give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon.

