Mr. Kaxuxwena (Namibia): My delegation
commends Ambassador Ward of Jamaica for his
leadership of the Working Group, which led to the
adoption of today's resolution in the Security Council.

At the Summit of the Security Council, the
President of Namibia, Mr. Sam Nujoma, commended
the report of the Panel on United Nations Peace
Operations and the recommendations therein. We
therefore welcome the speedy consideration of the
Brahimi Report system-wide. In the View of my
delegation, the recommendations contained in the
resolution adopted today give us an opportunity to take
into account lessons learned in past and ongoing peace
operations.

As per the Charter of the United Nations,
peacekeeping operations are a collective and shared
responsibility. While regional organizations have a role
to play in peace and security, the primary responsibility
of maintaining international peace and security rests
with the Security Council. In this regard, the provision
included in the resolution to strengthen the system of
consultations with troop-contributing countries at all
levels during the consideration of mandates is of
paramount importance. My delegation also agrees with
those who have emphasized clear and credible
mandates.

We stress the need for rapid deployment and look
forward to the findings by the Secretary-General on the
modalities for achieving these objectives. Indeed, in
maintaining international peace and security, our best
guarantee is to tackle the root causes of conflict.
Investing in the promotion of sustainable development
is indispensable to peace and security.

The report further reaffirms the indispensable role
that women play in conflict prevention and resolution
and endorses fully mainstreaming a gender perspective
in peacekeeping operations. The full implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) is therefore crucial. We are
pleased to note that in the implementation plan the
Secretary-General has recommended the creation of a
gender unit in the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations.

