Mr. Rosengren (Finland): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union. The acceding
countries Bulgaria and Romania, the candidate
countries Turkey, Croatia and the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, the countries of the
Stabilisation and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina and
Montenegro and the European Free Trade Association
country member of the European Economic Area
Iceland, as well as Ukraine and the Republic of
Moldova, align themselves with this statement.

The European Union would like to thank Under-
Secretary-General Gambari for his briefing on the
situation in the Middle East. We would also like to
thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2006/670)
on the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006). The
European Union fully supports the Secretary-General
in his efforts to find ways to implement that resolution.

It is now 11 days since the adoption of the
resolution and eight days since the cessation of
hostilities went into effect. The region has started the
process of recovering from the violence of the past
weeks. A number of encouraging steps have been
taken. We welcome the quick decision of the
Government of Lebanon to send Lebanese army forces
to the south of the country, and its rapid
implementation, as well as the beginning of the
withdrawal of the Israel Defense Forces (IDF).

The EU commends the constructive way the
parties have been coordinating with the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) on the withdrawal
of the IDF and the deployment of the Lebanese army.
The incidents that have occurred, especially in recent
days, demonstrate that the situation is very fragile.
Therefore, we strongly encourage all parties to do their
utmost to ensure that the cessation of hostilities is
maintained and to transform it into a durable ceasefire.

The international community will have to play an
important role in contributing to the stabilization of the
situation on the ground. We know that we need to
move swiftly to deploy the international force in
southern Lebanon in order to support the full
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006). The new
UNIFIL will be a challenging operation. It will have to
be different from the old UNIFIL to undertake its tasks
successfully. Many EU countries are willing to
participate in this common effort to help bring about
peace in the region. Some have already made their
decision to send troops, while others are considering it.

It is also important that all States in the region
play a constructive role in order, first, to contribute to a
reduction of tensions and then to be able to fully
implement resolution 1701 (2006).

The European Union welcomes the fact that the
cessation of hostilities has greatly improved the
frequency and quantity of humanitarian assistance. But
much remains to be done, and the Secretary-General's
report sets out the key priority areas for the
humanitarian community during this immediate post-
ceasefire phase. It is important that the air and sea
blockade be lifted as soon as possible to allow
unimpeded access to Lebanon for humanitarian
operations. There has been a mass return of displaced
people. In addition to the need for aid to meet basic
needs of the people, such as water supply and
temporary shelter, support is urgently needed in the
disposal of unexploded ordnance and the cleaning up
of oil spills.

The EU presidency Minister for Development,
Paula Lehtomaki, and EU Commissioner Louis Michel
were in the region last week in order to assess the
situation from an EU point of view. The EU will
continue to contribute to the humanitarian relief work.
EU aid already committed amounts to €74 million. It is
also clear that when full-scale reconstruction work
starts the EU will play a role, in close cooperation with
the Government of Lebanon and with other
international partners. The relief and early recovery
conference that will be hosted by Sweden on 31 August
will provide an important forum in which to continue
to discuss these pressing issues.

In addition to Lebanon, the situation in the
Palestinian territories also remains a cause of great
concern for the EU. The humanitarian situation has
been deteriorating for a long time; civilian
infrastructure has been destroyed and civilian lives
have been lost. These developments continue to pose
the risk of further deterioration of the situation in the
region. Both Israel and the Palestinian Authority need
to act to address this situation. The abducted Israeli
soldier must be released quickly and unconditionally.

The parties need to return to the peace process on
the basis of the road map. An unequivocal commitment
by all parties to a viable, independent Palestinian State,
living side by side with Israel and its other neighbours,
is a key to stability and security in the whole region.

The EU is committed to promoting a
comprehensive peace plan for the Middle East in close
cooperation with partners and the countries in the
region. There is no military solution to any of the
problems facing the people of the region.

