I thank President Issoufou and the Nigerien presidency for convening this very important meeting. May I first join others in thanking the Secretary-General for his valuable insights and commending his efforts at leading us through this global pandemic. I also wish to thank Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat for his contribution and the specific focus and insight he brings from Africa, as well as for the response of the African Union. If I may, I want to start with positives. As we face challenges, we often forget what has truly been achieved. The United Nations system, particularly the World Health Organization, has responded quickly to health, humanitarian and socioeconomic needs and has deployed around the globe in places that are home to some of the world's most vulnerable communities. The World Bank and the International Monetary Fund have adapted their instruments to the macroeconomic challenges posed by the pandemic, and have worked diligently in partnership with the United Nations. The Group of 20 moved swiftly to suspend debt-service payments for the world's poorest countries so that those nations are supported in their direct efforts to protect lives first and to alleviate economic and financial crises. And, as Minister for the Commonwealth, I note that the 54 Commonwealth Heads of Government issued a joint statement setting out a full range of international priorities in response to the pandemic and a commitment to work to mitigate its effects. I also acknowledge Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance, to which the United Kingdom recently pledged over $2 billion - an organization that has seen nations come together in search for a solution to protect people with diseases. These examples show the international community and the global response at its best, working together and meeting our collective needs through multilateral and good faith efforts, with full cooperation among the States Members of the United Nations. Yet, as much as this crisis has brought us together, there have been times when it has driven us apart. At times, geopolitics have dampened cooperation and hindered our agility. The pandemic has tested the international system like never before. It is therefore in our collective interest to ensure that the multilateral system does not just survive this crisis, but rather emerges from the COVID-19 pandemic stronger and more united in order to cope with future challenges. There will be a time to reflect on the lessons of this pandemic and how we can better prepare for the next challenge. The United Nations reforms implemented over the past two years have been shown to work, and we must continue them and strive to improve all our international organizations. But now is not the moment to reject international institutions. The principles that emerged from one of the darkest periods of human history, as the Secretary-General reminded us, are needed once again to bring us out of the lockdown and back into the light. Preventing the indirect effects of this pandemic may prove harder still, with implications for international peace and security. We know, for instance, that hundreds of millions of people around the world face food insecurity. Sadly, that will get worse. Global cooperation is therefore both critical and necessary to avoid catastrophe. That is why the United Kingdom made a call to action to prevent famine, with $150 million of new funding, on top of the $1 billion we have already contributed to the international response. We also appointed a new Special Envoy for Famine Prevention and Humanitarian Affairs, Nick Dyer. We urge all Member States to support our collective efforts. In conclusion, let me assure all colleagues, partners and Member States that the United Kingdom firmly stands by the values of the Charter of the United Nations. We believe strongly in its principles of peaceful international cooperation and, particularly, respect for human rights. This year, as we commemorate the seventy- fifth anniversary of the United Nations, we should all reaffirm our commitment to those valuable principles and, in doing so, rebuild, equip ourselves and renew our support to ensure that we can come together to tackle challenges and seize opportunities that lie ahead.
