The President: I shall make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Indonesia.

Indonesia acknowledges that the South
Sudanese parties continue to make progress in their
implementation of the Revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan, including their adherence to a permanent
ceasefire, the reconstitution of various key institutions
and ongoing confidence-building measures. Indeed,
there is still a great deal of work to be done, including
on transitional security arrangements.

My delegation calls on all South Sudanese parties
to direct their energy to ensure that all pending tasks
are completed in a timely manner, making use of the
six-month extension of the pre-transitional period.
The pride of the civilian population should be reason
enough for all South Sudanese parties to demonstrate
their ultimate resolve. We stand by our conviction that
the Revitalized Agreement is the best and only option
the South Sudanese have right now. As we have said
before in this very Chamber, there is no plan B. To
that end, Indonesia fully supports the continued and
proactive engagement of countries of the region, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the
African Union and the United Nations to support the
South Sudanese peace process.
My delegation has maintained a consistent view
regarding the use of sanctions. Sanctions should be used
only as a means to support a wider political strategy; they
should not be an end in themselves. Sanctions must have
a clear, transparent and measurable timetable. Their
application must be periodically evaluated, including
against the backdrop of the situation on the ground. As
a matter of principle, we see the need to always be clear
about key benchmarks that must be achieved to guide
the Council in reviewing the measures it has imposed.

Indeed, the resolution could have been stronger
had it contained the proper encouragement to South
Sudanese parties to make further progress in the
peace process. Having said that, our long-standing
commitment to supporting peace and stability in
South Sudan informed our decision to vote in favour
of resolution 2471 (2019). We care for the safety and
well-being of the people of South Sudan and that
should always be the focus of attention of the Council.
My delegation hopes that the technical extension we
have just adopted will provide a space for the South
Sudanese parties to instil confidence and work together
to fulfil the commitments they have undertaken.

I should like to close by commending the South
Sudanese Government and people for their perseverance
in their quest for peace and stability.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I would like to extend my sincere appreciation
on behalf of the delegation of Indonesia for all of
the support and kind words that have been extended.
However, Indonesia will continue its work until our
last day, which is tomorrow. I will then be smiling
and thanking the Kuwaiti President of the Council
and our Kuwaiti brothers. We still have another day of
interesting work to be done.

The meeting rose at 10.50 am.
