Mr. Malmierca Diaz (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Permit me to begin by congratulating Greece on its
work in the Security Council presidency during the
month of September. I also thank the Chairmen of the
Committees established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004) for the
information provided at this meeting.

Cuba has provided detailed information to the
Security Council's Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC) about the terrorist acts carried out against Cuba
by various individuals and organizations, as well as
about the complicit protection provided to them by the
Government of the United States. Thus far, there is no
evidence that the Committee has taken any action, even
to assess the information submitted, or that it has
launched an investigation into the failure of the United
States to comply with its obligations under resolution
1373 (2001).

The Government of Cuba once again reiterates its
request to the CTC to undertake an assessment of the
information submitted in documents S/2002/ 15,
S/2004/753 and S/2005/341, among others. That would
assist in the efforts to put an end to the impunity
enjoyed in United States territory by those who have
carried out, and are still planning, terrorist acts against
Cuba.
It is impossible to eliminate terrorism if we
condemn some terrorist acts while remaining silent
about, tolerating or justifying others.

A few days from now, 6 October, will mark
another anniversary of the monstrous terrorist act
carried out against a Cubana Airlines passenger
aircraft, which resulted in the deaths of 73 persons.
When Cuba asked the Security Council to act, nothing
was done. The Cuban draft resolution S/23990 was not
even considered. The representative of the United
States, speaking at that Council meeting, called it a
waste of time.

One of those responsible for the mid-air
explosion of the Cuban aircraft, Orlando Bosch, not
only walks freely on United States streets, but also
makes frequent statements on television and in the
print media. In those statements, he boasts, without any
remorse, of his many terrorist acts against Cuba.

Another person responsible for that crime is the
notorious international terrorist Luis Posada Carriles.
The United States refuses to comply with its
international obligation to prosecute him or extradite
him to the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, where he
is wanted by the judicial authorities. Despite the fact
that the United States Government itself has
acknowledged that he is a dangerous terrorist, Posada
Carriles is being held in Texas on the simple charge of
being an illegal immigrant. On top of all that, only a
few days ago, a federal judge recommended that he be
freed. Cuba today denounces most strongly before the
Security Council the fact that this international terrorist
could soon be released from prison. If impunity
prevails and the terrorist is freed, the Government of
the United States will bear full responsibility. It would
have to answer to its own people and to the
international community for such as infamous act.

The date of 11 September was another
anniversary date - that of the assassination of Felix
Garcia, a diplomat of the Cuban Mission to the United
Nations. That terrorist act is etched indelibly in the
memory of the Cuban people. Felix was riddled with
bullets when his car was stopped at a red traffic light in
Queens, a few blocks from this building. His assassin
was Pedro Crispin Remon, a member of the anti-Cuban
terrorist organization Omega 7. He is the same person
who, two decades later, attempted to assassinate
President Fidel Castro at the auditorium of the
University of Panama, acting in complicity with Luis
Posada Carriles. Despite Cuba's continued
denunciations, including those submitted many times
to the Security Council, today that terrorist also walks
freely in the city of Miami, where he boasts about his
sad fame.

Paradoxically, those who threaten the entire
world today in the name of a hypocritical counter-
terrorism campaign and protect on their own territory
Luis Posada Carriles, Orlando Bosch and other
convicted and confessed terrorists are the same people
who hold hostage in maximum-security prisons five
Cuban young people who are true counter-terrorism
fighters. Gerardo Hernandez, Ramon Labafiino,
Fernando Gonzalez, Antonio Guerrero and Rene
Gonzalez were only trying, with great altruism and
valour, to obtain information about the terrorist groups
located in Miami to prevent them from carrying out
violent acts and to save the lives of Cuban and United
States citizens.

In May, Cuba submitted a comprehensive report
to the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) on our country's
strict compliance with all the provisions set out in
resolution 1617 (2005), including those related to the
embargo on weapons and related material, travel
restrictions and the freezing of assets of persons and
entities included on the consolidated list. In June, our
country submitted its fifth report to the Counter-
06-54204
Terrorism Committee. The report, which is the result of
an extensive and serious process of elaboration,
accurately and thoroughly answers the questions asked
by the CTC and provides additional information useful
to the work of the Committee.

Despite a number of arbitrary Security Council
methods and decisions, our country will, as ever,
continue to abide strictly by the resolutions adopted by
this organ, including those related to the issue of
terrorism. We will maintain our good-faith cooperation
with the Council's subsidiary bodies responsible for
these matters. Cuba has never allowed and will not
allow its territory to be used for the perpetration of
terrorist acts against any State, without exception.

We will continue our combat against terrorism, in
all of its forms and manifestations, with strong resolve,
as we have been doing all along.

