Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Mr. Mariano Fernandez Amunategui, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Haiti, for his presentation, and I congratulate him on
his appointment at the head of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). I shall
limit my statement to three points.

Our most recent meeting on this issue in April
2011 (S/PV.6510) took place following the second
round of presidential and legislative elections in Haiti.
A peaceful and historic transition, as noted by the
Secretary-General in his report (S/2011/540), indeed
took place between two democratically elected
Presidents. We should congratulate the Haitian people
on this, as well as MINUSTAH for its efforts, which
made these elections possible.

Today we call upon the authorities of the country
to act with a sense of responsibility and allow the
establishment of a Government. Cooperation between
executive and legislative powers is never easy, as we
all know, but it is the mark of statesmen to put national
interests before partisan or individual interests.

Secondly, the international community needs
political stability and an established Government in
Haiti so as to continue its efforts for stabilization and
rebuilding. We know what the challenges are: a calm
but fragile security situation; a reconstruction effort
that is taking too long; more than 600,000 internally
displaced persons; an economy that must be rebuilt; a
police force that is still unable to guarantee security
throughout the country; a fragile rule of law; an
upswing in criminality, particularly in Port-au-Prince;
and a cholera epidemic that, after a second spike last
June, could become endemic.

The endeavours of the international community
for Haiti for so many years - and not just since the
earthquake of 2010 - are commensurate with these
challenges. In addition to its participation in
MINUSTAH, France's aid totals more than
€326 million for 2010-2011. More than half of this sum
has already been disbursed. The European Union is
also providing significant support, and France aligns
itself with the statement to be made by its
representative.

We will pursue our efforts not in order to keep the
country on indefinite life support, but to strengthen
State capacities and those of the Haitian people. The
determination of the elected authorities to shoulder
their responsibilities and undertake the measures
necessary will be the best gauge of the staying power
of our collective efforts for development in Haiti.

This also applies to the United Nations and
MINUSTAH. We will renew the Mission's mandate in
the near future. Its means were enhanced so as to rise
to the exceptional circumstances created by the
earthquake. Circumstances have changed, and we must
take this into account. The humanitarian context has
changed and the elections are behind us. Therefore,
today we can reduce the number of military and civil
personnel deployed without endangering either the
ability of the Mission to fulfil its mandate or the
stability of the country. These are, moreover, the
conclusions of the Secretary-General's report.

We cannot ignore the people's feelings with
respect to the presence of foreign troops in their
country and the wishes of elected authorities. In this
context, it is important that the behaviour of soldiers
deployed in the country be exemplary. As the presence
of the United Nations in Haiti is part of a long-term
endeavour, and as we want MINUSTAH to be the last
peacekeeping operation deployed in Haiti, we hope that
it evolves in a gradual and responsible way.

