Mr. Cunningham (United States): Thank you,
Sir, for convening this public meeting on such a
pertinent and vital subject for the Security Council. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
continuing efforts - demonstrated today- to
strengthen the role of the United Nations in preventing
armed conflict and its attendant far-reaching
consequences for the international community. The
United States welcomes the Security Council's decision
to make the prevention of conflict a priority and sees it
as our responsibility as Member States and members of
this Council to address the underlying causes of
conflicts in hope of preventing them.

It has been eight months since we last discussed
conflict-prevention strategies in detail. We are
dismayed by the almost daily reports since then of
burgeoning crises. Developments in Sierra Leone and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and between
Ethiopia and Eritrea, recall similar tragic events in the
Balkans and East Timor. All remind us of the fragility
of peace and our shared obligation to use all of the
resources available to prevent and defuse conflict. As
another example, we are reminded sadly that this year
marks the five-year anniversary of Srebrenica. The
United Nations, and in particular we members of the
Security Council, must learn from these horrific events
and take steps so that future generations do not suffer.

As we know too well, peacekeeping missions
today have grown more and more complex - not only
in scale, but also in scope and mission. Concomitantly,
the resources required for successful missions, as well
as their costs, have also increased. This fact alone
justifies taking early and effective action to prevent the
development of armed conflict. But experience also
proves that there is no system as such that will get this
job done. Rather, we must all bring energy, intelligence
and imagination to developing the means to mitigate
the tensions that breed conflict. And we must commit
ourselves to early preventive action. We must not only
address the consequences of such tragedies, but, more
importantly, focus on the conditions that give rise to
conflict. Furthermore, we need a comprehensive
approach to conflict prevention, one that encompasses
the promotion of democracy, human rights, the rule of
law and equal economic opportunity - all elements of
a sure path to long-term global stability and
development.

The scale and complexity of recent United
Nations missions, such as those in East Timor and
Kosovo, and crises worldwide also underline the
importance of close cooperation and coordination
among United Nations organs. As we have noted
before - and will continue to do - the United Nations
cannot by itself get the job done. To maximize
effectiveness, we must augment our use of the existing
and capable resources available, in particular the
regional and subregional groups in Africa, Europe,
Asia and Latin America that have successfully
addressed local crises and helped to prevent the
escalation of violence. We must enhance further the
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
groups. We encourage the heightened international
attention to the need to take steps to prevent conflict -
for example, the determination of the Organization of
African Unity in pursuing a peaceful resolution to the
conflict between Ethiopia and Eritrea, and the recently
announced commitment of the G-8 to promote a
"culture of prevention". We ask all nations to actively
support such initiatives.

Another means of improving the United Nations
ability to prevent the outbreak of conflict is through
better early-warning, in order to allow the Council and
the Secretary-General to identify situations before they
deteriorate into armed violence. A possible means of
strengthening the United Nations conflict-prevention
and early-warning capacity may be to consider
reinforcing the roles of the Special Representatives of
the Secretary-General, in particular their abilities to
identify hotspots and to intervene early.

We note the establishment by the Secretary-
General of the Brahimi Panel on peacekeeping and
peace operations and welcome his efforts to conduct a
comprehensive review in this field as a contribution to
efforts to strengthen the quality and speed of United
Nations responses to peacekeeping challenges. Key to
increasing the effectiveness of the United Nations in
this regard is strengthening its capacity to recruit, train
and deploy international civilian police. This is a
critical element of conflict prevention, as international
civilian police help indigenous civilian police forces
develop the capacity to provide public security.

We also reiterate our concerns about the illicit
trafficking of small arms and light weapons and the
threat their uncontrolled proliferation and destabilizing
accumulations continue to pose to international peace
and security.

Noting the events in Sierra Leone, we also must
press forward on curbing the illicit trade of high value
commodities, in particular the illicit diamond trade,
used to prolong and exacerbate conflict. The United
States welcomes the initiatives proposed within the
United Nations framework to assess the impact of the
illegal exploitation of such natural resources and also
welcomes the G-8 commitment to addressing this
serious problem.

Last, but certainly not least, I would like to
highlight the role women can play in conflict
prevention and peace-building activities. We encourage
the United Nations to make better use of the
contributions of women in peace negotiations and
operations, particularly by naming more women as
special representatives of the Secretary-General and
special envoys. International efforts to address
mounting political, economic and humanitarian crises
can be substantially strengthened by integrating women
fully into all phases of the process of conflict
resolution, mitigation and prevention, thus enhancing
opportunities for building just and equitable societies.

As the Council continues to develop and refine
the methods and means to prevent conflict, our ability
to successfully undertake these preventative efforts will
undoubtedly improve. Today and in the future, the
United States welcomes the opportunity to work with
all Council members so as to put into practice the ideas
and plans we are discussing here today.

