I would like to thank the President of the Security Council for convening this important and timely meeting on Somalia. I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the three African members of the Council - the Niger, South Africa and Tunisia - and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. At the outset, we would like to thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive report (S/2020/398) on the situation in Somalia. We would also like to thank Mr. James Swan, Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM), Mr. Francisco Madeira, Special Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission for Somalia and Head of the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), and Ms. Agnes Marcaillou, Director of the United Nations Mine Action Service (UNMAS), for their briefings. The three African members of the Council and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines wish to address the situation in Somalia, the role of the United Nations through UNSOM and the United Nations Support Office in Somalia (UNSOS), as well as the role of AMISOM. On the political front, we agree with the Secretary-General's observation that this year marks a critical period for the advancement of national priorities in Somalia. A number of targets and benchmarks in various policy documents, such as the Mutual Accountability Framework and the Somali transition plan, were set to be achieved this year. The concerted efforts of all Somalis is needed in order to realize those national priorities. However, that requires constructive dialogue between the Federal Government of Somalia and the federal member states if they are to resolve their differences - starting with tackling the challenge posed by the spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic in an already fragile situation. The three African members of the Council and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines echo the sentiments of the Secretary-General that political differences must not be addressed through violence. We are therefore concerned about the unfortunate armed clashes that erupted in the Gedo region of Jubaland and in Galmudug during the period under review. We urge the Somali parties to use dialogue as a peaceful means to settle disputes and as a tool for cooperation, which is critical to achieving national priorities, including the holding of general elections in 2020-2021. In that regard, we welcome the positive development of the meeting between President Mohamed Abdullahi Mohamed Farmajo and Somaliland President Muse Bihi Abdi. We also welcome the announcement by President Said Abdullahi Mohamed Deni of Puntland of his intention to travel to Mogadishu and to other federal member states to advance dialogue. We view those overtures as positive steps towards addressing the lingering tensions between the Federal Government of Somalia and the federal member states, and an indication of the will of Somali parties to address their differences. One of Somalia's critical priorities is the preparation and holding of one- person-one-vote elections. The three African members of the Council and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines underline that dialogue, inclusive political participation and the resolution of political differences between the Federal Government of Somalia and the federal member states is critical to the success of those elections and to national cohesion. Furthermore, we commend the enactment of the electoral law and encourage the expeditious formulation of regulations necessary to ensure its implementation and the broad support of all federal member states. It is also important to ensure the participation and representation of women, youth and all members of the Somali population, and to prepare and secure the electoral process. We encourage the international community to continue to mobilize resources to help the Federal Government of Somalia finance the elections. We remain deeply concerned about the volatile security situation due to the persistent terrorist threat posed by Al-Shabaab and the elements of the pro-Islamic State in Iraq and the Shams in Somalia, who continue to carry out targeted terrorist attacks against the Somali National Army (SNA), AMISOM, local security forces, civilians and the United Nations. Despite the commendable progress and success of joint operations conducted by the SNA and AMISOM to recapture towns from Al-Shabaab in south Somalia, the terrorist group continues to launch attacks and carry out assassinations using mortars and improvised explosive devices (IEDs). More has to be done to improve security in Somalia in general, and to mitigate mortar and IED attacks in particular. We agree with calls to strengthen the IED threat-mitigation capabilities of the Somali security forces with a view to better protecting themselves from the increased deployment of IED attacks and preventing harm to civilians and critical infrastructure. We highly appreciate the close cooperation and support among the SNA, AMISOM and the United Nations - particularly UNSOM, UNSOS and UNMAS - as well as the support of international partners for the national security architecture and national transitional plan. Since its deployment in 2007, AMISOM has been playing an important role in supporting the SNA's efforts to restore security and stability in Somalia. The recent success of joint AMISOM and SNA operations in Lower Shabelle in recovering territory attests to the valuable role of AMISOM. There is, however, a need for continued efforts to stabilize the recovered territories and to generate troops and capacities within the SNA and the police in order to secure recovered areas, facilitate stabilization activities, consolidate gains and avoid setbacks. We urge the Federal Government of Somalia - with the support of the United Nations, AMISOM and international partners - to continue the generation, training and resourcing of capable and effective Somali national security forces that will ultimately take over the security responsibilities, in line with the transitional plan and the national security architecture. To that end, we reiterate our previous calls for the international community and international partners to mobilize the necessary resources, including the replenishment of the Trust Fund for AMISOM, in order to support the Somali security forces as they continue to make commendable progress in weakening Al-Shabaab and securing and stabilizing liberated areas. On the humanitarian front, Somalia continues to be mired in a grave humanitarian crisis. Somalia is facing a triple shock - floods, desert locust infestation and the COVID-19 pandemic. The threat to food insecurity remains high, despite the favourable seasonal rains. In some parts, unpredictable rainfall due to climate change has resulted in flash flooding, which not only impacts food security but also leads to death, displacement and the risk of water-borne diseases. The rains have further exacerbated conditions and accelerated the locust infestation that has affected the entire Horn of Africa. We are concerned that the security situation continues to impede humanitarian operations and thwart assistance to people in need in Somalia. We call upon the international community and humanitarian organizations to continue supporting the Federal Government of Somalia and the Somali people in their quest for a peaceful and stable Somalia, including through the provision of prompt and adequate funding, as well as through contributions to the 2020 Somalia humanitarian response plan. The year 2020 will be remembered in history as the greatest challenge of our generation - the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic. Like all of us around the globe, Somalia has not been spared from the pandemic. As of mid-May, it has recorded over 1,400 cases of COVID-19. Given the country's numerous challenges and vulnerabilities, this pandemic presents specific risks. Measures must be taken to mitigate the impact of COVID-19 for the sake of the continuity of peacebuilding and State-building activities in Somalia. We commend the efforts of the Somali Government, United Nations agencies and partners in launching the Somalia COVID-19 country preparedness and response plan. We note that the coronavirus may exacerbate the already dire humanitarian situation, as well as the socioeconomic, development coordination and security challenges facing Somalia. In addition, it is important to safeguard the well-being of those under the employ of AMISOM, the SNA and other partners as they continue to provide security, including by facilitating the provision of the humanitarian assistance so critically needed by vulnerable Somalis. With respect to economic developments, we note that Somalia has made significant strides in the past few years in improving its economic prospects. All interventions undertaken by the Federal Government of Somalia have yielded positive results. We therefore commend the Federal Government for reaching the decision point under the World Bank and International Monetary Fund (IMF) Highly Indebted Poor Countries Initiative. That has facilitated the clearing of Somalia's arrears. It is also a matter of great satisfaction that the World Bank and the IMF have issued a joint staff advisory note on the ninth national development plan, for the period 2020 to 2024, noting that the plan exceeded the standards of a typical interim poverty reduction strategy. That is a positive and welcome development given the humanitarian, socioeconomic, resource-related and other challenges that Somalia faces in the period ahead. It is critical now, more than ever, that the international community join hands in support of Somalia, including through cooperation, coordination and resource mobilization, so as to mitigate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and ensure that Somalia continues on its positive trajectory of State-building and peacebuilding. We wish to underline the importance of fostering strong and effective regional cooperation in the Horn of Africa, particularly between Somalia and its neighbours. That is necessary if we are to bring peace, stability and development to Somalia and across the region. In that regard, we call on the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the African Union, the United Nations and the international community to continue to support efforts to foster strong and effective regional cooperation in the Horn of Africa. Finally, we commend the constant efforts and commitment of the United Nations, AMISOM, the Federal Government of Somalia and international partners to promote stabilization, federalism and State-building in Somalia. In view of the approaching end of AMISOM's mandate on 31 May, the three African members of the Council and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines would like to reaffirm their support of maintaining an AMISOM presence in Somalia as a stabilizing force for the SNA. We look forward to constructive engagement on a new resolution that will reaffirm the Council's commitment to support the activities of AMISOM by maintaining the Mission's current capabilities and authorizing its deployment for another 12 months. It is our view that the 12-month extension will provide the necessary space for Somalia, AMISOM, the United Nations and other partners to assess and deal with the impact of COVID-19, the security situation on the ground, the upcoming elections, the comprehensive review of the Somali transition plan, effective force generation and the need to preserve the gains made thus far.
