Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): The issue
before the Security Council is topical for a wide range
of issues on the agenda of the Council, including
conflict prevention and post-conflict peace-building.
Observance of the rule of law is an essential element
for the effective functioning of States and the
promotion and protection of the rights of individuals. It
is also a crucial ingredient in relationships between
States and thus of a functioning multilateral system.
Indeed, the Council is instrumental in upholding the
rule of law and must therefore continue to act on the
basis of clear rules in carrying out the tasks with which
it is entrusted.

It is difficult to imagine effective application of
the rule of law without permanent courts in place to
enforce it. As far as relations among States are
concerned, the primary competent body is obviously
the International Court of Justice. When it comes to
dealing with individuals who violate rules of
international law applicable to them, the situation is
slightly more complex. The principle of
complementarity is a central concept in that respect. It
is always preferable that States have in place an
independent and effective judiciary that brings to
justice those individuals who have committed serious
crimes under existing international law.

The United Nations can play - and on many
occasions has played - a decisive role in assisting
States to enhance their national capacities to that end.
This important function of the United Nations, both in
post-conflict situations and in the context of conflict
prevention, must be continued and enhanced. One
important measure to that end is the proposed
establishment of a pool of legal experts - including in
the area of criminal justice - who can be called upon
to provide legal assistance in the context of operations
mandated by the Security Council, but also in the
context of other activities, such as those carried out by
specialized agencies and programmes.

Over the past decade, the Council has established
ad hoc tribunals to deal with serious violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law
committed in the former Yugoslavia and in Rwanda.
The ad hoc tribunals have played a valuable role in
bringing to justice those who have committed the most
serious crimes. At the same time, they have been
plagued by a variety of problems rooted in their ad hoc
character - ranging from managerial to credibility
issues - and the costs have proved to be quite
unsustainable over a protracted period of time.

It became particularly clear from that experience
that only a permanent international tribunal could serve
the cause of international criminal justice while
maintaining the necessary efficiency and credibility.
Such a permanent body was established in 1998, when
the Rome Diplomatic Conference adopted the Statute
of the International Criminal Court (ICC). The Court is
based on the very principle of complementarity that I
mentioned earlier. It is meant, first and foremost, to
ensure that States have effective and independent
judiciaries in place to deal with the most serious crimes
under international law. Only in the absence of such a
judiciary - owing to the unwillingness or inability of
the States concerned - the International Criminal
Court can step in to deliver justice.

The Court poses a challenge and provides an
opportunity for the United Nations system to continue
and enhance its activities in the area of justice and the
rule of law. Specialized agencies and programmes can
play an invaluable role in helping States to build or
solidify strong national judiciaries. In cases where
States are not in a position to so, the ICC can step in
and bring criminals to justice. It is thus clear that the
Court can play a twofold role: first, in motivating
States to strengthen their judicial mechanisms; and
secondly, in assisting States - especially weakened
States, during or after a conflict, for instance - in
delivering justice in accordance with the Rome Statute.

The Security Council is, of course, given a
particular role under the Statute. In fact, the
relationship between the Court and the Council is one
of the most carefully crafted aspects of the Rome
Statute. Specifically, the Council is given the
possibility of referring situations to the Court - a
function that can be of particular relevance in
situations of conflict or post-conflict transition, where
States are most likely not to be in a position to deal
with the crimes in question through their national
mechanisms.

The vast experience of the United Nations makes
it clear that justice and the rule of law are of central
importance in conflict and post-conflict situations.
Ending the climate of impunity and restoring the
confidence of the people concerned can be
indispensable elements in securing a peaceful
transition. The United Nations system as a whole, and
the Council in particular, should therefore further
develop the instruments available to enhance the rule
of law and to avail itself of existing institutions to that
end.

In conclusion, I should like to thank the United
Kingdom for initiating this process. We look forward to
its continuation.

