The President: On that point, perhaps one of the
Secretary-General's reports could cover what is being
done to address that question, but I also want to make
the point on behalf of the Council - and this is a
public meeting - that, in West Timor, there are stories
of continued abuse of women. It is very important that
the Government of Indonesia, amongst others - and it
has the responsibility here - should take these cases
very seriously. They are happening on its watch in its
territory.

I am very grateful to the Assistant Secretary-
General for the frankness and comprehensiveness with
which he has gone into detail on our questions and
interests this morning. I think that has been very useful.

If no member wishes to make any final point, let
me just sum up so that the Secretariat and non-
members of the Council can be clear on what the
Council is expecting on this issue over the next few
weeks. I think that this morning's discussion has got
into a lot of extremely useful detail about our concerns
and I hope that the style of the meeting has added to
that.

I want the Assistant Secretary-General to make it
clear to the leadership of the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET)
how impressed the Council is by their efforts and how
much encouragement we give them to continue in quite
difficult circumstances. We also want to focus,
however, on what the Council can do over the coming
weeks and months to support UNTAET and we
therefore want the Secretary-General's reports to let the
Council know what recommendations the Secretary-
General may have for further action by the Council in
encouraging the international community to support the
move to independence by East Timor.

I think we have focused on a number of particular
points that should be regarded as priorities for the
reports and debates coming up. First of all, of course,
there is the overall political context within East Timor
and with its nearest neighbour, and in the regional
context.

Secondly, there is the capacity-building that is
necessary in East Timorese institutions in preparation
for independence. That should include the potential for
wider help from the international community, not just
from the Council or the family of United Nations
institutions.

Thirdly, there is the need for accelerated refugee
return from West Timor and care of refugees, both in
East and West Timor. Fourthly, there are the
arrangements for the 30 August elections and the
timetable of preparations for them. There is still a lot to
do to make sure that they are held fairly with maximum
participation of those who can and should qualify.

Fifthly, there is the issue of security. We regard it
as essential, if possible, to snuff out the continuing
threats to security and the economic and social
situation in East Timor. Tunisia raised the question of a
possible security assessment team Visit, and we would
like that to be considered. It would be relevant, I think,
for the Secretary-General to make specific
recommendations in respect of further security
measures in the 30 April report.

Sixthly, there is the issue of the economy
generally, but I welcome Bangladesh's raising of the
point about employment. We have seen - or perhaps
we have taken on board - the possible link between
youth unemployment and violence from frustrated and
bored gangs. Investment is clearly necessary -
motivation for talented East Timorese to return from
abroad if they can. This is an extremely important
aspect for peace and security, as well as for economic
development.

Finally, there is the exit strategy for UNTAET.
The Assistant Secretary-General heard this morning of
our strong interest in looking further ahead, regarding
where this is going to come out, both for East Timor
and for the United Nations presence there in the longer
term. In that respect, we will be keenly interested to be
kept abreast of the planning process. If it is sensitive,
we will go into informal consultations on it, but
planning ahead is of extreme interest to us.

I hope that those are useful pointers for the
Secretariat for these reports that are coming up.

If there are no more speakers on this subject, I
will close this agenda item. Of course, we will be
following it up very closely.

Before adjourning the meeting, I have one or two
notices from the Chair. This morning, since there was
no breaking of the silence procedure over the United
Nations Iraq-Kuwait Observer Mission, I have
informed the Secretary-General that we approve his
recommendation for the continuation of that mandate.

Regarding the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, there was a discussion yesterday, and you
encouraged me to speak to the Ugandan charge in
respect of incidents and violations of the ceasefire. I
have not been able to get directly to Ambassador
Morjane, but the Secretariat is quite clear that
Ambassador Morjane and his team approve of the
approach that we are taking. I will be proceeding with
that recommendation from the Council.

As for forthcoming meetings, there is, unless
there is an emergency, no meeting of the Council
tomorrow. The next meeting is on 9 April, when we
will be talking about our other extraordinary devolved
administration, that in Kosovo. I intend, unless
members of the Council want me to stop, to have this
kind of discussion about Kosovo. I think that it would
be productive on that issue as well.

Jean-Marie Guehenno, the Under-Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, will brief us on
his recent visit. It will be open to participation by non-
members of the Council. If delegations that have a
direct interest in this matter wish to make short
interventions, they should let me know in the normal
way.

If there is any need for informal consultations
over the next few days, before we have our next
scheduled informal consultations - on Tuesday, on
Sierra Leone and the region - I shall schedule them at
short notice.

The meeting rose at 1 pm.
