Mr. Monteiro (Portugal): According to the latest
report of the Secretary-General, there has been progress
in the implementation of the General Agreement on the
Establishment of Peace and National Accord in Tajikistan.
This is welcome news. It is particularly important to note
that the Commission on National Reconciliation, on which
both the Government of Tajikistan and the United Tajik
Opposition (UTO) are represented, has now been
convened on Tajik soil and has begun its work in earnest.

Other important steps have been taken, which have
de-escalated tensions and allowed the return of refugees.
There is no substitute for commitment and hard work by
the parties to make peace. We encourage both the
Government and the UT 0 actively to continue their
efforts to implement fully the General Agreement.

I was particularly happy to hear the representative of
Tajikistan state here today that genuine civil peace and
concord is irreversible.

The international community - in particular, the
United Nations - has been on hand to help the parties
reach this stage and will continue to do so by offering its
assistance towards implementing and consolidating peace
in Tajikistan.

 

The Security Council today extends the mandate of the
United Nations Mission of Observers in Tajikistan for six
months and authorizes an increase in its strength, as
recommended by the Secretary-General, in order to carry
out the tasks attributed to that United Nations mission. Like
others, however, we remain concerned that the security
situation is not yet under control, thereby threatening
UNMOT and other international personnel as they carry out
their activities. We stress that it is the responsibility of the
parties to ensure that unarmed United Nations personnel are
not put in harm's way, especially when they are striving to
help the Tajik people. In this context, we welcome the
agreement to form a joint Government/UTO security unit to
escort and protect UNMOT, and we urge its rapid
establishment.

Also important in this regard is the decision by the
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) to authorize its
peacekeeping forces in Tajikistan to provide security to the
United Nations on request. While it is the responsibility of
the parties to ensure the safety and security of United
Nations personnel in Tajikistan, this decision by the CIS
provides an important back-up for their protection.

The CIS peacekeeping forces in Tajikistan, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) Mission, and the States and organizations in the
Contact Group have played a crucial role in the
international efforts to help peace gain a foothold in
Tajikistan. We would like to add our voice to the tributes
paid to Mr. Gerd Merrem, and to the men and women of
UNMOT and of the United Nations agencies and
programmes who are working in Tajikistan under such
perilous conditions.

Portugal is pleased to join the consensus in adopting
the draft resolution.

