Mr. Ivanov (spoke in Russian): I am pleased to
welcome the participants in this meeting on behalf of
the Executive Committee of the Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS).

One of the priority areas of cooperation among
the States members of the CIS is to jointly ensure
security, which is based on common views of existing
external threats and challenges and the determination
to collectively counter them. The focus of cooperation
in the security sphere over the past few years has been
on countering terrorism. It has a respective normative
and legal basis and an effective system of cooperation
among competent bodies.

Member States are constantly improving and
developing those two components based on evolving
demands and needs of the times. Last year, the
agreement on information-sharing within the CIS
to counter terrorism and other forms of violent
extremism entered into force, as did the agreement on
cooperation in combating criminal activity in the area
of information technology. Such documents provide
concrete follow-up for information-sharing, develop
further cooperation in the area of counter-terrorism
and allow the efforts of States' specialized entities and
competent bodies to be optimized in an entire range of
law enforcement activities in CIS territory to identify,
counter, investigate and terrorism-related crimes.

Measures are being taken within the CIS to
eliminate the conditions that contribute to the financing
of terrorist activities. That is the goal of cooperation in
the area of countering the legalization of profits obtained
through illicit means, terrorism financing and the spread
of weapons of mass destruction. We are successfully
implementing the programme of cooperation of the
CIS member States in combating terrorism and other
violent manifestations of extremism for 2017-2019. In
October, we plan to approve a similar programme for
the period 2020-2022. The main focus will be on taking
joint operational preventive measures, conducting
special operations and sharing preventive information,
best practices and experiences of cooperation with
other international organizations. As we implement
the programme, we are taking joint measures against
individuals who attempt to enter the territory of CIS
member States after being involved in the activities of
terrorist organizations. We also actively cooperate in
identifying and countering the flow of funds obtained
through economic criminal activities and counter the
attempts to use these funds to finance terrorism.

While preserving and strengthening the role of
competent law enforcement bodies actively engage
members of civil society, the private sector and the
media, and traditional religious leaders. We also
focus particular attention on countering the spread
of extremist ideas and recruitment by terrorists. We
cooperate to develop, produce and deliver modern
technology and equipment for the purposes of combating
terrorism. Modern technology is broadly used by
specialized services and other competent bodies of the
CIS to share information about individuals involved
in terrorist activity, identify their location, stop
them at border crossings as part of migration flows,
investigate-information technology-related crimes
and ensure security at major international, public and
sporting events , as well as in public transport and on
other critical sites.

Cooperation between defence ministries and law
enforcement bodies is becoming a new area of focus.
Experience in Syria has shown that military operations
in connection with law enforcement operations can be
effective in fighting terrorism. In the light of that, the
joint military exercises Comradesip-in-Arms-2017 and
Issyk Kul-Counter-Terror 2018 have been conducted
over the past two years. During those exercises, the focus
has been on developing joint measures of competent
bodies with a View to taking action to release hostages
or to prevent terrorist acts being planned, and a military
exercise Operation to block and eliminate armed terrorist
groups. A joint counter-terrorism exercise - Ararat-
Antiterror-2019 -is being conducted now. To ensure
stability on the southern borders of the CIS, we have
developed a cooperation mechanism for competent
bodies when crisis situations occur.

I would like to underscore that cooperation among
the members of the CIS in combating terrorism is
conducted with important international organizations,
including the United Nations Office of Counter-
Terrorism, the relevant bodies of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization, the Collective Security
Treaty Organization and the Eurasian Group on
Combating Money Laundering and Terrorist Financing.
There is no doubt that effective cooperation in
combating terrorism can be achieved only on the
basis of an agreed legal framework. A leading role
in harmonizing national legislation is played by the
Interparliamentary Assembly of Member Nations of
the CIS, which constantly works to harmonize national
legislation to combat terrorism, while finding new ways
of implementing its mandate, as the Secretary-General
mentioned.

We have every reason to believe that the work we do
is an important contribution of CIS to ensuring regional
and global security. Given the increased terrorist
threat, it is now extremely important to strengthen
international mechanisms for cooperation and enhance
their operational responsiveness and effectiveness, as
well as forecasting and analytical activities. In that
regard, today's discussion is important in developing
joint measures to counter terrorism in all its forms.

