Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Uruguay regrets that for the second time in less
than a month, the Security Council has been unable
to renew the mandate of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations
Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM). In my country's
view, the JIM. has been an invaluable instrument for
carrying out investigations for the two past years on
the responsibility for incidents in Syria in which the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
established that chemical weapons had been used
against the civilian population.

Time and again, we have expressed in the Chamber
our total confidence in the serious, independent,
impartial and objective work of the JIM, whatever the
conclusions it reaches in its investigations. In fact, to
date, the Mechanism has attributed responsibility for
the use of banned chemical weapons to agents in the
Syrian Government and to Da'esh terrorists. These are
serious crimes for which there can be no impunity.

Through the JIM's investigation, we have been able
to determine, in many of those cases, who was behind
the use of such weapons. But once again, in February
the Council was also unable to adopt a resolution to
sanction the responsible parties (see S/PV.7893). That
is why we reiterate our position - which is shared
by the almost 120 signatory parties to the Code of
Conduct promoted by the Accountability, Coherence
and Transparency group - that Council members that
enjoy veto privileges should abstain from its use in the
case of atrocious crimes, such as the attacks currently
under investigation by the JIM.

It is paradoxical, frustrating and even sad to
see so many roadblocks to a mechanism that was
established by the Council itself only two years ago (see S/PV.7501). For serious crimes, such as those the JIM
tries to investigate, not investigating is tantamount to
concealing. We repeat that these abhorrent crimes must
not go unpunished, whoever the perpetrators. We call
on all members of the Council to continue to work on
garnering consensus with a view to extending the work
of the Mechanism.

