Mr. Baati (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I salute Ms. Khawla Matar, Deputy Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, and thank her for her valuable briefing. The launch of the Constitutional Committee during the third quarter of last year under the auspices of the United Nations represented an important step in the course of the political process in Syria towards achieving a comprehensive Syrian-owned and Syrian- led political transition through constitutional reform that paves the way to free, fair and pluralistic elections, under the supervision of the United Nations and in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015), in a manner that meets the aspirations of all Syrians; preserves the unity, sovereignty and independence of Syria; and ends the presence of external forces and terrorist and sectarian groups. We call on all parties and the international community to maintain and support this positive development. My delegation believes that as long as the negotiations within this context are based on the principle of goodwill, then it is natural and even healthy to have difference and divergence of views. My delegation supports the Secretary-General's good offices and the efforts of his Special Envoy to bring the ongoing political process to safe harbour. In that context, we welcome Mr. Geir Pedersen's discussions with the Syrian Government in Damascus in order to advance the deadlocked Constitutional Committee's work, and we express our hope that the Committee will resume its work as soon as possible in order to adopt an agreed agenda that is in line with its own benchmarks and internal regulations. We urge the Syrian parties to give priority to the interests of the brotherly Syrian people, demonstrate flexibility and search for common denominators through constructive engagement in the work of the Constitutional Committee in a spirit of compromise and without preconditions and dictates. Given its specific experience in managing public affairs with various political components and civil parties, Tunisia believes that the transitional stages should be managed not by imposing the logic of hegemony or single opinion, but rather by conducting dialogue between the political parties as a strategic option to defuse political tension and violence and to consolidate the pillars of democratic architecture. The political process in Syria, like any transitional political process, cannot flourish without providing an appropriate environment in which security, stability and national reconciliation prevail in order to assist in the voluntary return of refugees and displaced persons and pave the way for the drafting of a constitution and the holding of free and fair elections pursuant to that document, with the participation of all spectrums of Syrian society. We are concerned about the current developments on the ground, which do not contribute to achieving the desired security, economic and community environment as fighting has intensified in north-west Syria in the past few weeks. We recall that resolution 2254 (2015), which represents the political solution, notes the close link between a ceasefire and the political process. We stress once again the need to combat terrorism in Syria, including the Security Council-listed terrorist groups, in order to create the necessary conditions for achieving security and stability in Syria and the region. We are also concerned about reports that terrorists are being transferred from Syria to Libya. We call on the international community to redouble its efforts to end such practices and prevent terrorist groups from again carrying out their criminal activities and expanding into hotspots in the Arab region and beyond. It is unfortunate that the economic environment in Syria, similar to the security environment, remains unstable. According to a report issued by the United Nations this month, the Syrian economy registered overall growth as a result of an increase in the reconstruction process. However, that growth will slow down quite soon as a result of economic sanctions. We hope that the appropriate economic conditions will be created and reflected in the living conditions of the Syrian people, who are the ones who bear most of the humanitarian and economic brunt of the conflict. In conclusion, we reaffirm the importance of the ongoing political process being accompanied by confidence-building measures, as stated by the Special Envoy many times. Progress should be made in the areas of releasing abducted and detained persons and clarifying the fate of the missing, so as to ensure the sustainability of the political process and strengthen national reconciliation among the various segments of the brotherly Syrian people, while respecting thesovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of Syria, including the occupied Syrian Golan.
