I thank the President for convening today's meeting. I would also like to express my gratitude to Mr. Jamal Usseni Jamael and Special Representative Leila Zerrougui for their valuable insights. I would like to extend my condolences to Indonesia for the casualties it suffered in the recent attack against peacekeepers in the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), and to others who have paid the greatest price while working to establish peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Despite a stable political situation, peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo remains elusive. The Allied Democratic Forces have carried out dozens of attacks, which have left over 100 people dead, mostly civilians. Several other groups have also increased their attacks in Kivu, including the Nduma defense du Congo- Renovee, whose leader, Guidon Mwissa, remains a fugitive at large. In Ituri, attacks against civilians and security forces by the Lendu have claimed hundreds of lives. I would like to commend MONUSCO for its quick reaction to these conflicts, which has undoubtedly saved many lives. I also understand that the cooperation between MONUSCO and the Forces armees de la Republique democratique du Congo has been steadily improving, which will hopefully help save even more lives in future. It is also good to hear that, despite the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), there has been progress with the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR) process. I hope that the pandemic will not stop provincial and national initiatives on DDR, which are necessary to ensuring that former combatants remain former combatants. In addition to the security situation, I remain most concerned over the human rights situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The violence of armed groups during the first three months of 2020 has been accompanied by some 2,000 human rights violations and abuses, including cases of sexual and gender-based violence. The fact that the Congolese security forces perpetrated many of these acts remains a significant problem. Accountability for such violations and abuses must be established in order to avoid the prevalence of a culture of impunity and build trust in the country's security forces. Strengthening the rule of law and justice institutions is a critical component of efforts aimed at addressing the root causes of conflict. MONUSCO's assistance in the investigation and prosecution of those who need to be held to account is very welcome, as is the assistance towards security sector reform. The challenges facing the Democratic Republic of the Congo are numerous and diverse: from armed-group violence and the illicit export of minerals to floods, the Ebola virus disease and now COVID-19. I would like to conclude by commending MONUSCO, the Congolese authorities and all partners for their continued commitment to establishing peace in the country.
