Mr. Buallay (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): I should like
first of all to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
public meeting in the context of the overall effort by the
Security Council to keep other members informed of the
work of the Council with a view to ensuring transparency.
My delegation would like also warmly to thank
Ambassador Fowler, the Chairman of the Security Council
sanctions Committee established pursuant to resolution 864
(1993).

I should like to ask Ambassador Fowler a question
about a matter that concerns his Committee: arms-
trafficking. How can arms-trafficking be controlled? Arms
factories are at work day and night. And there is also the
question of the arms trade. Sometimes there is civil conflict
in countries and weapons are sold there. How can we stop
this deadly trade? In Angola, of course, this question also
relates to diamond trading. The conflict in Angola has gone
on for two decades now. Of course there is a lot of money
to be made from arms-trafficking, at the same time as this
involves trafficking in human lives. It seems that a lot more
money can be made from weapons than from anything else.

One cannot talk about the demobilization of
combatants in Angola and elsewhere, about reintegrating
these people into civil society, about the return of refugees
or about national reconciliation while arms-trafficking
continues unabated. UNITA would never have dared violate
the sanctions unless they had outside support for this. A lot
of money is made from this arms-trafficking.

Having said this, I would also like to ask Ambassador
Fowler some questions regarding the work of this important
Committee. Did Ambassador Fowler discuss the matter of
cooperation with all the Governments and bodies with
which he met? Did he discuss relations between them and
the expert panels? Has he received any written confirmation
from organizations about how they will cooperate with the
expert panels? Has he discussed with some Governments
how their companies are violating sanctions against
UNITA? Is there any talk about punishing those
responsible for violating sanctions? In the view of
Ambassador Fowler, how can the Security Council deal
with those States and corporations when there is proof
that they are violating sanctions against UNITA?

