Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I would like to thank Under-
Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman, Ambassador Joao
Vale de Almeida and Ambassador Sebastiano Cardi
for their respective briefings on the implementation of
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) and
resolution 2231 (2015).

Of course, I endorse everything that you said before
the meeting, Mr. President, with regard to Ambassador
Samantha Power. Whether one loves or hates her, one
will never be misled by her. What you see is what you
get. There is no duplicity in Samantha Power. That is a
great quality that is not abundantly present in the world.
I wish her and her family long life and success.

The Iranian nuclear deal represents, as Under-
Secretary-General Feltman said, a significant
achievement of multilateralism and diplomacy in
addressing one of the most pressing peace and security
issues of our time. One year since implementation
day, the Security Council should be encouraged by the
progress made in the implementation of the landmark
JCPOA agreement, which contributes much to the
strengthening of the non-proliferation regime and the
promotion of international peace and security.

In that connection, we take note of the key
findings and recommendation of the Secretary-General
contained in his second biannual report (S/2016/ll36)
on the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015). Most
notably, as others have indicated - and it is worth
repeating-no information has been received during the
past six months with regard to actions inconsistent with
resolution 2231 (2015), in particular as it pertains to the
supply, sale, transfer or export of nuclear-related items,
ballistic missile activity, or ballistic missile-related
transfers, as well as asset-freeze violations. That is
indeed a positive development, clearly indicating
that the implementation of the agreement is firmly
on course.

The Islamic Republic of Iran and the participating
countries deserve to be commended for demonstrating
strong commitment under the JCPOA framework. Of
course, we understand the challenges and difficulties
that may be encountered in implementation, and that
is only natural. However, it is absolutely critical that
all participants continue to display the same spirit
of cooperation in order to address this challenge and
preserve the agreement so as to achieve the desired
objectives. Here I would like to echo something that
Ambassador Vale de Almeida said in his briefing:

"The work we have undertaken so far has proven
that it is possible to reach agreements even on the
most contentious issues and to implement them,
provided that there is a will to do so."

As the Secretary-General's report indicates, there
are some issues that could lead to ambiguities and
different interpretations of the provisions of resolution
2231 (2015) on the JCPOA. In that regard, explanations
such as that provided by the Joint Commission on the
temporary transfer of nuclear weapons are necessary
in order to clear up misunderstandings and avoid
any possible obstacles to full implementation of
the agreement. The close cooperation and working
relationship between the Joint Commission and the
Security Council with regard to the procurement
channel is important. The continued cooperation of
the International Atomic Energy Agency with the
Islamic Republic of Iran and the JCPOA-participating
States will also continue to be critical to the full
implementation of the nuclear-related commitments
under the J CPOA and to the broader implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015).

Lastly, we are concerned about the information
provided by France about the seizure of arms shipments
that were probably destined for Yemen or Somalia,
as indicated in the Secretary-General's report. We
therefore hope that the necessary investigation will
be carried out in order to verify the information and
that the Council will be briefed about the outcome in
due course.

