Mr. Gentiloni (Italy): One year ago, the advent of
the extremist, sectarian and brutal entity Daesh brought
the terrorist threat to new, unprecedented levels in the
Middle East and North Africa. To counter the rapid
expansion of that organization, Italy assured its resolute
and concrete support to the international coalition
against Daesh, providing humanitarian assistance,
making a qualified contribution to military activities,
and supporting the stabilization efforts. To date, some
important results have been achieved, showing the
effectiveness of a vast, collective action. Nevertheless,
more effort is still required.

Concerning the great tragedy taking place in Syria,
we cannot but reiterate that the ever-increasing violence
on the ground is causing immense suffering for the
civilian population. Despite some sporadic and very
limited ceasefires, our assessment is that the conflict
is bound to continue unless we help the Syrians find a
lasting and inclusive political solution to the conflict.

We believe that the international community should
step up its support for the endeavour of the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Staff de
Mistura, to broker a credible and viable transition, in
line with the Geneva communique (S/2012/523, annex).
We encourage regional players, especially those who
have a greater influence on the Syrian parties, to
increase their efforts to facilitate a political settlement.
A Syria without a clear way forward is in nobody's
interest.

Concerning Iraq, major challenges remain before
us. We need to uphold, in an effective and sustainable
way, the reform process undertaken by Prime Minister
Al Abadi aimed at increasing inclusivity and promoting
reconciliation. As we move to clear the Daesh presence

from progressively larger areas, we must ensure that
they will be effectively held and not subject to a Daesh
attempt at renewed conquest. In that regard, Italy is
expanding its efforts to train Iraqi police, whose role
will prove critical to stabilize liberated areas and allow
displaced persons to return to their homes safely and
without fear of retribution.

We also need to carefully monitor and prevent any
further expansion of Daesh throughout the region, most
notably in Libya, where internal divisions and infighting
are creating the space for that group to prosper. The
Libyan crisis poses a major challenge to the stability
of a vast region that spans from the Middle East, to
sub-Saharan Africa and to Europe itself. Without a
political settlement, none of the problems in Libya will
ever find a durable solution. That is why Libya urgently
needs a decision from Libyans to choose a Government
of national accord that is able to undertake a critical
stabilization process, curb human trafficking and take
the lead in fighting terrorism.

Lebanon is another country of the region that is
increasingly affected by instability. The ramifications
of the Syrian crisis in Lebanon risk worsening the
prolonged political crisis.

While we remain steadfast in our fight against
Daesh and all terrorist organizations in North Africa
and in the Middle East, we should continue to advocate
dialogue and reconciliation as key ingredients for a
peaceful future in the region. In that regard, broader
global cooperation could strengthen our fight against
terrorism. Italy considers the Russian Federation's
draft resolution a potential step in the right direction.
We need a common and unifying goal, as well as to
concentrate our efforts against Daesh and to support
political Change through a transition in Syria.

