Mr. Schulz (Germany): I too would like to start
by thanking our briefers, Mr. Mark Lowcock and
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo for their comprehensive, albeit
alarming briefings.

As the representative of Belgium has delivered a
statementonbehalfofthethreeco-penholders-Belgium,
Kuwait and Germany - I will limit my remarks on
this particular issue and simply say again that it is
absolutely unacceptable that civilian infrastructure
is being targeted. We supported the people of Hama
and Idlib while they were under dual pressure from
the regime and terrorist groups like Islamic State. It
did not go unnoticed that the medical facilities that
we supported have been reduced to rubble, leading to
deaths, displacements and an even more dire lack of
medical care for civilians.

We are unified in our rejection of terrorist groups
such as Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham. They are not covered by
the Idlib agreement and their attacks endanger the well-
being of the people they pretend to govern. However,
the fight against terrorism, as so many have already said
today, can in no way justify indiscriminate attacks on
civilians and civilian infrastructure. Counter-terrorism
operations do not diminish the responsibility of parties
to protect civilians, nor should they impede impartial
humanitarian action.

Like my colleague from Kuwait, I would also like
to say a few words on the broader political picture.

First of all, let me reiterate that we continue to
fully support all the efforts of Special Envoy Geir
Pedersen. We remain convinced that only a political
solution on the basis of resolution 2254 (2015) and the
full implementation of all its elements can achieve
sustainable peace and stability in Syria. The formation
of a credible, balanced and inclusive constitutional
committee, with a clear mandate and transparent
operating procedures under United Nations auspices, is
overdue and urgently needed as a point of entry into a
political transition process.

The second observation I would like to make
is that the Syrian regime has to start to live up to its
responsibilities. That is part and parcel of a future
political solution. As long as basic human rights
continue to be massively violated on a daily basis; as
long as there is violence in Syria; as long as civilians
are being killed, arbitrarily detained, tortured and
denied access to humanitarian assistance; as long as
we do not see accountability; and as long as there is
no sustainable solution to the Syrian crisis, the Council
will need to keep its attention on the situation in Syria. It
is absolutely essential to create a safe, calm and neutral
environment in which political change can take place.

That will require, first and foremost, a change
in the behaviour of the Syrian regime. Violations of
international humanitarian law and abuses of human
rights must finally stop. It is the responsibility of
the Syrian Government to provide credible security
guarantees that would enable the voluntary, safe
and dignified return of Syrians to their country.
We emphasize again that it is first and foremost the
Syrian regime's policies of repression, persecution and
injustice that is keeping internally displaced persons
and refugees from returning home. Regime-sanctioned
arrests, torture and killings continue to create a climate
of fear. Crimes and atrocities already committed on
all sides during the Syrian conflict, including horrific
accounts of murder, torture, sexual violence and
crimes against children, must be investigated and the
perpetrators brought to justice.

Finally, before concluding, I would add that
the Syrian regime continues to arbitrarily prevent
humanitarian access from reaching more than a million
people living in areas under its control. We urge the
Syrian regime to grant immediate, unimpeded and
lasting humanitarian access to all people in need.

