Mr. Doutriaux (France) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank you, Sir, for the excellent way that
you have presided over the Council in the month of
January. I would also like to bid farewell, but not
adieu, to our colleague, Ambassador Shen. Goodbye.
We are certain we shall see you again.

Ambassador Levitte would have liked to be able
to come here today, because, like many members of the
Council, he would have wished our monthly wrap-up to
be more interactive to be attended by more
representatives. Fortunately, we have here the
Permanent Representative of Namibia, a former
member of the Council, who certainly would have had
some interesting comments to make. The Ambassador
of Jamaica, who just left the Chamber, would have
liked to stay, and I believe would have done so, if she
could have taken the floor. But I understand that under
the presidency of Mexico we will be able to have a true
interactive debate, limited to certain points. And each
statement should be limited - as our colleague from
Norway recalled - to three minutes. So I shall try to
do so with my watch. Three minutes means three
points.

My first point is on the fight against terrorism.
Ambassador Greenstock has in fact given us a good
format for interaction with the non-members of the
Council. I think it is a good example. We should repeat
this type of interactive meeting with non-members of
the Council, for example, next month, on the question
of Afghanistan. I know that many non-members of the
Council wish to be able to have an exchange of views
with Mr. Brahimi, and we will shortly have the
opportunity to have him here in New York.

My second point is on Africa. We had an
excellent debate on Africa. It was summed up very well
at the end by Mr. Ibrahima Fall. With respect to Africa,
we have taken note that we will have an opportunity to
come back to the issue of targeted and limited
sanctions. Also during the debate on Africa, France
announced it would soon put forward a proposal for
creating a permanent mechanism on sanctions. From
the debate on Africa, we should also retain everyone's
wish for good cooperation on the peace processes
between all the donors and the Security Council. We
will soon hold, during the United Kingdom's
presidency, a meeting with the Economic and Social
Council on the peace-building process. When we
discuss East Timor, perhaps in April, the United
Nations Development Programme, the World Bank and
the International Monetary Fund will participate in
order to have good interaction among all the Council's
partners in peace-building.

My third point is on the Middle East. We kept our
commitment to have a meeting on the Middle East in
January. It was held yesterday with Mr. Roed-Larsen.
We have a press statement available on the web site of
the presidency of the Security Council. We must
continue, and the question of the Middle East must be
dealt with by the Council on a very regular basis. I
hope that I did not exceed my three minutes.

