Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): I
should like at the outset to thank the Presidents and
Prosecutors of the two Tribunals for their presentations
and, in particular, to congratulate Judge Robinson. 1
would also like to thank the delegation of Belgium for
its report on the work of the Informal Working Group
on international tribunals. We are particularly grateful
to Ambassador Grauls for the leadership and energy
that characterized the Belgian Chairmanship of the
Working Group.

Burkina Faso attaches great importance to the
work of the special Tribunals for the former Yugoslavia
and Rwanda, which were established by the Security
Council to combat impunity and to provide justice for
the victims on behalf of the international community.
We have taken note of the reports before us and we
would like to express our appreciation to those
primarily responsible for the practical steps taken as
part of the Completion Strategy in facilitating the swift
and harmonious management of trials, as well as the
efficient utilization of judges and personnel. These
efforts must be acknowledged and encouraged. We are
also grateful to the staff of the Tribunals for their
dedication.

The reports that have just been presented to us
make it clear that the Chambers will be very busy in
the coming months. In the case of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), for example,
the commencement of ten new trials is planned. This
single example demonstrates clearly the significant
challenges awaiting these two institutions, which share
the same Appeals Chamber, in light of the timeframes
they have been assigned to complete their work. Given
such an outlook, in order to enable the ICTR to
continue with its current level of activity, my
delegation reiterates its support for the three-part
request made by the President of the ICTR for an
increase in the number of ad hoc judges; that a
chamber be made up exclusively of ad hoc judges; and
for the possibility that judges who are retiring be
authorized to finalize their judgements from their
country of origin without being involved in new cases.

With regard to the question of the timeframe for
completion, which is closely linked to progress being
made in trials under way and the volume of work to
come, Burkina Faso is of the view that the Security
Council, through the Working Group on international
tribunals, should be realistic and flexible because, in
practice, it will be impossible to meet the deadlines set
in Security Council resolution 1534 (2004).

With regard to the matter of cooperation with the
Tribunals, including in the pursuit and arrest of
fugitives, we commend those States which have shown
themselves willing to assist the Tribunals pursuant to
resolution 1534 (2004). We welcome the agreements
the Tribunals have been able reach with certain States,
specifically with regard to the respect of sentences and
protection of witnesses. We appeal to all other States,
in particular those in the subregions involved, to
cooperate actively with the Tribunals, particularly in
the pursuit and arrest of fugitives.

We encourage both Tribunals to continue with
their completion strategies, bearing in mind the time
factor. At this point, there should be consideration of
referring cases to national jurisdictions and stepping up
efforts to locate fugitives.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to urge
the international community to continue supporting the
work of these two Tribunals. The Security Council in
particular must give them all the support they need to
complete their work. In the belief that justice and the
search for international peace and security are shared
responsibilities, Burkina Faso reaffirms its
commitment and its readiness to make its contribution
to combating impunity and we to support all efforts
being undertaken to that end.

