Mr. Cardi (Italy): Iwould like to thank the Presidents
of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY), Judge Carmel Agius, and of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, Judge
Meron, as well as Prosecutor Brammertz, for their
briefings today in this Chamber.

As far as the ICTY is concerned, we welcome
the fact that work is proceeding according to plans to
ensure completion by the end of 2017. We commend
the President and the entire work force of the ICTY for
these efforts.

Concerning the Mechanism, we are pleased to see
that it is up and running, and functioning effectively.
Under the leadership of President Meron, many
important steps have been taken, as we have heard,
to ensure the effective handling of the wide range of
crucial functions with which the Mechanism has to
deal. We are ready to support the Mechanism. We are
also confident that the remaining tasks in the area of
the search for fugitives, relating to the Rwandan cases,
and all prosecutions and other proceedings regarding
both the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR) and ICTY are in safe hands with Prosecutor
Brammertz at the helm.

I agree entirely with Judge Carmel Agius that we
have a collective responsibility to keep building on the
legacy of the two ad hoc Tribunals, working with the
Mechanism as well as with other international criminal
courts and tribunals, including the International
Criminal Court (ICC).

The Council as a whole has contributed to the
establishment of the age of accountability and must be
coherent in upholding its main principles in the face of
the many challenges we confront in order to abide by its
commitment. Also, in my capacity as Vice-President,
in New York, of the Assembly of States Parties to the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court,
I would like to make three additional comments of a
general nature.

The first point is on the primary responsibility
of States to ensure that justice for war crimes,
crimes against humanity and genocide is carried
out in accordance with international standards. The
international community must provide the necessary
assistance and be ready to step in when domestic
jurisdictions are unable or unwilling to ensure that
justice is done. We must never tire of underlining this
crucial aspect of our work, on behalf, of course, of the
victims of all the crimes committed.

Secondly, cooperation is an essential element of
the functioning of international criminal tribunals.
Failing that, such organs would be giants without arms
or legs. States must assist the tribunals by lending
them their enforcement powers. We note that lack of
cooperation is still an issue of concern at the ICTY and
the Mechanism; this is not, of course, a positive sign.
The so-called completion strategy is based on the idea
that there must be swift cooperation with tribunals and
a commitment to the fight against impunity. That fight
does not end with the closing of the ad hoc tribunals.

Thirdly, and finally, the Council should assume
full ownership of the work done by these subsidiary
organs, established in the 1990s, and should incorporate
their lessons into its activities. Together with the
Secretariat, we need to find ways to have these issues
featured more systematically and analysed in greater
depth. Accountability must become part of the broader
prevention strategy of the United Nations. There is
virtually no situation of which the Council is seized that
does not require attention in terms of accountability:
from Syria to Yemen, from Iraq to South Sudan, from
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to the Central
African Republic.

We might have different views, but it is precisely
for this reason that we should be able to find a forum
where we can discuss these different views thoroughly
and consider all aspects ofjustice more systematically.
We must not shy away from discussing concerns so
long as we have not found viable solutions.

Ambassador Elbio Rosselli of Uruguay, together
with his team, have done and are doing an excellent
job in steering the work of the Informal Working
Group on International Tribunals; I would like to
thank him for that and support his call for action.
The future should be about continuing this job with a
stronger and broader collective engagement with these
issues. As long as crimes continue to be committed,
and there is abundant evidence that they do continue
to be committed, the Council must consider situations
including from the angle of accountability and, on the
basis of the work done by the ICTY and the ICTR, and
now the Mechanism, redouble its efforts to be united in
the fight against impunity.

