Mr. Skau (Sweden): I thank High Commissioner
Grandi and Director General Swing for their sobering
briefings this morning. We welcome France's initiative
to request an urgent Council meeting on this important
topic, as it is essential that today's meeting lead to
swift and decisive action, including through a strong
statement by the Council.

Like others, we have been horrified and outraged
by the video footage released last week of human beings
reportedly being bought and sold as slaves in so-called
slave markets in Libya. All States have an obligation to
prevent, deter and penalize the crime of slavery; it is
always prohibited and may very well amount to crimes
against humanity. We condemn any such act in the
strongest terms.

Sadly, these revelations are only the latest in the
litany of indignities and abuses seen in the conflict in
Libya. In every Security Council meeting on Libya
this year, Sweden has raised the widespread and
well-documented human rights violations and abuses
suffered by refugees, migrants and internally displaced
person, including arbitrary detention, rape and other
forms of sexual and physical abuse, and forced labour.
Those terrible crimes continue to take place with
complete impunity. We all have a responsibility to act;
now is not the moment to pass the buck. Let me set out
a number of concrete measures to move forward.

First, the Council must demand accountability.
We reiterate Secretary-General Guterres' call on
the competent authorities to investigate the reported
slavery and slave trade. We note the announcement
of an investigation by the Libyan Government of
National Accord and we welcome to United Nations
initiative to work with the Libyan authorities to set
up a transparent monitoring mechanism in order to
safeguard migrants and refugees against human rights
abuses and violations.

We also support the Secretary-General's call on
20 November for all United Nations actors to actively
pursue the matter of slavery, and we would welcome a
report by the Secretary-General to the Council on the
results of those efforts. The Council should join him,
as well as the African Union and the European Union,
in clearly and unambiguously demanding that these
crimes be fully investigated in a swift, credible and
independent manner. To that end, we call for the urgent
establishment ofa fact-finding mission to look into the
matter of slavery in Libya.

In addition, we support the initiative of the Office
of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court,
last communicated to the Council on 8 November
(see S/PV.8091), to actively explore the possibility of
investigating crimes related to human trafficking and
smuggling networks. As a preventative action, as well
as to promote changes in behaviour, we remain open
to exploring the possibility of using sanctions to target
smuggling and trafficking in persons.

Secondly, improvements in the humanitarian
situation are acutely necessary. We call on the Libyan
authorities to ensure full and unimpeded humanitarian
access to migrant detention centres across Libya, and
we repeat our calls for these detention centres to be
turned into open transit centres that meet international
standards. In addition, it is crucial to find sustainable
alternatives to detention, not least for women, children
and vulnerable groups. We support the efforts of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) to ensure the protection needs
of refugees, including the emergency evacuation
and temporary settlement mechanism. We are one of
the largest donors to the important operations of the
International Organization for Migration and UNHCR;
we have provided emergency resettlement slots to that
mechanism and we encourage other countries to do
the same.

While urgent action is required to respond to the
most immediate needs of refugees and migrants, the
only long-term solution to the unfolding human tragedy
is to address the root causes of forced migration. That
will require concerted and coordinated action to
tackle poverty, inequality, human rights violations and
abuses, as well as instability in countries of origin and
transit, including Libya itself. The full implementation
of the 2030 Agenda on Sustainable Development is a
powerful tool to that end.

Finally, we must continue to support United
Nations-facilitated efforts to achieve a lasting political
solution to the conflict in Libya, which will improve
the lives of all people in Libya, including migrants
and refugees.

