Mr. Elaraby (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic):
Germany's proposal for a public debate on land-mines is,
in Egypt's view, a very important initiative that deserves
our full support. In this regard I would like to conunend

 

the action programme presented by Mr. Klaus Kinkel, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Germany.

Mines are an international problem, afflicting
approximately 65 countries, on whose territories are found
85 million to 100 million mines from wars and conflicts
that in some cases have ended. This burdensome legacy not
only brings suffering to people but also poses a real
obstacle to economic development in a number of countries.

We welcome the fact that United Nations peace-
keeping operations now have a mine-clearance unit in the
field, Where Department of Humanitarian Affairs personnel
assist the Governments of concerned States to clear the
mines obstructing the work of administrative and economic
institutions to enable them to run more smoothly and to
facilitate the return of refugees and displaced persons.

We view the problem from a comprehensive
perspective because the phenomenon of mines preceded by
several decades the concept of peace-keeping as it is
currently understood. The problem began during the First
World War and was aggravated during the Second World
War, as well as during other regional wars in various
countries throughout the world. These mines are present in
countries which face widespread economic problems, which
are compounded by the presence of mines and the high cost
of clearance, in addition to the drain on technical and
financial resources.

In our view there are two approaches to the problem
of mines. The first is remedial, and includes the need to
intensify international efforts to clear the huge numbers of
mines planted during earlier conflicts. The second is
preventive, and includes the measures called for by some
countries: restrictions on the Circulation and use of mines to
curb their proliferation, the rate of which far exceeds that
of mine clearance.

I take this opportunity to illustrate the first approach
to the problem with a real model - the difficult experience
which Egypt is going through. Egypt is one of those
countries with a great many mines on its territory,
especially in the Western Desert, in the area of El Alamein,
west of Alexandria, which was a theatre for widespread
military operations in one of the great battles of the Second
World War. In addition, there are the mines remaining from
four Arab-Israeli wars, particularly in the Sinai peninsula.

I am not exaggerating the proportions of this problem
in saying that there are about 22 million mines on Egyptian
territory: approximately one mine for every three citizens.
These mines represent a real and great threat to the
security, health and lives of innocent civilians and
obstruct the efforts for economic and human development
in these regions, which we are trying to exploit for
tourism and other economic ends. They also represent a
major obstacle to Egypt's efforts in creating an
environment conducive to the absorption of population
growth in the long and medium term.

From 1981 to 1991 the Egyptian Government made
a great effort, which cost tens of millions of dollars. This
led to the clearance of about 924 square kilometres,
where 11 million mines were cleared. However, it is
difficult, unacceptable and unreasonable that Egypt alone
should bear the effort and great cost of clearing all the
mines, which were not planted by Egyptians and were not
used for any Egyptian interests.

I take this opportunity to remind the countries
responsible for the proliferation of these mines of their
legal, historic, moral and material responsibility, and I
call upon the international community, particularly the
countries that laid these mines, to provide the technical
and financial assistance necessary for mine clearance.

Egypt has raised this subject before in a number of
forums. In this connection, I would like to refer to the
Final Declaration of the Review Conference of the States
Parties to the Convention on Certain Conventional
Weapons, held in Geneva last May. In this Declaration,
there is a paragraph on the role of the countries that lay
mines:

(spoke in English):

"Recognizing the important role that the international
conununity, particularly States involved in the deployment
of mines, can play in assisting in mine-clearance in
affected countries..." (CCW/CONF.I/]6/(Part1), annex C,
eighth para.)

(spoke in Arabic):

This paragraph should be interpreted as an
affirmation of the responsibility of countries that lay
mines to clear them. Despite the fact that United Nations
documents acknowledge that these mines are present in
great numbers on Egyptian territory, Egypt, is not one of
the countries benefiting from the United Nations mine
action programme, which is coordinated by the
Department of Humanitarian Affairs (DHA) in the United
Nations. We consider that the absence of the United

 

Nations mine action programme from the Egyptian
territories is an unwarranted exception and does not comply
with the major objectives of DHA efforts in the field of
mine clearance.

I move now to the second aspect of the problem, the
preventive aspect, which has to do with the constant
manufacture of mines and their absorption by new markets.
It is estimated that the number of new mines laid annually
is 20 times as great as the number of mines cleared. The
United Nations Convention on Conventional Weapons has
dealt with mines to reach a final solution: the destruction of
all mines. Egypt agrees with that ultimate and humanitarian
objective of the Convention. However, there are certain
considerations, particularly security considerations, for a
number of countries, as well as the fact that all weapons,
from light weapons to nuclear weapons, are considered
inhumane. There are about 40 countries that agree on the
necessity of prohibiting and outlawing mines. However,
there are a number of other countries, particularly
developing countries, that consider the responsible and
legitimate use of mines an inexpensive way to protect their
borders, their regional security and their strategic interests.
Those countries do not own any other more advanced, less
costly technological alternatives to take the place of mines.

In this context, there are several proposals. The
developed countries with modern technology could provide
the necessary assistance in technology transfer to
developing countries so that they could develop mine
production, limited to self-destructive land-mines, or land-
mines rendered ineffective following a certain period of
time - the so-called smart mines, which the developed
countries excluded from the Convention on the prohibition
of mine production. Certainly, in our modern world there
should be no discrimination in favour of developed
countries that own this kind of technology and manufacture
mines at a time when the ban is applied only to developing
countries that do not have appropriate alternatives to protect
their security interests.

Before concluding, I would like to express our
appreciation for the activities of DHA and peace-keeping
operations in general in the field of mine-clearance. I would
like to call for international support for United Nations
efforts in this field through the provision of financial
resources, technical expertise, modern technology and
through considering the issue of mine-clearance in a
comprehensive framework that includes social, economic
and humanitarian dimensions, as well as all other
dimensions necessary for the protection of the security of
all countries.

