Mr. Dabouis (spoke in French): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
28 member States. The candidate countries Turkey, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro,
Serbia and Albania, the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina, as well as Ukraine, the Republic
of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves with
this statement.

I thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2017/783), as well as Special Representative
Yamamoto for his briefing. I would also like to thank
and Minister Rabbani for his statement.

(spoke in English)

As stated on several occasions, the EU strongly
acknowledges the crucial role played by the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
and all the United Nations agencies in supporting the
Afghan people, encouraging peace and reconciliation,
monitoring and promoting human rights and in
coordinating the international community's assistance.
The European Union remains fully committed to
supporting an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned process.
Such a process must include all Afghan men and women
and must preserve Afghanistan's unity, sovereignty,
territorial integrity and the equal rights of all Afghans
under the Constitution.

The EU supports the Kabul process on peace and
security and other international efforts to establish a
genuine Afghan peace and reconciliation process. The
Kabul process can also encourage further discussions
between Afghanistan and its neighbouring countries
to increase regional cooperation. We encourage the
Afghan Government to engage in a political process
with the Taliban and other Afghan opposition groups
to reach a lasting political settlement. We also welcome
all initiatives to create a conducive environment for
such a process and call on all parties to engage in
constructive solutions.

On 24 July thejoint communique adoped on elements
for an EU strategy in Afghanistan set our vision on how
the European Union can support Afghanistan. It focuses
on four priority areas critical to achieving progress in
Afghanistan, namely, promoting peace, stability and
regional security; reinforcing democracy, the rule of
law and human rights and promoting good governance
and women's empowerment; supporting economic and
human development; andaddressing challenges related
to migration.

The joint communique follows the Conference
on Afghanistan held in Brussels in October 2016,
the signing of a new EU-Afghanistan cooperation
agreement on partnership and development in February
201 and the appointment of a Special Envoy to
Afghanistan in June this year. Next month, the Foreign
Ministers are expected to adopt the actions proposed
in the joint communique. In that context, let me also
refer to the new United States strategy on Afghanistan
and South Asia. As in the past, the European Union
will continue to work together with the United States
and the international community in support of lasting
peace, security and stability in Afghanistan.

Ensuring respect for human rights and the holding
of democratic elections continue to be a focus of all
EU actions in the country. An EU-Afghanistan high-
level meeting on human rights took place in Kabul
on 14 August, with more than 80 participants. The
meeting highlighted next steps to be taken by the
Afghan authorities to advance on the protection of
human rights. Human rights will from now on be part
of the structured dialogue between the European Union
and Afghanistan under the Cooperation Agreement on
Partnership and Development.

With regard to elections, the EU and its member
States welcomed the announcement by the Independent
Election Commission of the date for the parliamentary
elections in Afghanistan, to be held on 7 July 2018.
Joint efforts will now be deployed to make these
elections possible on that date in a democratic,
inclusive, transparent and credible manner. There is
still a lot to be done; in particular, key decisions on
electoral reforms have to be taken and implemented
by the Afghan authorities in a timely manner. The EU
and its member States remain committed to supporting
the Afghan electoral process. Recently, the EU adopted
a €3.5-million project to strengthen Afghanistan's
electoral institutions, which complements the existing
and future European Union electoral assistance
in Afghanistan.

Joint State-building and development efforts in
Afghanistan need to build on reinforced regional
cooperation to address both the common threats
of terrorism and common sustainable development
challenges. In this regard, the EU strongly supports
such regional forums as the Heart of Asia-Istanbul
Process and the Regional Economic Cooperation
Conference on Afghanistan to facilitate cooperation
among all regional actors.

Migration continued to be a very important subject
in our discussions with the Afghan authorities. The
EU-Afghanistan Joint Way Forward on migration
issues, complemented by bilateral EU member States
arrangements with Afghanistan on migration, is
producing good results and we need to continue to
jointly pursue and enhance its implementation. Our
comprehensive dialogue with Afghanistan includes
addressing the root causes of irregular migration and
forced displacement and ensuring the sustainable
reintegration of the returnees. Assistance in this field
was strengthened in the past two years with measures to
facilitate the sustainable reintegration of returnees and
internally displaced persons, socioeconomic cohesion
in host and return communities, and the strengthening
of the Government's capacity for migration management
and fight against human trafficking and smuggling.
Since last year, approximately €200 million have been
made available to help Afghanistan tackle the challenges
related to migration and forced displacement, including
with regard to the regional dimension of the situation of
Afghan refugees.

In July, UNAMA reported that the number of
civilians killed and injured in the Afghanistan conflict
during the first six months of 2017 persisted at the
same record high levels as last year. Extreme harm to
civilians continued amid a worsening toll from suicide
attacks and a greater impact on women and children.
We call on all parties to do their utmost to protect the
civilian population, especially women and children.

We also need to continue to protect the vital role
of humanitarian agencies and respect their impartiality
and humanitarian space in addressing the most urgent
needs of the most vulnerable. In view of the threat
posed by the many mines and improvised explosive
devices to the population, the European Union also
encourages Afghanistan to maintain their current
demining rhythm.

(spoke in French)

To conclude, the European Union continues to
consider UNAMA as a key partner in achieving lasting
peace in Afghanistan. UNAMA has an invaluable role
to play in ensuring the broadest possible international
support for an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned process.
The European Union will continue to support these
efforts with all means at its disposal. In that regard, and
as already announced, I note that the newly appointed
Special Envoy of the European Union to Afghanistan,
Mr. Roland Kobia, has taken up his post. His main task
will be to promote the regional consensus for peace and
to advance the European Union's contribution to the
security, stability and development of Afghanistan and
the region.

