Mr. Malungo (Angola): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Madam President, on behalf of my
Government, on your assumption of the presidency of
this Council and for organizing this open debate on the
Angolan situation. We are convinced that your wisdom
and diplomatic experience will bring us to a successful
conclusion.

May I also take this opportunity to reiterate our
appreciation for the efforts undertaken by Secretary-
General Kofi Annan aimed at the rapid restoration of a
long and lasting peace in Angola.

My Government is committed to working very
closely with Under-Secretary-General Ibrahim
Gambari, the Secretary-General's Adviser for Special
Assignments in Africa, and encourages him to
intensify his engagement in this regard. The
Government of Angola continues to be grateful for the
substantial political support lent by this organ and the
humanitarian assistance provided by United Nations
agencies actively engaged in our country.

The armed conflict in Angola has taken slightly
different forms over the past years, but the suffering of
our people has remained a constant. The 1994 Lusaka
Protocol, which should have led Angola to peace, was
never implemented in its totality. That is because Jonas
Savimbi rejected several provisions crucial to its
implementation, namely, the obligation to demilitarize
his forces and to permit the establishment of state
administration in areas that UNITA occupied illegally.

In 1998, Savimbi once again undertook armed
force to achieve power, just as he had done in 1992
following his defeat in the country's first national
elections. This decision relit the flames of a war shorter
in duration, but even greater in intensity as a result of
the unprecedented rearming of UNITA forces that had
taken place. It is a sad commentary that UNITA's
rearming took place with the open support of a number
of countries and leaders, including Africans.

A very real military force was threatening the
existence of institutions of elected power and the very
future of our democracy. Regrettably, not all voices
condemned Jonas Savimbi's actions or took steps to
pressure him to abandon his plans for war. The
Angolan Government saw itself forced to adopt a series
of political and military measures to contain UNITA.
Happily, that objective was achieved. UNITA's
conventional war capacity was destroyed and today
constitutes no immediate threat to the Government.

Thanks to the measures taken by the Government,
Angola today enjoys a climate of relative tranquillity in
a large portion of the country. That situation bodes well
for an improvement in economic and social
development. However, we are well aware that we have
not put a definitive end to war. Small pockets of
UNITA resistance still exist to carry out terrorist
activities.

A question frequently asked is: "What is the most
appropriate way to resolve the internal conflict once
and for all?" There has been no single answer, either
within our own society or outside it. An adequate reply
to this question requires, first, an attentive and honest
understanding of the evolution of the Angolan political
process.

For more than 10 years, we have been seeking a
peaceful solution to our internal conflict. However,
each of the various formulas for peace, devised with
the cooperation and assistance of the international
community, was systematically violated and trampled
by the same person every time. Jonas Savimbi called
for negotiations only when he found himself militarily
disadvantaged and for the sole purpose of buying time
to reconstitute his army and prepare it for renewed
attempts to seize power by force of arms. That is the
way it has always been in the past, and today we are
again witnessing a manifestation of alleged gestures of
good will.

The facts themselves are clear. Savimbi has never
been truly interested in any negotiating process. He has
used these occasions only to trick the less cautious and
to further his attempts to consummate his personal
ambition to achieve power by force. His lack of
credibility and continued betting on the option of war
are incompatible with the objectives of strengthening a
democratic society in Angola.

The lasting solution to Angola's problem still lies
in the complete implementation of the Lusaka Protocol.
Measures that the Angolan authorities have adopted
foresee the fulfilment of the Protocol's provisions that
were not implemented voluntarily. More than 92 per
cent of Angolan territory is now under the control of
the legal authorities. More than 11,000 rebel soldiers
have thrown down their arms and hundreds of others
continue to do so each month. They are being
reintegrated into society.

We urge the international community to continue
to apply pressure through the strict observance of
United Nations sanctions against those who reject the
Lusaka Protocol in order to persuade them to turn away
from the option of war and to join the forces of peace,
reconciliation and national reconstruction. We are
confident and hopeful regarding the restoration of
peace in the near future, the consolidation of the
democratic system and the development of the
country's economic potential for the benefit of all
Angolans. It is in this perspective that we plan to hold
general elections in 2001 with the participation of all
legal political entities.

The Security Council's actions, strengthened by
the report of the sanctions Committee chaired by
Ambassador Fowler and by increased regional
solidarity in southern and central Africa, have
dramatically raised the cost of doing business for Jonas
Savimbi, as well as the potential cost to those who may
be identified as UNITA collaborators. The eventual
success of these concerted efforts will improve the
standards of living and contribute to economic growth
in my country.

The Government of Angola applauds the
establishment of the Panel of Experts that will help
guarantee the effective application of relevant Security
council resolutions within the logic of "smart
sanctions". In this context, we also want to praise from
the outset the contribution to peace in Angola made by
Ambassador Robert Fowler. We wish him every
success in his next posting. He created conditions that
will permit his successor to continue to play an
important role in the work of the sanctions Committee.

The Angolan Government is encouraged by a
number of positive developments whose origins can be
traced to this Security Council. Additionally, events
taking place in the international diamond industry, and
specifically announcements by De Beers and the
recently concluded World Diamond Congress in
Antwerp, hold promise for increased self-regulation by
an industry that has financially sustained destabilizing
rebel elements and corrupt leaders in Africa and
elsewhere in the world.

A week-long international peace conference,
entitled "Pro Pace", organized by the Catholic Church,
has just concluded in Luanda. Participation by the
Angolan Government included six ministers and two
deputy ministers. A personal message from Pope John
Paul was read to the 220 participants, including
members of the clergy, civil society and the
Government. We hope that these grass-roots efforts by
the Church and by Angolan citizens may have a
positive impact on the crisis in our country.

While the Angolan Government is forced to
contend with disruptive activities by small UNITA
bands, it must also engage a range of additional
responsibilities. For example, it must sustain progress
towards milestones established by the staff-monitored
programme of the International Monetary Fund (IMF)
in order to be eligible to participate in a poverty
reduction and growth facility in the year 2001. And,
importantly, it must make every effort to meet the
country's daunting immediate humanitarian challenges.

The United Nations Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) stated in its mid-term
review for Angola the week of 17 July that the
humanitarian situation in Angola is "precarious" and
that United Nations agencies have received only 40 per
cent of their funding requirements for this year. OCHA
said that an estimated two million people continued to
rely on food aid and that as many as 2.7 million people
may need some kind of humanitarian assistance in the
months ahead - a requirement for assistance funds
totalling nearly $260 million.

As of June, the breakdown of United Nations
agency receipts by per cent of requested funds for work
in Angola is as follows: the World Food Programme,
44 per cent; OCHA, 43.8 per cent; the United Nations
Children's Fund, 27 per cent; the World Health
Organization, 61 per cent; the Food and Agriculture
Organization, 10.5 per cent; the United Nations
Development Programme, 1.4 per cent; and the United
Nations Fund for Population Activities, 9.6 per cent.

At the end of June, there were an estimated 2.5
million internally displaced persons in Angola; this
number represents approximately 20 per cent of the
total population. More than 217,500 people have been
displaced in 14 provinces since the beginning of this
year alone.

Access and security remain key factors in
providing assistance to needy populations. Guerrilla
activities carried out by UNITA rebels limit access to
most areas in the extreme south and east of the country,
and safe travel on roads is not yet possible outside
major cities and some coastal areas. At present, more
than 70 per cent of all humanitarian assistance must be
delivered by air because of restricted surface
transportation. The result is high delivery costs for
humanitarian assistance.

In May, the World Food Programme announced
that it faced a possible breakdown in the food pipeline
beginning in late September unless new contributions
were received. It already has reduced by 20 per cent
the number of people receiving direct food aid
assistance for the months of June and July.
Additionally, a nationwide campaign to distribute
agricultural inputs is due to start in September and
October as part of the Government's efforts to promote
agricultural self-sufficiency.

Meanwhile, health remains the most under-
funded sector of the entire humanitarian programme.
Hospitals and health posts are under-staffed and under-
funded and lack basic equipment and medicine.
Malaria, diarrhoea and tuberculosis remain prevalent
throughout the country, and in many locations children
have not been vaccinated against life-threatening
diseases.

The Angolan Government is actively engaged in
the support of humanitarian assistance and services.
Through the national emergency assistance programme
it has provided emergency assistance to more than
500,000 people since September 1999. In Phase I,
$21 million have been spent to purchase goods for
populations in areas where United Nations agencies
and non-governmental organizations have been unable
to operate. Phase II of the programme will aim $13.7
million at agriculture self-sufficiency projects
associated with a national resettlement plan.

The Government has subsidized $12 million
worth of fuel for World Food Programme and
International Committee of the Red Cross aircraft
providing humanitarian assistance. The Government
has covered $7.5 million in port and airport fees related
to international donations, and it has participated in the
preparation of the next United Nations consolidated
appeal that will be presented to donors in August.
Before I conclude, I would also like to express
the Government's sincere thanks for the dedicated
efforts of the more than 100 national and international
non-governmental organizations and United Nations
agencies which remain actively engaged throughout the
country, under the most challenging circumstances, in
providing humanitarian relief to the suffering people of
Angola. We appeal once again to the donor community
to continue their partnership to sustain progress being
made to improve the living conditions of all Angolans.

