Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank Mr. Taye-Brook Zerihoun and Mr. Ivan Simonovie
for their briefings on the situation in Ukraine. Argentina
will concentrate specifically on the theme and the focus
of today's meeting, namely, to analyse the report of the
United Nations human rights monitoring mission in
Ukraine.

In that regard, like our colleagues, we are concerned
at the deterioration of the situation in the eastern part
of Ukraine. The living conditions of the majority of the
population, the actions of armed groups, the increasing
number of armed persons and weapons, unilateral
acts, worsening of violations of human rights and
confrontations seem to spreading. Without any doubt
we are all aware that those trends have to be dealt with
in an urgent manner. The toll in human lives increases
with each violent confrontation, and the lives and rights
of residents of the affected areas are threatened. We
therefore cannot be optimistic but I do believe that we
are facing a scenario in which there is awareness that
priority must be given to having an open dialogue and
finding a political solution to this crisis.

However, we cannot ignore the violations of human
rights described in the report of the Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights. The killing,
torture, kidnapping, harassment, illegal detention and
intimidation are unjustified. All allegations should be
investigated and those responsible should be brought to
justice. All the necessary measures must be taken to
protect all the human rights of everyone in Ukraine and
to ensure their full enjoyment, irrespective of ethnicity,
language, cultural group, religion or the region of the
country in which they live.

We have taken note and understood how the
increase in violence impacts those living in the areas
affected by the confrontations. It was therefore clear
that a direct consequence of that would be an increase
in displaced persons and in the number of people to
leave the region - for example, from Donetsk - access
to water in Slovyansk and other areas in the Donetsk
region having been limited, along with limited access
to health services and a lack of electricity and gas,
as well as problems with the availability of food and
medical supplies. All of that has served not just to
subject the population to difficult living conditions;
I wish to repeat that it demands a positive attitude to
finding a solution to the crisis.

I will conclude my observations by mentioning the
15 points set out by the Government of Ukraine, which
I appreciate. It is also very important, in particular with
regard to points 14 and 15 of the plan, that discussions
also take on board not just the talks between the State
and the regions, armed groups and various minorities,
but also the behaviour of the market. I say that because,
in listening to Mr. Simonovie say that there is an extreme
humanitarian crisis that is creating great suffering for
a huge segment of the population, we also see in the
document that has been circulated to us that the cost
of food has increased dramatically, with some seasonal
vegetables being four or five times more expensive than
in the past.

We know that during crises, whether they
be security, political, economic or social, some
unscrupulous market players, who do not sit with us
here to reconcile our differences - we do not even
know where they are - well know how to speculate
when it comes to the cost of food. No Valerie Amos
can hold back, and no Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Assistance can be up to the task, if we
remain indifferent to such actions, which are ethically
reprehensible. We should discuss that in the forum
where it should be discussed: the organs of the United
Nations.

We believe it is necessary to take every measure
to address the situation effectively, while ensuring that
assistance reaches those who need it, including in the
areas that are still outside of Government control, and
facilitating the conditions for the civilians who wish to
leave the areas affected by the conflict to be able to do
so.

Finally, I should like to make the following brief
points. Argentina insists on the need to redouble efforts
on the part of all stakeholders to demonstrate political
will and the belief that the only acceptable way forward
is through dialogue and that resorting to violence is not
an option.

Secondly, Argentina will support any initiative
that might genuinely contribute to putting an end to
the violence and providing a space for constructive
negotiations and reaching a political compromise
among the parties.

Thirdly, the measures agreed in Geneva and
the road map of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) continue to be a road
map, the effective implementation of which by all
parties will allow us to de-escalate the situation and
move forward in a process of national dialogue that
generates trust among the various communities and
provides assurance for all Ukrainians that their main
demands will be heard and their rights respected.

Fourthly, we are pleased with the efforts being made
by the democratically elected Ukrainian Government
for a peaceful settlement to the country's situation and
with the steps taken by the Russian authorities to the
same end.

Fifthly, it is vital to combat the hate speech,
discrimination, hostility and violence. Argentina
reaffirms its respect for, defence of and belief that the
international community and all its Member States must
act within the framework of respect for international
law and the Charter of the United Nations.

Along with the representative of Nigeria, we too
hope that the rebels' promise to release the OSCE
detainees will come to pass. In that connection, we have
asked many times that they be released unconditionally
and without delay.

