Mr. Duclos (France) (spoke in French): As you
requested, Mr. President, I shall confine myself to
some brief comments. Allow me first to congratulate
Lord Ashdown on the work that he has already done in
the space of a few months. I wish also to pay special
tribute to Jacques Paul Klein, who has had a successful
and outstanding tenure in Bosnia. We hail his passion
and his effectiveness. He has dedicated them to a very
fine cause with remarkable results.

Allow me also to hail the activities of the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(UNMIBH) in training and restructuring the police
force, and to pay tribute to the excellent cooperation
there has been between the European Union and the
United Nations in the transition period. I think this will
enable the European Union to take over on 1 January
2003 in the best possible circumstances.
With respect to recent events, and on the
substance of the issues, we, of course, support what the
presidency of the European Union will be saying on
these issues. But I would say that we essentially concur
in Lord Ashdown's assessment of the results of
5 October elections. There are some things that might
be regretted in those elections. But it is true that they
do not mark a return to a conservative attitude or a
style of politics which would run counter to the
country's interests. They reflect, as Lord Ashdown has
said, a degree of disappointment on the part of electors,
particularly with respect to their chief priorities, which
remain jobs, improving living conditions and
combating corruption.

In these circumstances, it seems to us that we can
draw three conclusions with regard to operations. The
first is that we should encourage, call on and urge
future leaders to take that message into account and to
commit themselves resolutely to the path of reform.
That is what the electors want: reform.

Secondly, we should support the reform priorities
identified by Lord Ashdown and summed up by the
phrase "first justice, then jobs" (supra). Perhaps, we
should place particular stress on combating organized
crime, which is clearly a priority task for everyone.

Thirdly and lastly, as Lord Ashdown has stated,
that programme will be successfully carried out only if
the international community and all the actors engaged
in that country are fully mobilized on a sustained basis.
I think our discussion today is an excellent opportunity
to underline that crucial point.

