The Secretary-General: I would like to thank
Ambassador Power and the United States for having
convened this meeting of the Security Council on
Ebola virus disease. Only twice before has the Security
Council met to discuss the security implications of a
public-health issue, both times on the AIDS epidemic.
Like those meetings, today's meeting on the outbreak
of Ebola in West Africa is timely and clearly warranted.

The Ebola crisis has evolved into a complex
emergency with significant political, social, economic,
humanitarian and security dimensions. The suffering
and spillover effects in the region and beyond demand
the attention of the entire world. Ebola matters to us all.

The outbreak is the largest the world has ever seen.
The number of cases is doubling every three weeks.
There will soon be more cases in Liberia alone than
in the four-decade history of the disease. In the three
countries most affected - Guinea, Liberia and Sierra
Leone - the disease is destroying health systems. More
people are now dying in Liberia from treatable ailments
and common medical conditions than from Ebola.

The virus is also taking an economic toll. Inflation
and food prices are rising. Transport and social services
are being disrupted. The situation is especially tragic
given the remarkable strides that Liberia and Sierra
Leone have made in putting conflict behind them.

National Governments are doing everything
they can. I applaud the courageous actions of the

Governments, communities and individuals on the
front lines, including local health workers, Medecins
Sans Frontieres, the International Federation of Red
Cross and Red Crescent Societies, and United Nations
entities. The gravity and scale of the situation now
require a level of international action unprecedented
for a health emergency.

The leaders of the countries affected have asked
the United Nations to coordinate the global response.
We are committed to doing what is needed, with the
speed and scale required. Under the leadership of
Dr. Margaret Chan, the World Health Organization
(WHO) is working to identify the best epidemiological
ways to address the outbreak.

I have activated, for the first time, the system-wide
organizational crisis response mechanism. Under the
leadership of Anthony Banbury, an Ebola response
centre is operational.

With the support of the Government of Ghana and
the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL), the
United Nations peacekeeping mission in Liberia, an air
bridge has been established in Accra to facilitate the
influx of key health responders and equipment. The
United Nations Humanitarian Air Service is operating
between the countries. UNMIL is adapting its tasks to
the current context, and the Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, Herve' Ladsous, Visited
Monrovia last week to assure Liberia's leaders of the
Mission's support.

In addition to the many local and international
workers already on the ground, WHO, the United
Nations Development Programme, UNICEF, the World
Food Programme and others are actively delivering
emergency assistance. The United Nations Volunteers
programme has identified more than 200 health-care
professionals and other experts willing to be trained
and deployed.

Despite these wide-ranging efforts, the spread
of the disease is outpacing the response. No single
Government can manage the crisis on its own. The
United Nations cannot do it alone.

This unprecedented situation requires unprecedented
steps to save lives and safeguard peace and security.
Therefore, I have decided to establish a United Nations
emergency health mission combining the World Health
Organization's strategic perspective with a very strong
logistics and operational capability. This international
mission, to be known as the United Nations Mission for
Ebola Emergency Response (UNMEER), will have five
priorities: stopping the outbreak, treating the infected,
ensuring essential services, preserving stability and
preventing further outbreaks.

Under the leadership ofa Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, the Mission will bring together
the full range of United Nations actors and expertise in
support of national efforts. It will draw on the capacities
of many international partners and work in close
coordination with regional organizations such as the
African Union (AU) and the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS). It will strive to ensure
that these wide-ranging efforts avoid duplication, fill
gaps and are aligned with the overall strategy. Our goal
is to have the Mission's advance team on the ground
before the end of the month.

I have written to both the Security Council and the
General Assembly with further details. I thank them in
advance for their support.

Dr. David Nabarro will continue in his vital role
as my Special Envoy for Ebola, providing strategic
direction and galvanizing international support.

My colleagues and I will do everything we can
to ensure the success of the new Mission. But its
effectiveness will depend crucially on support from
the international community. Our best estimate is that
we need a 20-fold increase in assistance. Earlier this
week, the United Nations outlined a set of critical needs
totalling almost $1 billion over the next six months.
One key enabler is medevac capacity, which is essential
if we are to be able to give assurances to the heroic
international health and aid workers who are placing
themselves at personal risk while serving others.

I applaud the leadership of United States
President Barack Obama, and warmly welcome his
announcement that the United States will deploy 3,000
troops to provide expertise in logistics, training and
engineering. I also thank the many Governments that
have made contributions, including Canada, China,
Cuba, the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo, Ethiopia,
France, Germany, Ghana, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kenya,
Norway, Qatar, the Russian Federation, Rwanda, South
Africa, Switzerland, Uganda and the United Kingdom.
I hope that other countries with the means will follow
suit. Airports in Senegal and Spain are serving as
logistical hubs. The AU, ECOWAS, the European
Union, the World Bank, the African Development
Bank, the Gates Foundation and the Global Fund are
also engaged. We are looking to all those in a position
to do so to help. The business community, for example,
is well placed to contribute in the health, transport,
communications and information sectors. I also appeal
again to major airlines and shipping companies to
resume services to the affected countries. Isolation only
hampers international efforts to reach people in need.

I welcome the draft resolution to be adopted today
by the Security Council. Tomorrow I will speak to
the General Assembly. One week from today, we will
gather at the highest level to mobilize political will to
meet this extraordinary challenge. We cannot afford
delays. The penalty for inaction is high. We must race
ahead of the outbreak and then turn and face it with
all our energy and strength. I count on the Security
Council's support and that of the General Assembly and
all Member States in meeting this test.

