Mr. Perazza (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, allow me to begin by extending our
warmest congratulations to the Argentine Republic and
to you personally on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council in the month of March. We wish you
every success throughout your presidency.
The delegation of Uruguay is especially pleased
to see open debates being held by the Security Council.
In the specific case of small arms, this open debate is
one of the main mechanisms that the Council has to
improve its interaction with the General Assembly, as
stipulated in the recommendations contained in the
2002 report of the Secretary-General on small arms
(S/2002/1053).

My delegation would like to associate itself fully
with the statement made by the delegation of Guyana
on behalf of the Rio Group, in which they explained
the position of the Group vis-a-vis the upcoming
review conference. Therefore, Uruguay will simply
limit itself to raising a few specific items.

Small arms and light weapons are the arms most
widely used in several recent conflicts, especially those
that have been considered by the Security Council.

What is particularly alarming for my delegation is that
60 per cent of these small arms are found in the hands
of civilians, compared to 37.8 per cent that are in the
hands of armies, 2.8 per cent for the police force, and
barely .2 per cent in the hands of armed groups. That is
why the Government of Uruguay believes that one of
the main problems to be tackled by the international
community is the availability of these arms among
civilian populations.

For the delegation of Uruguay, an analysis of the
phenomenon of the illicit trafficking of small arms and
light weapons should not focus only on matters of
security and national sovereignty. It should also be
seen as a problem that has close links with human
rights and development.

Uruguay is especially pleased with the activities
that the United Nations and its specialized agencies
have been carrying out within the framework of the
current peacekeeping missions with a view to
reintegrating and demobilizing child soldiers in
Afghanistan, Burundi, Cote d'Ivoire, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Haiti and Sierra Leone.

With respect to the linkage with development,
Uruguay expresses its deep concern over the fact that
the international community has not managed to
identify the best ways to redirect a part of the resources
that are freed up by disarmament to economic and
social development. In the last six years, for example,
it has been puzzling to see that in many developing
countries where there are conflicts, more then $87
billion have been spent on arms - in other words, $22
billion a year, which, used in another way, would have
made it possible for those same countries to comply
with the Millennium Development Goals, since they
would have been able to achieve universal primary
education and reduce the infant mortality rate.

According to the Interpol database, illicit
trafficking in small arms and light weapons has not
been detected in our country. Nonetheless, the
Government of Uruguay has begun campaigns to
destroy small arms that are not duly registered or that
have come from illicit activities. Since 1998 Uruguay
has destroyed 17,595 arms. Likewise, the Government
of Uruguay plans to hold a new ceremony of arms
destruction before the upcoming review conference.
We will destroy 1,866 short and long arms, a figure
which could go up to 5,502 arms if we reduce the
custody period that is required by our legislation.
As was mentioned in the first national report on
small arms presented by Uruguay in accordance with
the Programme of Action, our country has a set of
laws, standards and administrative procedures at the
national level that make possible effective control over
small arms and light weapons in aspects related to
production, export, import, transit and transfer.
Currently, our country is drawing up the second
national report on small arms, which it will present at
the review conference. For this purpose, we have
established an inter-ministerial commission to update
the information required by the Programme of Action.

Uruguay has ratified the Inter-American
Convention against the Illicit Manufacturing of and
Trafficking in Firearms. At the same time, we are
applying the Model Regulations for the Control of the
International Movement of Firearms drawn up by the
Inter-American Drug Abuse Control Commission.

At the subregional level, Uruguay is part of the
MERCOSUR Working Group on Firearms. One of the
concrete results this has achieved is the development of
a memorandum of understanding for the exchange of
information on the illicit manufacture and trafficking
of firearms. The establishment of this Working Group
has facilitated the exchange of information and
cooperation among MERCOSUR member States,
helping to prevent, combat and eradicate the illicit
trafficking of small arms and light weapons along
borders.

Lastly, Uruguay would like to encourage all
States to renew their commitment to implement
unconditionally all the Security Council resolutions
related to sanctions, including those through which
arms embargoes are imposed, in order to control
effectively the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons in conflict situations.

