Mr. Shalgham (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, allow me to express the
appreciation of the Libyan delegation for the Council's
initiative in holding this summit and for the United
States delegation's preparation of the draft resolution
we just voted upon (resolution 1887 (2009)).

My country undertook an historic initiative when
it voluntarily ceased production of the nuclear bomb it
was on the verge of producing. In so doing, it greatly
served the cause of international peace and security.
The decision was based on our deep belief in the
primacy of peace for all mankind over any limited
national motivations. Libya deserves the thanks and
gratitude of the world. Libya must be helped to use
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. Indeed,
furthermore, because of the great service it made to
international peace and security, Libya deserves a
permanent seat in the Security Council.

All States have the right to develop their
capabilities to use nuclear energy and enrich nuclear
fuel - but for peaceful purposes only. States must be
encouraged to use nuclear energy for peaceful means.
However, the world cannot accept attempts by any
States to produce nuclear weapons.

As brother leader Muammar Al-Qadhafi stated
before the General Assembly yesterday, the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) must
inspect all States, including those possessing nuclear
weapons. Its role must not be limited to non-nuclear
States alone if we wish the Agency to be a truly
effective international agency. However, if its role is
limited to non-nuclear States, the Agency will lose its
global character. The Agency must monitor all States
without exception.

We want the Middle East to be a nuclear-weapon-
free zone, a fully free zone. However, the Israeli
Dimona nuclear plant must be inspected. Israel cannot
remain above the law. The IAEA must have open
access to Dimona. Otherwise, all the States of the
Middle East will say, "We have the right to acquire
nuclear weapons; why Israel alone?"

Nuclear energy is just another type of energy, just
like oil and natural gas. As President Museveni stated,
States requiring energy must be helped to use this
important source of energy, but for peaceful purposes
alone. At the same time, we cannot accept the military
use of such energy, as it is the most dangerous weapon
threatening mankind.

In conclusion, we support the paper presented by
the Non-Aligned Movement to the summit, and I thank
you, Mr. President, for your initiative. Let me express
our appreciation of the United States delegation for
preparing the draft resolution we voted on this morning
(resolution 1887 (2009)).

