Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): I
would first of all like to congratulate Ambassador
Grauls on his assumption of the chairmanship of the
08-3802]

Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006). It is an important task, which Ambassador
Verbeke performed in an outstanding manner. We have
every confidence that Mr. Grauls will do likewise. We
assure him of our full cooperation.

More than three months have passed since the
adoption of resolution 1803 (2008). We are very
concerned about indication in the last report of the
Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency that Iran has still not met any of its
obligations. In particular, that report indicates that Iran
has not appropriately responded to the questions asked
of it about one of the most dangerous aspects of its
programme: the work on militarization. Since 3 June,
Iran has been in violation of resolution 1803 (2008).

However, the E3 + 3 have made every effort
possible to renew dialogue with Iran. It has now been
five years that a series of increasingly generous offers
have been made to Iran, without the slightest indication
of interest on its part. Nevertheless, tomorrow, Javier
Solana and five political directors from the E3 + 3 will,
with the support of the United States, visit Tehran to
once again present the Iranians with a proposal for
negotiations. The ball is now in their court. We very
much hope that they will have the wisdom to quickly
seize the hand that is being extended to them.

Beyond the issue of Iran, we all of us have an
individual responsibility to implement resolutions. In
that regard, I would like to emphasize that cases of
violations have been brought to the attention of the
Committee. It is up to everyone to take the necessary
measures to ensure that such cases do not happen
again.

Finally, we hope that, in the future, the
Committee will continue to play its full role as
guardian of the resolutions and help States to ensure
that they fully respect them.

