Mr. Kasemsarn (Thailand): I join other speakers
in thanking you, Sir, for holding this important meeting
and in congratulating you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of July.

Thailand has been closely following the Security
Council discussions regarding the extension of the
mandate of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH). As a troop-contributing
country with officers attached to the International
Police Task Force (IPTF) of UNMIBH, we are
concerned about the uncertainty of UNMIBH's
operations. UNMIBH's operations have already been
extended three times since 21 June 2002. That does not
bode well for the effective functioning of UNMIBH or
for its main task, the maintenance of law and order in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We therefore hope that the
Security Council can quickly reach an agreement to
renew UNMIBH's mandate to 31 December 2002, as
recommended by the Secretary General, so that its
mission can be completed.
Thailand shares the concern expressed by a large
majority of United Nations Member States regarding
recent developments in the Security Council that could
detrimentally affect the credibility and effectiveness of
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
(ICC), in force since 1 July 2002. The Rome Statute,
with 139 signatories and 76 States parties, is the result
of several decades of multilateral efforts by the
international community of nations to end impunity for
perpetrators of the most serious crimes with which the
Statute is concerned. The Rome Statute plays a pivotal
role in upholding justice and protecting human rights
and is thus one of the most important milestones in the
evolution of international law. With this in mind,
Thailand signed the Statute on 2 October 2000 and has
been working hard to fulfil the constitutional
requirements for ratification of the Statute.

We fear that these developments in the Security
Council may erode the sanctity of international law and
multilateralism, and we therefore ask all States to
safeguard the independence and the effective
functioning of the ICC, which is complementary to
national jurisdictions. While recognizing and
sympathizing with the various concerns expressed in
the Security Council with regard to the ICC, we
sincerely hope that the Security Council will find a just
solution which fully respects not only the relevant
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations but also
the letter and spirit of the Rome Statute.

