Mr. De Rivero (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation commends you, Mr. President, for having
convened this open debate on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. We are also grateful to
Mr. Egeland for his comprehensive briefing -
although I must say that his comments give cause for
concern.

This discussion is important, because one of the
great challenges facing the Security Council in the
twenty-first century will be the protection of civilian
victims of conflicts throughout the world - conflicts
that are now mostly civil in character. Since the cold
war, approximately 33 domestic armed conflicts have
broken out or been rekindled, resulting in more than 5
million deaths and almost 17 million refugees and
displaced persons. Such conflicts are truly hellish in
character, there being no longer any respect for the
most basic humanitarian principles, nor any distinction
between the belligerents and innocent civilians. Thus,
civil armed conflicts turn into a kind of mass crime
wave. They are truly destructive national conflicts that
transform countries into breeding grounds for crimes
against humanity. That is why this debate is so
important.

It must be said that the problem in addressing
such conflicts is that the United Nations was not
created to prevent internal conflicts among civilians.
Many Governments still believe that the suffering that
they inflict or allow to be inflicted on their civilian
populations is the domestic affair of States. However, it
is worth asking ourselves whether perpetrating or
permitting mass or systematic violations of the right to
life and, specifically, the provisions of the Geneva
Conventions and the Convention Against Genocide,
can honestly be called the domestic affairs of a State.

It is clear that, in accordance with international
law, States bear the primary responsibility for
protecting civilian populations. We believe that
belligerent armed groups also bear that responsibility.
If States or armed groups violate international law or
fail to comply with the Geneva Conventions, the
Convention Against Genocide or humanitarian law in
general, such violations are not a domestic matter, but
represent a threat to international peace and security.
Accordingly, such acts must meet with an immediate
and firm response by the Security Council. The United
Nations is thus duty-bound to protect civilians from
crimes against humanity, including mass violations of
human rights, ethnic cleansing and genocide.

That right to protection is not easy to exercise,
because it involves three specific responsibilities: the
responsibility to prevent internal causes of conflict that
put populations at risk; the responsibility to respond,
which includes coercive measures, sanctions and, in
extreme cases, military intervention; and the
responsibility to reconcile the population and rebuild
the ravaged country.

One important measure that would strengthen the
Council's responsibility to protect civilians would be,
for example, for the five permanent members of the
Security Council to arrive at a gentleman's agreement
not to use their veto when dealing with questions about
whether to intervene to prevent crimes against
humanity, in particular in the face of mass violations of
human rights or the right to life, ethnic cleansing and
genocide. That gentleman's agreement would become
operative once the Secretary-General put forth a case
backed up by reports of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. The
underlying idea would be for permanent members of
the Security Council, in response to a request by the
international community, to cooperate by not vetoing
Council operations that could save thousands of human
lives. The Council could also take the following
practical measures to strengthen its capacity to protect
civilians.

First, the Council needs greater foresight in
identifying countries at risk of crisis and under stress,
as well as in possibly identifying future threats to
peace not yet on its agenda.

Secondly, the Council should undertake a
systematic evaluation of mandates pertaining to the
protection of civilians, including measures taken
pursuant to Chapter VII of the Charter, so as to
enhance its capacity to protect.

Thirdly, the Council should review national
reconciliation and reconstruction processes on an
ongoing basis.

Thus far, the Council has not effectively carried
out its responsibility to prevent conflicts. With regard
to the second responsibility - namely, to respond -
not all peacekeeping missions have been completely
successful, either. As regards the responsibility towards
reconciliation and reconstruction, it remains to be seen
whether that will work in the future.

As we can see, the Council continues to face the
great challenge of fully carrying out its responsibility
to protect, which today exceeds the good intentions
reflected in resolutions 1265 (1999) and 1296 (2000).
It is therefore a good idea to consider another draft
resolution to supplement those.

The gentleman's agreement on avoiding a veto
and the practical measures I have mentioned will be
worth nothing if the Council's peacekeeping - or
peace enforcement - capacity is weakened by lack of
recruitment, shortcomings in the troops recruited and
delayed deployment of troops. If we do not improve
the quantity and quality of United Nations personnel,
we will not be able to achieve protection for civilians,
unless the Organization were hypothetically prepared
to resort to the hiring of private military firms that
have no obligations vis-a-vis international
humanitarian law but are already providing an
alternative in many armed conflicts.

It is for those reasons that the Council should
embrace the recommendations of the High-level Panel
on Threats, Challenges and Change calling on
countries with the greatest military capacity to make
available to the United Nations autonomous, highly-
trained and self-sufficient stand-by battalions that
could even be as large as a brigade.

One of the things that should be examined in the
area of protecting civilians in international armed
conflicts today is the increasingly common use of the
notion of collateral damage. That is often a euphemism
referring to the many civilians who are going to die, or
who have in fact died, and is to justify military
objectives. If the United Nations does not react to the
concept of collateral damage in international conflicts,
it will be following the military logic of belligerents,
which accepts the inevitability of the loss of innocent
life as falling within the acceptable scope of military
action. If we really want to protect civilians, one of the
first tasks of the Security Council should be to dispatch
special missions to investigate civilian losses in
international armed conflicts. Only in that way will it
be possible to determine whether or not warring parties
have complied with humanitarian conventions.

United Nations reform is unquestionably a very
high-profile issue in international public opinion today.
In that regard, the case of Darfur will prove whether
the Council is capable of bridging the gulf between its
speeches and resolutions about protecting civilians and
effective action in the face of crimes against humanity.

