Mr. Djedje (C6te d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank Ms. Bintou Keita for her excellent
briefing.

First of all, I would like to firmly condemn the
cowardly attack on a convoy of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) on 26 June, which
resulted in the death of Bangladeshi soldier, and extend
condolences to the family of the victim and to the
Government of Bangladesh.

My country remains deeply concerned about the
security situation in South Sudan five years after the
start of the conflict. Despite the cessation of hostilities
agreement signed by the parties to the conflict on
21 December 2017, clashes continue in several regions of
the country, leading to loss of life and the displacement
of many civilians. My country strongly condemns
Violations of the cessation of hostilities agreement and
again calls on the parties to the conflict to honour their
commitments and end the clashes. My delegation is also
concerned about the ongoing inter-ethnic Violence and
welcomes the civilian disarmament initiative adopted
by the Government of South Sudan. Cote d'Ivoire
encourages the Government to redouble its efforts to
ensure the security and well-being of the population.

My country remains convinced that lasting peace
will not be achieved in South Sudan without a political
solution negotiated by the parties to the conflict.
We welcome the efforts of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD), the African
Union and UNMISS to encourage the parties to the
conflict to resume negotiations towards a lasting and
inclusive political settlement to the crisis. In that
regard, my delegation welcomes the diplomatic efforts
of the Ethiopian Prime Minister, which led to the
meeting between President Salva Kiir and former First
Vice-President Riek Machar, held in Addis Ababa on
20 June. We welcome the fact that mediation efforts
by the Sudanese President led to the signing by the
parties in Khartoum on 27 June of a declaration of
agreement, in which they commit to implementing
a permanent ceasefire and to continuing discussions
to reach an agreement on power-sharing and security
arrangements. Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the good offices
of the leaders of IGAD member States and reaffirms
that it is up to the parties to the South Sudanese conflict
to honour the commitments made through the signing
of the declaration, which constitutes a decisive step in
the quest for peace in South Sudan. In that regard, Cote
d'Ivoire supports the deployment of an IGAD-African
Union contingent tasked with enforcing the permanent
cessation hostilities agreement, as mentioned in the
agreement.

The fragile nature of the humanitarian situation
in South Sudan remains a source of concern for
the international community. With approximately
2.5 million refugees and 1.8 million internally displaced
persons, it is one of the most serious humanitarian
situations in the world. Humanitarian organization
estimates of more than 7 million people who are food
insecure and more than 1 million children at risk for
malnutrition serve to underscore the urgent need for
increased humanitarian assistance to South Sudan. Cote
d'Ivoire thanks humanitarian organizations for their
considerable efforts to help people in need and strongly
condemns the recurring attacks on humanitarian
workers. We urge the parties to the conflict in South
Sudan to guarantee the safety of humanitarian workers,
remove the obstacles to humanitarian assistance and
enable humanitarian access to the population, in line
with the 21 December 2017 agreement.

The human rights situation also remains a source of
concern, in particular because of acts of sexual violence
committed against women and the use of child soldiers
by the parties to the conflict. My delegation therefore
calls for the urgent establishment of transitional justice
institutions, such as a hybrid court for South Sudan,
which will be an effective tool for protecting human
rights and combating impunity.

My country would like to congratulate UNMISS
on its excellent work in discharging its mandate in a
particularly challenging environment. We underscore
our support for the Mission and urge it to continue its
work, specifically to protect civilians and human rights.
My country therefore urges the Government to respect
the status-of-forces agreement, which remains the legal
framework for cooperation between the Government
and the United Nations Mission with a view to restoring
peace and stability in South Sudan.

In conclusion, the latest political developments give
us hope that lasting peace is possible in South Sudan.
However, it remains dependent upon the political will of
the South Sudanese leaders and their robust ownership
of the process of exiting the crisis, as well as on the
regional support provided by IGAD and the African
Union. In that regard, my country calls on the United
Nations to support the current momentum and all the
efforts of the countries involved.

