Mr. Bertoux (France) (spoke in French): Iwould like
to start by thanking Ambassadeur Gasana and his entire
team for their work this month. This second Rwandan
presidency, which has been just as professional as the
first, has unfortunately been marked by the tragedies in
Ukraine and the Middle East. In a heated climate, Sir,
you have worked with a cool head day and night, seven
days a week. For that we thank you.

I also wish to congratulate you on having made
this month's wrap-up session a public meeting. I am
sure that future Presidents will be eager to follow your
example.

Fighting has continued in Ukraine after the
separatists have refused to lay down their arms. Even
worse, signs of outside support for the separatists have
multiplied, especially with respect to the transfer of
long-range weapons. On the one hand, Russia claims
to be working for peace, yet on the other it continues to
arm and support thugs. That is the context in which the
European Union has decided to significantly strengthen
its sanctions. The double game must cease, because
when one arms bandits, anything can happen.

Unfortunately, the crash of Malaysia Airlines
Flight MH-17 on 17 July is tragic proof of that. The
Council held an emergency meeting the next day
to express its horror and outrage in the face of the
disaster (see S/PV.7219). We wish once again to offer
our deepest solidarity to the many countries that lost
citizens in the catastrophe. The Council unanimously
adopted resolution 2166 (2014), confirming Ukraine's
responsibility to conduct the investigation and
demanding that the Secretary-General file periodic
reports. The presence of three foreign ministers at the
meeting was evidence that the public attaches great
importance to full light being shed on the matter. Due
to the lack of security, the investigators have not yet
been able to begin their mission. It is urgent to establish
the conditions necessary for the international mission
to conduct its investigation. That will require the
parties to respect a ceasefire. The victims must receive
a dignified burial. The investigation must be able to
proceed unhindered. Justice must be done.

The tragedy of the crisis in Gaza demands that we
stand firm. The catastrophic human toll, with more
than 1,200 victims on the Palestinian side, most ofthem
civilians, requires us to increase pressure on the parties.
As French Minister of Foreign Affairs Fabius remarked
on the occasion of the meeting in Paris on 26 July,
the urgency of the situation demands an immediate,
unconditional and renewable humanitarian ceasefire
that will provide relief to the civilian population and
delivery of the assistance they require.

That can be only a first step. Our common goal must
be to obtain, as quickly as possible, a lasting, negotiated
ceasefire that meets the legitimate Israeli security
needs and the legitimate Palestinian needs for the
protection of civilians, free access and socioeconomic
reconstruction. The Palestinian Authority must be
brought in to help achieve that goal, on the basis of the
Egyptian initiative. The crisis underscores yet again
the urgency of restoring a political outlook to both
Palestinians and Israelis. Only credible negotiations
between the parties can lead to the signing of a just,
definitive agreement establishing two democratic
States living side by side in peace and security within
recognized borders.

Despite all the efforts made so far, armed force
continues to prevail over political dialogue in Syria. The
Syrian regime bears overwhelming responsibility in
that regard. It has never sought anything but a military
victory. It has refused to take part in negotiations,
preferring to continue laying siege, bombarding
and torturing all those who have resisted it or those
who - peacefully at the outset - demanded reforms.
The independent international commission of inquiry
on Syria led by Mr. Pinheiro made that clear again on
Friday. The regime has chosen instead to encourage
the efforts of terrorist groups, to which it is now losing
control and that are threatening the stability of the entire
region. Given that situation, the moderate opposition
continues alone to fight two forms of extremism; it is
battling the regime on the one hand and the terrorists
on the other. Only by giving it additional support will
we be able to promote the emergence of a free and
democratic Syria that is respectful of all its citizens.

Civilians are bearing the brunt of the current
situation. Humanitarian aid must reach them without
any impediment, without political considerations and
by the most direct routes, as required by resolutions
2139 (2014) and 2165 (2014). But it is also important
to relaunch a process aimed at finding a way out of
the crisis, with a View to reaching a political transition
solution that is based on the Geneva communique. We
welcome in that regard the appointment of Staffan
de Mistura as the Special Envoy for the Syrian Arab
Republic, succeeding Mr. Brahimi, whom we thank for
his efforts.

France is deeply concerned by the advance of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), which poses
a threat to the integrity of the country and the stability
of the entire region. We have strongly condemned
the atrocities committed by ISIL against ethnic and
religious minorities and all those who do not adhere to
its barbarous ideology, as well as the ultimatum given
the Christians in Mosul. This is yet another illustration
of the true nature of that terrorist organization. The
Council, on the initiative of France, made itself clear
on this issue. What ISIL has undertaken to eradicate in
Iraq is a centuries-old tradition.

The Council usefully recalled the obligations of
States in the fight against the financing of terrorism
and expressed its concern about access to oil zones
and refineries by terrorist groups that are under the
Al-Qaida sanctions regime, in particular ISIL and the
al-Nusra Front.

France supports the Iraqi State in this fight against
terrorism and believes that the only lasting solution
to the crisis is a political one. Only the formation of a
national unity Government on the basis of an agreement
involving all communities will allow for a political
solution to be reached.

Finally, in the context of this overview of the North
Africa and the Middle East region, I would cite Libya
as another example of a deteriorating security situation
and continued political confusion. We have asked all of
our nationals to leave Libya and have temporarily closed
our embassy. After the elections, our priority must be to
help the Libyans to relaunch a political process. They
must unite around a common political project, through
an inclusive process of national reconciliation. Today
violence threatens this institutional perspective, and
we must therefore help the Libyans reach a ceasefire as
quickly as possible.

To that end, the Libyans require greater support
from the international community. We must act in
a consistent and coordinated manner, and the United
Nations has a key role to play in this process. It is of
paramount importance that it continue its involvement
in Libya and bring together all the efforts of the
international community.

The scant good news this month comes, for once,
from Africa, and this must be stressed.

First, Mali saw the consensus-based adoption in
Algiers of the road map on inter-Malian negotiations.
That is an encouraging and long-awaited step which the
Council welcomed and which must be continued.

Good news comes also from the Central African
Republic, with the holding of the reconciliation forum
from 21 to 23 July. That, along with the increase in the
strength of and the preparations for the United Nations
force, will make it possible to envisage a peaceful
transition in that country.

I would conclude by issuing a warning on South
Sudan. For more than six months now, the Security
Council has been stepping up its efforts to help resolve
the crisis there, by doubling the size of the Mission last
December, under the French presidency of the Council;
building its capacity; revising its mandate; supporting
the mediation of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development; and integrating the troops of the
countries of the region to endeavour to enforce respect
of the ceasefire. Unfortunately, experience has shown
that the parties do not want peace. We heard Ms. Amos
sound the alarm for the people of South Sudan; indeed, a
million people have been displaced, there are hundreds
of thousands of refugees, and now famine looms large.

The Mission's mandate was therefore tightened as
concerns the protection of civilians, human rights and
the facilitating of access to humanitarian aid. But we
must continue to reflect together on the best way for the
Security Council to have an impact on the disastrous
situation in the country and to save lives. We must
urgently devise concrete humanitarian initiatives and
take action against those who make civilians pay such
a high price for their unquenchable thirst for power and
riches.

I thank you once again, Mr. President, for your
work this month, and I wish the United Kingdom good
luck.

