Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): As Ambassador Sir
Mark Lyall Grant indicated, I co-led the Security
5

Council mission to Kenya. I wish to focus my briefing
on the meetings held with the Government of Kenya
and with the African Union (AU), the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD),
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), the
United Nations Political Office for Somalia (UNPOS)
and the United Nations Support Office for the African
Union Mission in Somalia (UNSOA).

The Security Council met with the Vice-President
and Prime Minister of Kenya. The Vice-President, the
Honourable Stephen Kalonzo Musyoka, described the
situation in Somalia as the biggest threat to
international peace and security and placed the security
challenge of Somalia both in its international and
regional context and in its domestic context for Kenya.
Kenya shares a long border with Somalia and hosts the
Dadaab refugee camp, which is the largest such camp
in the world. The country also plays an important role
in the prosecution and imprisonment of pirates who
operate off the coast of Somalia. The Vice-President
expressed the View that the international community
had failed Somalia. In that regard, he expressed
concern that AMISOM. was not receiving the requisite
support from either the international community or the
Security Council. The Vice-President echoed the AU's
request for additional support and called on the
Security Council to strengthen AMISOM's troop levels
to 20,000 and for the imposition of no-fly zones and a
naval blockade. Kenya also requested greater
assistance in its fight against piracy and in dealing with
the influx of refugees from Somalia.

With regard to political developments in Somalia,
the Vice-President expressed concern that the
Transitional Federal Government had not taken
advantage of the increased security, and stated that the
Somali political leadership should stop the personal in-
fighting and place the interests of Somalia and Somali
people first. The concerns expressed by the Vice-
President with regard to terrorism, piracy and support
for AMISOM. were also echoed by the Prime Minister,
the Honourable Mr. Raila Odinga.

With regard to political developments in Somalia,
the Prime Minister stated that the environment for
conducting elections before August did not exist. He
proposed that clear timelines be developed for
finalizing the constitution-writing process. Both the
Vice-President and the Prime Minister cautioned
against fatigue by the international community when it
comes to Somalia. They appealed for effective
multilateral support for ensuring a lasting solution to
the Somali conflict.

In the joint meeting with the United Nations
country team heads, UNPOS, UNSOA and His
Excellency Mr. Jerry Rawlings, the African Union
High Representative, Ambassador Boubacar Diarra,
Special Representative of the Chairperson of the
Commission of the African Union, and AMISOM. Force
Commander Major General Nathan Mugisha, the
members of the Security Council had the opportunity
to discuss end-of-transition and post-transition
arrangements. Ambassador Mahiga, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, updated the
meeting on the latest political developments and
stressed the need for the Security Council and the
international community to speak with one voice in
reinforcing the Council's decision, as agreed in its
presidential statement of 11 May (S/PRST/2011/10*).
In that statement, the Council emphasized the
importance for the Transitional Federal Institutions
(TFIs) to reach agreement as soon as possible on the
holding of elections, and that no extension could be
considered without an agreement among the parties on
the date for the elections.

During the discussion on the activities of
AMISOM. to maintain peace and security, the
AMISOM. Force Commander updated the Council on
its recent military successes. The Force Commander
and the AU Special Representative also outlined some
of the main challenges besetting AMISOM. At the
political level, the continued political uncertainty
represents a major threat to security. At the operational
level, the effectiveness of AMISOM. is severely
curtailed by, among other things, the lack of equipment
and logistical support, the lack of air and maritime
support, the lack of protective vehicles and the lack of
predictable financing. In addition, the lack of
agreement and predeployment training have also
delayed the deployment of AMISOM. troops to the
authorized level of 12,000.

President Rawlings underlined the need for
coordination among IGAD, the AU and the Security
Council, as well as for the territorial integrity of
Somalia to be respected. In that connection, he
expressed the AU's support for the need for
benchmarks and timeframes to be linked to any
extension for the TFIs, as well as the creation of the
monitoring mechanism for the implementation of such
benchmarks.
The joint meeting with our IGAD and AU
partners and the Government of Kenya was most
useful. We left the meeting with a sense of convergence
among the international role players regarding the post-
transition phase in Somalia.

During our interactions in Nairobi, we
experienced an overwhelming expression of support
and confidence across the board in the sterling
leadership of Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Mahiga and his team in facilitating the
Somalia consultative conference to be held in
Mogadishu, as well as his collaborative efforts with
IGAD to facilitate agreement among the Somali
leadership on the post-transition phase.

In conclusion, these meetings underscore the
need for a comprehensive strategy for dealing with the
security, humanitarian and development challenges in
Somalia. I would like to express my gratitude to
Special Representative Mahiga and his team for their
tireless efforts to assist the people of Somalia in
securing a peaceful future. My gratitude also goes to
11-36348

the African Union and AMISOM. for their continued
commitment and sacrifice in securing peace and
stability in Somalia. Finally, I wish to add my voice to
that of Ambassador Lyall Grant in thanking the United
Nations Secretariat, at the levels of both Headquarters
and at UNPOS and UNSOA, for facilitating and
arranging the programme in Nairobi. My thanks also
go to all those who assisted us during our visit.

