Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank you, Sir, for organizing today's
open debate. We also thank the Secretary-General for
his very informative briefing. We listened carefully
to the representatives of the African Union and the
European Union.

For the past few years, the Security Council has
repeatedly drawn attention to the need to step up
practical cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations in the area of maintaining international
peace and security. Today's debate is another
confirmation of the importance the Council attaches
to the task of developing collective approaches in
shaping effective strategies for preventing and settling
conflicts. Our position is that cooperation of that kind
should be based on the Charter of the United Nations,
specifically its Chapter VIII.

There is no doubt that regional and subregional
organizations have better knowledge of the situations
in their region. Their preventive and peacekeeping
mechanisms are more specifically tailored to the
realities on the ground. Those comparative advantages,
added to the universal nature of the United Nations
and its internationally recognized legitimacy, create
unique peacekeeping potential. It is also important
that partners should act in a harmonious way, without
duplicating efforts or creating unnecessary obstacles in
their work, which should be focused on coming up with
political and diplomatic approaches to the settlement of
conflicts.

Throughout the long history of cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations in the area of peacekeeping, there
are many excellent examples of success in different
countries around the world. That success is based on
fulfilling realistic tasks with the support of sufficient
human and material resources. A very important
imperative in fulfilling those tasks is compliance
with the basic principles of peacekeeping, namely, the
consent of the host country, neutrality and the use of
force only in accordance with a mandate. Moving away
from those principles and focusing only on coercive
measures could destabilize a situation and in fact
antagonize the local population.

Partnership between the Organization and
regional organizations is based on the recognition
that the Security Council has the main responsibility
for maintaining international peace and security.
That means first and foremost that the Council has
to authorise and supervise regional and coalition
peacekeeping operations. We should not, however,
forget the need for the Council be accountable. Expert
assessment of the Organization could be very useful in
planning and carrying out regional operations and in
fostering an appropriate command structure.

A special role in the traditional network of partners
of the United Nations is played by the African Union.
The broad experience of and respectful cooperation
between the two organizations in different areas is an
excellent guide for other regional organizations in terms
of establishing an effective paradigm for cooperation.
We highlight the successful efforts ofboth organizations
in Darfur, Somalia and in the inter-Sudan conflict. It
is important to continue stepping up coordination in
South Sudan, the Central African Republic and Mali.
I recall that, during the Russian presidency of the
Security Council in June, we held a traditional and very
useful meeting in New York with our colleagues from
the Peace and Security Council of the African Union.

We commend the experience of the working
partnership between the United Nations and the
Economic Community of West African States. That
organization has shown itselfto be a reliable partner with
the Organization in resolving conflicts in the subregion.
We also see added value in cooperating with and
receiving financial support from the European Union.
There is also great potential in the cooperation between
the United Nations and the League of Arab States,
as well as good opportunities for expanding contacts
with such dynamically developing organizations as the
Community of Latin American and Caribbean States
and the Union of South American Nations.

We also would not want to lose sight of the
importance of cooperation between the United Nations
and the Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO)
and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, which have
become increasingly recognized around the world in
the area of maintaining peace and security. We also see
good opportunities for cooperation between the United
Nations and the CSTO in peacekeeping, which has
been reflected in resolution 2167 (2014), just adopted.
In the framework of the CSTO, considerable work has
been undertaken to strengthen peacekeeping potential,
including in United Nations peacekeeping operations.
In addition, the CSTO is actively cooperating in the
post-conflict reconstruction ofAfghanistan and dealing
with the terrorist threat coming from that country.

We continue to favour closer cooperation between
the United Nations and regional organizations on the
basis of Chapter VIII of the Charter in order to promote
the Organization's peacekeeping objectives. We hope
that today's debate will give additional impetus to the
process of improving the long-standing cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organization
based on the Charter of the United Nations and the
norms of international law.

In conclusion, we would like to express our
gratitude to the delegation of Rwanda for the effective
coordination of the process of preparing the draft
Security Council resolution that we have adopted in the
course of today's meeting.

