Mr. Taiana (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like at the outset to express my delegation's
appreciation for the excellent work done by the
delegation of the Hellenic Republic in exercising the
presidency of the Security Council during the month of
September. I would like to thank you in particular,
Madam, for all your efforts in organizing this meeting.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his statement. I also convey to him my country's
appreciation for all his efforts during his tenure aimed
at achieving a solution to the conflict in the Middle
East.

Argentina believes that the Arab League's
initiative to convene this ministerial meeting on the
Middle East peace process is very timely. It provides a
good opportunity for the Security Council to reflect on
the status of the peace process and to begin to consider
concrete measures to revitalize it.

The Arab-Israeli conflict has a historical and
political importance that transcends the Middle East; it
has been a cause of instability in that region for more
than half a century. Argentina therefore believes that
the Security Council should attach high priority to the
quest for a lasting resolution of the conflict.

The principles of the peace process were set out
almost four decades ago by this body, and we do not
believe that they should be revised. The occupation
that began in 1967 must be ended through a negotiated
solution between the parties. The result should be the
emergence of an independent, democratic, viable and
territorially contiguous Palestinian State, living in
peace and security with Israel and its other neighbours.

Experience shows there is no military solution to
the conflict. The path of violence and mutual rejection
will lead only to further suffering for the peoples of the
Middle East. If that path is taken, the legitimate
aspirations of the Palestinian people to their dignity
and to the establishment of an independent State, and
the legitimate aspirations of the Israeli people to their
security, will be frustrated indefinitely and submerged
in a cycle of violence, reprisals and revenge.

The situation in Gaza and the West Bank
demonstrates that neither will a policy based on
unilateral acts resolve the conflict, and that faits
accomplis on the ground, such as the construction of
the separation barrier and settlement activities, will
only exacerbate resentment, increase distrust and
strengthen extremist elements.

Argentina is convinced that there is only one path
for the peoples of the Middle East: mutual recognition
as a necessary step towards a definitive peace. It is
evident that the parties have not, on their own, been
able to break the stalemate. The active assistance of the
international community is therefore essential if that
objective is to be achieved.

The Quartet has an important role to play in this
regard. My country reaffirms its support for the
Quartet's efforts to guide the peace process, and
acknowledges the statement issued yesterday by the
Quartet. However, we believe that, given the delays
and difficulties experienced in implementing the road
map, the Quartet must seriously reflect on the
consequences of maintaining the status quo and should
consider urgent additional measures to achieve
concrete results.
The international community in general should
also play a more proactive role in the search for peace.
My country believes that the proposal to convene
another international conference for the Middle East
could contribute in a positive manner to the
relaunching of the peace process, and we hope that all
interested parties can work in a constructive manner
with a view to convening such a conference as soon as
possible. In this regard, we believe that it would be a
positive step if the Secretary-General were to present a
report to the Security Council before the end of his
mandate setting out concrete proposals for overcoming
the current stalled process.

The efforts of President Abbas to form a
Palestinian Government of national unity also deserve
our full support. We hope that such efforts will bear
fruit and that the platform of the new Palestinian
Government will be compatible with the three
principles appropriately endorsed by the Security
Council: recognition of Israel, renunciation of violence
and acceptance of prior agreements.

We believe that there is an urgent need for
international assistance to be re-established for the
alleviation of the grave humanitarian situation of the
Palestinian people. Israel must also transfer all
Palestinian tax and customs revenues so as to avert the
collapse of the Palestinian Authority.

In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm that our
vision of a just and lasting peace in the Middle East is
a comprehensive one. The bases for such a regional
peace are the resolutions of this Council, in particular
242 (1967), 338 (1973), 425 (1978), 1397 (2002), 1515
(2003) and 1701 (2006), the principle of land for
peace, the terms of reference of the Madrid Conference
and the Arab Peace Initiative.

We in Argentina, which is home to sizeable,
active and flourishing Arab and Jewish communities,
know that peace is possible.

