Ms. King: I first wish to thank the Chinese
presidency for convening today's meeting and
inviting me to this open debate on multilateralism
and strengthening the role of the United Nations. This
debate demonstrates the importance that the Security
Council attaches to reaffirming the values of the rules-
based order created 73 years ago.

Three years ago we celebrated a big victory for
multilateralism - the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. The process was universal,
integrated and inclusive. It represented the rich and the
poor, Governments and non-governmental stakeholders
and those concerned with each of the three dimensions
of sustainable development, namely, economic
development, social development and the environment,
as well as peace and security. As we implement it,

we cannot afford to forget that it was dialogue and a
painstaking, inclusive approach that got us to this point.

It is troubling that multilateralism is so frequently
being questioned today. Many are asking whether that
agreement would be at all possible in today's political
reality. But are we asking the right question? Perhaps
the answer to our fears and concerns lies in the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda. This open debate is
an opportunity to remind ourselves that multilateralism
works. It was multilateralism that delivered conditions
for economic growth after the Second World War. It was
multilateralism that allowed us to reach the objective of
halving extreme poverty after 2000.

Climate change, technological disruption and the
threat of nuclear war are the defining issues of our
time. The issues of refugees, migration and trade need
to be addressed. All of those challenges need a global
solution. Only the United Nations allows everyone to
bring their viewpoint and find common approaches
and solutions. Now more than ever, we must keep the
channels for dialogue wide open. How can we therefore
enhance multilateralism?

We need to fulfil the commitments in the 2030
Agenda, which was the most ambitious and universal
agenda ever adopted by the United Nations. Upholding
the principles of the 2030 Agenda is paramount to
solving our most pressing challenges. The High-
level Political Forum on Sustainable Development
creates a space for real dialogue and a platform for
knowledge-sharing. I am inspired by the strong
commitment we have seen from the 102 countries that
have already presented voluntary national reviews, with
an additional 41 scheduled to present theirs in 2019.
The High-level Political Forum to be held next year,
under the auspices of the Economic and Social Council,
will review Sustainable Development Goals on jobs
and growth, inequality, climate change, education and,
of course, global partnerships, as well as address the
theme on inclusiveness and equality - all relevant as
we grapple with the burning issues of our time.

The High-level Political Forum, which will also
meet under the auspices of the General Assembly at the
summit level in September next year, provides us with
a perfect opportunity to take stock, address solutions
and catalyse action towards the implementation of the
2030 Agenda. It will be an opportunity to reaffirm
our commitment to global cooperation and create the
conditions for peace and sustainable development,
because we cannot have either unless we have both.

The Economic and Social Council and the Security
Council have cooperated in the past, when the Economic
and Social Council ad hoc advisory groups on African
countries emerging from conflict worked closely with
the Security Council ad hoc working group on conflict
in Africa, in Guinea-Bissau and Burundi, during the
period from 2002 to 2007. Another example of joint
efforts and integrated approaches was the request by
the Security Council for the Economic and Social
Council's advice on a long-term programme of support
for Haiti in 1999. Members of the Security Council
may wish to consider whether the use of Article 65 of
the Charter of the United Nations, on the exchange of
information between the Economic and Social Council
and the Security Council, could be a way to strengthen
the dialogue between the two councils.

I am optimistic that we can bring about more
coherence across the three main pillars of the United
Nations. The working relationship between the
Economic and Social Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) is becoming stronger. For the
first time, the presidency of the Economic and Social
Council has been invited to address the annual session
of the Peacebuilding Commission, which will focus
on the Sahel. The following day, on 13 November,
the Economic and Social Council-PBC joint meeting
will address the linkages between climate change and
challenges to peacebuilding and sustaining peace in
the Sahel. The presidency was also invited this year for
the first time to brief the Human Rights Council on the
outcomes of this year's High-level Political Forum, a
seizing of the opportunity created by resolution 37/25
to mainstream the 2030 Agenda into the human rights
agenda.

The Economic and Social Council provides the
space for non-governmental organizations to give
voice to their hopes and dreams for the future. Its
Commission on the Status of Women is also a space
for accountability on Security Council resolution 1325
(2000), on women and peace and security. I also offer
the Economic and Social Council Youth Forum as a
space for an integrated dialogue on youth and peace
and security to discuss the economic underpinnings of
the historic Security Council resolution 2250 (2015),
adopted in 2015.

While we must continue to break down silos
between the main organs, it is also clear that they are in
need of reform. Indeed, the membership recognized the
wisdom of the Secretary-General's reform efforts last
session. Still outstanding, however, is the much-needed
reform of the Security Council. Of critical importance
also is the ongoing work on the revitalization of the
General Assembly and the efforts to align the work of
the General Assembly and of the Economic and Social
Council in the light of the adoption of the 2030 Agenda.
As President of the Economic and Social Council, it
is my responsibility - and a priority - to facilitate
the implementation of the innovations mandated in the
outcomes of the review process aimed at strengthening
the Economic and Social Council, as articulated in
General Assembly 72/305.

With the 2030 Agenda, we pledged that no one
would be left behind, and we committed to endeavour
to first reach the furthest behind. We should be guided
by that principle in our pursuit of the world we want and
that should be the basis for reaffirming our commitment
to multilateralism.

In closing, I draw the Council's attention to
the words of the late, great mathematician Stephen
Hawking. In his last book, entitled BriefAnswers to the
Big Questions, Hawking explained that when we see
the Earth from space, we see ourselves as a whole. We
see the unity and not the divisions. It is such a simple
image with a compelling message: one planet, one
human race. Stephen Hawking died earlier this year,
but not before issuing his own call to action, which I
quote as follows:

"I hope that going forward people with
power can show creativity, courage and leadership.
Let them rise to the challenge of the Sustainable
Development Goals and act I am very aware of
the preciousness of time. Seize the moment, act
now."

