Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): I wish to thank President
Mandela for his briefing on his vision for the Arusha peace
process. We warmly welcome his appointment as Facilitator
of the Arusha peace process. We have no doubt that, under
his guidance and able leadership, the negotiations will reach
a successful conclusion acceptable to all Burundians.

I also wish to thank the Secretary-General for his
briefing and update on the situation in Burundi. We support
his continuous efforts in Burundi and in the region as a
whole.

The situation in Burundi is at a crucial juncture, with
Violence against civilians being perpetrated by all sides to
the conflict. The policy of forced regroupement is not the
answer to the violence that afflicts the country. Rather, it
brings further division among the population, escalates the
cycle of violence and exacerbates the already dire
humanitarian situation in Burundi. My delegation condemns
the inhuman policy of regroupement. It is in this light that
we reiterate our call on the Burundian authorities to cease
the policy of regroupement and create conditions conducive
to the safe return of civilians to their homes to resume their
livelihood.

The Arusha peace process is the best viable option for
finding lasting peace in Burundi. In addition, the
participation of all Burundian parties in the Arusha peace
process is of paramount importance, and we therefore
urge them to cease hostilities and to participate
constructively in the negotiations so as to end the carnage
in that country. Only the people of Burundi, with the
assistance of the international community, can bring true
and lasting peace to that war-tom country. We therefore
call for continued assistance to the peace process.

President Mandela has taken over from another
gallant and respected son of Africa, the late Mwalimu
Julius Nyerere, one who played a pivotal role in the
liberation struggle in Africa, particularly in southern
Africa. Who better than President Mandela can help
reinvigorate the Burundi peace process? He is familiar
with the tragic politics of exclusion because he comes
from a country where in the past the majority were
trampled upon by the minority regime, and from a
background where exclusion rather than inclusion was the
order of the day. Last but not least, President Mandela
comes from a background where ethnic division was used
by the minority regime to sustain themselves in power.
But even more importantly, President Mandela hails from
a country with a leadership that has proved that it is
possible for people who were in the past divided along
racial and ethnic lines to accommodate and accept one
another and live together in peace and harmony.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our support
for the efforts of President Mandela, a distinguished son
of Africa, and to wish him success.

