Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): We
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this special
meeting of the Security Council to debate the political
crisis in Zimbabwe.

The Council has already expressed concern over
the possible implications of the Zimbabwe crisis for
regional peace and security by adopting its presidential
statement of 23 June 2008 (S/PRST/2008/23). The
crisis has since deepened, with the flawed presidential
elections in Zimbabwe of 27 June 2008, as witnessed
by election monitors from African institutions. The
African Union has expressed its heightened concern
and engagement regarding the crisis in Zimbabwe, by
adopting unanimously on 1 July 2008 a resolution
which condemns the political motivated violence in
Zimbabwe. The resolution encourages dialogue by all
the parties and calls for the formation of a government
of national unity. The resolution ushers in a new and
more robust initiative to address the precarious
Zimbabwe political and security situation. It merits
serious consideration by the Security Council in order
to enable the Council to work in tandem with the
African Union and to create an atmosphere in
Zimbabwe and the region that is more conducive to a
negotiated settlement.

The political significance of the African Union
resolution for the prospects for advancing the peace
process in Zimbabwe lies in five areas which the
Council may wish to consider as the way forward to
support the peace initiative of Africa and the Southern
African Development Community (SADC) intended to
address the situation in Zimbabwe.

First, the African Union resolution has the full
political backing of the entire membership of the
African Union, which now remains fully seized of the
issue.

Secondly, the resolution is advancing the peace
process from a facilitation mode by President Mbeki
before the elections to a mediation effort in the post-
election period.

Thirdly, the resolution calls upon SADC to form
a mediation mechanism which was not there before for
the exclusive purpose of initiating a dialogue among
the parties and the formation of a government of
national unity in Zimbabwe.

Fourthly, as we speak, President Mbeki has
started fresh efforts to prepare for the SADC
mediation. The 14 ministers of the SADC Organ on
Politics, Defence and Security Cooperation are meeting
on 16 July 2008 in Durban to elaborate on the mandate
and modalities of negotiations and mediation by the
proposed mechanism, which should begin to function
expeditiously.
Finally, the resolution further calls for undivided
support from the entire international community for the
new political process initiated by SADC and the
African Union.

In the light of these new developments, the
Council should consider focusing on supporting the
new political initiative which has begun and should
give it a chance to proceed. At this stage, the political
option should take precedence over the punitive option.
We urge the adoption of a judicious combination and
calibrated sequencing of approaches to this crisis
without prejudice to the powers and rights of the
Security Council to determine its agenda and priorities.

