The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council for the month of May, I should like to
take this opportunity to pay tribute on behalf of the
Council to Ambassador Gunter Pleuger, Permanent
Representative of Germany to the United Nations, for
his service as President of the Council for the month of
April 2004. I am sure I speak for all members of the
Council in expressing deep appreciation to
Ambassador Pleuger for the great diplomatic skill with
which he conducted the Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Letter dated 31 March 1998 from the Charge
d'affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Papua
New Guinea to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/1998/287)

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Fiji, Japan, New Zealand and Papua
New Guinea, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Aisi (Papua New Guinea) took a seat at the Council table; the
representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.


The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Danilo Turk, Assistant Secretary-
General for Political Affairs.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Turk to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Danilo Turk, Assistant Secretary-
General for Political Affairs. I give him the floor.


