Mr. Ebner (Austria): Let me join others in
congratulating you, Sir, on assuming the Security
Council presidency and in thanking the Libyan
presidency for the month of the March for the work
done.
We thank Mr. Hedi Annabi, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
detailed briefing and his mission's ongoing efforts to
contribute to peace and stability in Haiti. Austria
wishes to align itself with the statement to be delivered
by the representative of the Czech Republic on behalf
of the European Union.

Austria commends the progress made in terms of
the political situation following the successful
organization of presidential elections and the
establishment of Haiti's Government in 2006.
Significant advances have been made in the fields of
political dialogue as well as the extension of State
authority. In order to further those positive
developments, it remains vital for the Government to
continue its dialogue with all relevant actors, including
political parties, the private sector as well as civil
society.

Austria welcomes the significant improvements
made in the rule of law sector. Due to the important
role played by the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and the gradual
strengthening of the Haitian National Police, security
has improved throughout Haiti. That coordination has
greatly contributed to the decline in violence and
criminal activity in the country. Austria therefore
believes that the enhancement and continued vetting of
the Haitian National Police remain key prerequisites
for Haiti's stability and security.

We are pleased to note the progress made in the
organization of the judiciary through the
implementation of respective legal instruments, yet
further advancement of stability in Haiti will also
depend on promoting the other pillars of the rule of law
system. We are concerned about the challenges faced
by the Haitian judiciary in conducting and completing
proceedings in an expeditious manner. That has
resulted in a dramatic rise in the prison population
under very difficult conditions. We welcome the launch
of the working group on the reform of the judiciary and
hope that it will help to accelerate the judicial reform
process.

With regard to juvenile justice, more reform
efforts are needed. Austria has been actively involved
in the elaboration of a juvenile law code, which is a
prerequisite for a comprehensive child protection
system, and encourages the Haitian Government to
further continue its work in that regard.
Another element of vital importance to further
stabilize Haiti's political situation and to improve the
functioning of its democratic institutions will be
constitutional reform, which should bring about better
governance in Haiti. We recognize the tight schedule
that Haiti faces and encourage the country's political
leaders to achieve the necessary consensus.

In that context, the successful holding of the
upcoming elections for the renewal of one third of the
Senate is of great importance and a prerequisite for the
necessary constitutional reform. Every effort must be
taken to ensure that the election process be free, fair
and inclusive.

The economic and social situation in Haiti
remains precarious due to the devastation caused by
last year's hurricanes and the global economic crisis.
Daily living conditions have deteriorated. Poverty and
food security remain issues of great concern. In that
respect, the adoption of agricultural policies aimed at
boosting production and continued efforts to
implement a reconstruction and development strategy
will constitute significant contributions towards
ameliorating the socio-economic climate in Haiti.

Austria believes that regional cooperation and
partnership contribute substantively to the
effectiveness of MINUSTAH. In that context, Austria
welcomes the strong Latin American and Caribbean
participation and ownership in MINUSTAH. Through
the engagement of regional organizations, such as the
Organization of American States and the Caribbean
Community, Haiti's integration into the region is
ensured. The substantial progress achieved by
MINUSTAH with regard to the security situation in
Haiti underlines the benefits to peacekeeping drawn
from troop and police contributions by regional actors.

Finally, let me stress the importance of efficiently
using the momentum for further positive development
in Haiti. On his recent visit to Haiti, the Secretary-
General underlined that Haiti and the international
community were presented with a window of
opportunity to enhance the situation in the country. In
that regard, the upcoming international donor
conference in Washington, DC. is an opportunity for
Haiti to gain access to supplementary funds in order to
continue its peace and stabilization process.

