Mr. Akahori (Japan): I would like to begin
by thanking President Agius, President Meron and
Prosecutor Brammertz for their briefings and their
respective reports (S/2016/453, annex and S/2016/454, annex).

Japan is committed to the establishment of the rule
of law and attaches great importance to the activities
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. I would like to
assure the Presidents and the Prosecutor of Japan's full
support to the work of their bodies.

With regard to the work of the ICTY, we appreciate
the efforts made by the Tribunal to deliver judgements
on the Karadeie and Seselj cases in March, as projected,
despite serious staff attrition. We are also pleased to
learn that the judgment on the Stanisic' and Simatovie
case is likely to meet the envisaged June date. Let
me commend the leadership of the Presidents and the
Prosecutor for those actions, and I call upon them to
keep the timeline of the judicial activity as projected,
while respecting due process.

The Tribunal can fulfil its mandate only when
it receives the necessary cooperation from Member
States. We recall that Member States have the obligation
to cooperate fully with the ICTY, and urge the relevant
States to implement their obligations.

Turning to the Mechanism, resolution 1966 (2010)
mandated the Mechanism as a small, temporary and
effective judicial organ to take over the activity and
legacy of the ICTY and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR). We are pleased to hear
that the Mechanism has been trying to be as efficient as
possible by implementing various innovative measures,
such as the "one-office" approach in the Office of the
Prosecutor, while ensuring smooth and sound judicial
activities. However, we note with concern that the
construction of the new permanent premises in Arusha
is facing a slight delay. We hope the project will be
completed by the end of this year and expect strong
leadership by the President and the Registrar.

Like the ICTY, Member States have to cooperate
fully with the Mechanism. In that respect, we are
happy to learn that the United Nations and Mali
signed an agreement on enforcement of sentences of
imprisonment. We also welcome the cooperation by the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in implementing resolution 2256 (2015) to transfer
Mr. Ladislas Ntaganzwa to the Rwandan authorities.
We look forward to more such examples in the future.

Before concluding, let me reiterate Japan's support
for the activities of both the ICTY and the Mechanism.
We hope that they will contribute further to the
development of international criminal justice.

