Mr. Monteiro (Portugal): It is a pleasure, Sir, to see
you presiding over the work of the Security Council; I wish
you continued success.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the European
Union. The Central and Eastern European countries
associated with the European Union - Bulgaria, the Czech
Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland,
Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia - and the associated
countries Cyprus and Malta, as well as the European Free
Trade Association countries members of the European
Economic Area, Iceland, Liechtenstein and Norway, align
themselves with this statement.

Allow me to thank Mr. Annabi for his briefing and his
update to the report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH).

As the single largest contributor to the international
assistance effort in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the European
Union and its member States remain committed to
continuing their support for economic and democratic
consolidation, reintegration of refugees and reconciliation
in that country. This year, 100 million euros have been
allocated to Bosnia and Herzegovina in the following
priority areas: support for the return process, institution-
building, cooperation with the European Investment Bank,
customs and fiscal assistance, economic regeneration,
media support, education and technical assistance. Over
the last few years, this has added up to more than
1 billion euros for reconstruction and technical assistance
and a similar amount for humanitarian aid. In total, the
European Union has provided more than 2.5 billion euros
to Bosnia and Herzegovina since 1991.

The European Union also provides support to the
United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
particularly in its work with police academies and in
assistance to judicial reform. Of course, European Union
member States continue to provide significant numbers of
police monitors for UNMIBH and troops for the
Stabilization Force (SFOR), as well as seconding
personnel to the Office of the High Representative, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and
the European Community Monitoring Mission (ECMM).

The European Union also continues to work actively
within the Peace Implementation Council towards the full
implementation of the Dayton-Paris Peace Agreement and
supports fully the efforts of the High Representative in
that regard. We must, however, reaffirm the view of the
European Union that Bosnians themselves must move this
process much further and much faster. In fact, the long-
term future of Bosnia and Herzegovina depends on this.

The European Union Council of Ministers recently
welcomed the initiative of the European Commission on
a road map for Bosnia and Herzegovina to help pave the
way towards a feasibility study on the opening of
negotiations for a stabilization and association agreement.
But the pace of progress in this regard will depend on the
readiness of the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities to
take full advantage of the opportunities offered by the
stabilization and association process.

The European Union is, therefore, concerned that the
Bosnian leadership has yet to implement the letter and the
spirit of the New York Declaration of 15 November 1999.
The European Union reiterates its call for the early and
comprehensive implementation of the Declaration in all
its parts and urges the Bosnian parties urgently to
overcome their difficulties. We regret in this regard the
delay in the establishment of the State Border Service.

Firm and positive steps must very soon be taken
towards the full implementation of the Dayton-Paris Peace

 

Agreement and the effective functioning of the relevant
institutions if the European Union is to continue to remain
engaged in the reconstruction of Bosnia and Herzegovina at
current levels.

The European Union looks forward to the Bosnian
parties registering such essential progress by the next
meeting of the Peace Implementation Council, in May, and,
in this regard, expects the smooth conduct of free and fair
municipal elections in April.

The long-term stabilization of Bosnia and Herzegovina
is being sought in the context of the Stability Pact signed
at Cologne in June last year, with a View to achieving
lasting peace, prosperity and stability for the region as a
whole. In this regard, the European Union fully supports
the efforts by the Special Coordinator of the Pact, the
European Commission and the World Bank, aimed at
achieving a substantive outcome of the regional funding
conference to take place on 29 and 30 March and at putting
together a credible package of quick-start projects.

The European Union also continues to attach great
importance to the work of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia and to bringing to trial
those indicted by the Tribunal. The European Union recalls
the duty of all States to cooperate with the Tribunal in
delivering indicted persons into its custody.

