Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): New Zealand
remains a strong supporter of the work of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) and the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals. As someone who worked on the
Security Council resolutions that established the ICTY
and the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR), I feel a special sense of connection with the
work of the Tribunals. Back then, none of us expected
that we would still be sitting in the Security Council
23 years later considering the Tribunals' completion
strategies. New Zealand agrees that this has taken far
too long.
We must all take our share of the responsibility for
this situation. It is true that the Tribunals could have
done more to expedite their work, but it is also clear
that political factors have also played a major role in
this delay. Governments have not always provided the
level of cooperation required and the Council has not
been as effective or active in supporting progress as we
believe it should have been.

As the ICTY enters its final year, New Zealand
agrees that its exclusive focus should remain on
completing its work by the end of 2017. Both the
Presidents' reports and Prosecutor's reports highlight
the challenges to be faced in meeting this deadline, but
it must be met. The Council and the United Nations
must support the ICTY in achieving this. In this regard,
we support the adoption of an incentives package for
staff members to encourage them to remain with the
ICTY until the end of their contracts. That is sensible
business planning and we commend the Tribunal for its
perseverance on this issue.

The cooperation of all relevant States with the
ITCY remains essential to its completion strategy. It is
axiomatic that all States are required to cooperate with
the Tribunals in order to ensure justice is delivered. That
obligation applies particularly to the States of the region.
These requirements are set under international law and
should not be subject to domestic law constraints. In
that connection, we urge Serbia to lend its full support
to the ICTY's work. While we understand that it is
important to respect the different competencies of the
judiciary and the executive, the national obligation to
cooperate remains and cannot be ducked by suggesting
the issue is for someone else to address.

We have taken note of the deficiencies identified
by the evaluation report (S/2016/441) of the Office of
Internal Oversight Services (OIOS), but at this stage
in the Tribunal's life cycle, we believe the focus must
be on the practical and the achievable. It makes little
sense to divert precious resources from core completion
work. We therefore welcome the practical alternative
suggestions provided by the Tribunal. We are pleased
to see the Mechanism's continued commitment to
maximizing effectiveness and efficiencies and we
commend the flexibility it has shown during the
transition phase with the ICTY, including through the
One Office approach and dual batting of some staff.

New Zealand raised the important ICTR legacy
issue of access to archives issue during the Council's
last debate in June (see S/PV.7707). We understand
and support the desire of the Rwandan Government to
have the originals of the archives located in Rwanda.
This desire is not peculiar to Rwanda. Any of us in a
similar situation would want documents critical to our
national history to be located in our own territory. We
recognize there are practical and process issues to be
worked through, and hope these can be resolved. This
is an important issue of principle.

The Mechanism's report also highlights the
increasingly urgent need for a comprehensive solution
to the issue of relocation. We reiterate our call to
the Mechanism to develop a process for risk-based
assessments for relocation of those acquitted and for
released persons remaining in the Arusha safe house.

As New Zealand prepares to complete its
current term on the Council, I wish to offer some
concluding thoughts on how the Council makes use
of its relationships with relevant international legal
institutions in discharging its mandate. These organs
all have their own areas of primary competence, but
they all operate at the intersection of international law
and peace and security. Overall, it is hard to escape the
impression that Council members appear less aware of
the legal and judicial contexts which could support their
work than they were when New Zealand last served on
the Council two decades ago. Politics now seems to
dominate completely and it is hard to argue that this
has made the Council more effective. The question I
want to leave with Council members is: how can we
do better?

At the macro level, the members of the Council
need to accord greater respect to the mechanisms it
establishes for the administration of justice. While the
Council may be a political body, thejudicial mechanisms
it establishes must manifest independence, transparency
and freedom from politics - the hallmarks of justice
in any credible legal system. At the more immediate
level, New Zealand encourages the Council and its
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals
to be active in monitoring the issues we have raised
in our statement, including the Mechanism's progress
on the ICTR archives and the relocation of released or
acquitted persons.

