Mr. Nabarro: I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, and other Council members, for giving
me the opportunity to be here. I bring greetings from
Gro Harlem Brundtland, the Director General of the
World Health Organization (WHO), who is unable to
be here because she is presiding over our annual
assembly, which is currently under way.

I am going to present a short version of a longer
statement which I hope will be accessible to Council
members, prepared for this occasion by the World
Health Organization's teams in Iraq and surrounding
countries.

When the World Health Organization assessed the
health situation of the people in Iraq at the beginning
of this year, we concluded that they faced the mix of
health hazards that are generally associated with
longstanding deprivation. Children, women, the elderly
and disabled people, and the 5 per cent of the
population with chronic illness - heart and kidney
disease, cancer and diabetes - were especially
vulnerable. Such people accounted for about 20 million
out of the total population of 25 million.

Those people were heavily dependent on the
functioning health services that were provided by more
than 1,400 medical facilities, of which 160 were
hospitals and 1,200 were health centres, and by several
thousand doctors. Through the oil for food programme,
systems for the procurement, distribution and
availability of medical supplies were in place and were
funded, and health services were well used.

But daily reports to the World Health
Organization's headquarters from many parts of Iraq
now give cause for concern, particularly as this is an
important time of transition for that country. As has
been said by others, in terms of risks to people,
property and movement, the security situation hampers
access to and provision of all basic services - water,
sanitation and electricity, and, of course, medical and
public health.

But even in situations that are secure, the power
vacuum means that Government workers in hospitals
and health centres who really want to work do not
know who should direct them. They do not know what
is expected of them; they do not know whether they
have any likelihood of long-term employment. Indeed,
in some places we have the problem of hospitals being
taken over by neighbourhood groups and not really
functioning in the way that they are designed to do.
The absolute lack of cash to meet the running
costs of services - particularly food for patients,
cleaning services, refuse disposal from the hospitals,
and to enable staff to receive the remuneration they
need - undermines the capacity of all institutions to
offer essential health care to people who need it. As a
result, therefore, Iraqis are unable to access the health
care services that they need for the treatment of chronic
conditions, as well as acute needs. Services, in our
judgement, are running at between 20 per cent and 40
per cent of their pre-war capacity. Public health
systems are not working as they should, and the threat
of cholera, tuberculosis, malaria, leishmaniasis,
measles and, now, whooping cough, is always there.

For some weeks now we have made strenuous
efforts to catalyse a restarting of the health services.
We have been working through WHO national staff in
Iraq, who continued operating throughout the war. We
have also been working in close cooperation with our
colleagues in the International Committee of the Red
Cross, to whom I would like to pay tribute again today,
as well as many other non-governmental organizations
and other parts of the United Nations system,
especially the United Nations Children's Fund.

We have worked in support of national authorities
in Baghdad and in the governorates. We have really
quite a complicated and decentralized operation. We
have given priority to restarting essential hospital
services, disease surveillance, medicine distribution
systems and the capacity to run the services within
individual governorates. Together with national
counterparts, we have been working out What funds are
needed for staff supplies and basic utilities, looking at
a six-month period of transition. We have been finding
ways to move these monies to the hospitals and to
ensure that the funds are properly used. We have joined
together the emerging mechanisms for coordinating
actors for health in different parts of the country so that
all the different contributions that the actors are
making are well used and can build on national
capacities, whether in the south, in Baghdad, in the
centre or in the north.

We have made an effort to match available
supplies to needs, identifying 115 oil for food contracts
at a value of $130 million, speeding them up so that
they are delivered where they are needed, and adding
another 30 additional contracts for essential goods
under resolutions 1472 (2003) and 1476 (2003), so that
we can bridge the gap until new systems are
established.

There will be a need for funds to get essential
services back even to their pre-war level. An amount of
about $20 million a month is needed to get them in
place. Although we have received some very generous
contributions for health in Iraq from some of the
countries that have already been mentioned, it is not
enough. Frankly, it is much less than what will be
needed for the eventual budget for a functioning health
service in Iraq.

We hope that, as the new Development Fund and
systems that have been agreed upon this morning are
put in place, a proportion of those funds can be made
available for the essential running costs of basic
services during the transition, and that that can be done
in a way that does not unduly drain the available
international funds for the huge number of health crises
already under way in other parts of the world. Of
course, in the long term we expect that the country of
Iraq will be able to afford a good-quality, equitable
health service without external assistance.

We now look forward to moving ahead -
working with the new authorities and coordinating the
various actors who are involved in health care on the
ground - to restart health services in all governorates
so that the people of Iraq can access the medical care
and public health they not only need, but also deserve.

