Mr. Tiirk: Before proceeding to the item on the
Council's agenda and offering my briefing on the
situation in the Middle East, I would just like to say
how very much we in the Secretariat appreciate the
statement which you, Mr. President, have just made
regarding the tragic events in Baghdad, resulting from
a terrorist attack on the United Nations office in
Baghdad. Undoubtedly, the Council will come back to
this tragedy. But in the meantime, and in accordance
with the agenda, I would like to proceed with the
following briefing on the situation in the Middle East.

Since the last briefing to the Security Council, on
17 July, the situation in the Middle East has remained
fragile. The recent violence on the Israeli-Lebanese
border and in the Palestinian-Israeli conflict is
testament to that. It is noteworthy, however, that the
overall level of violence in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
compared to previous months, has dropped considerably,
although, tragically, lives continue to be lost.

Despite setbacks, progress in some areas
continues with the implementation of the Quartet's
road map. At the end of July, President Bush hosted
Palestinian Prime Minister Abbas and Israeli Prime
Minister Sharon for talks on road map implementation,
reflecting the United States Government's deep
commitment to the process. The international
community should be actively supportive, and should
work with the parties to seek ways to maintain
momentum in this difficult process. However, there are
no miracle fixes or easy shortcuts for the strategic
actions that both parties must take in parallel to ensure
the realization of the road map's ultimate goals: an end
to terrorism and violence, an end to the occupation and
a resolution to the conflict, leading to two States, Israel
and Palestine, living in peace and security side by side.

The Palestinian Authority must intensify its
efforts to achieve full security control in its areas. That
is a primary obligation under the terms of the road map.
The Palestinian Authority should also continue the reform
process in order to streamline and professionalize the
cabinet and the civil service and to secure full
accountability and transparency. As was reported last
month, the Palestinian Authority resumed security
responsibility for the Gaza Strip and Bethlehem in
early July, and violence in those areas has significantly
decreased. Until now, however, and six weeks into the
ceasefire, the parties have been unable to agree on the
conditions under which the Palestinian Authority
would resume security responsibilities in the remaining
seven West Bank Palestinian cities. Both parties must
deepen their commitment to security cooperation: it
lies at the heart of further progress.

For its part, Israel should help to strengthen the
Government of Mahmoud Abbas - Abu Mazen - and
should take additional steps to improve the lives of
ordinary Palestinians. Without such steps, the Palestinian
people lack adequate incentives for peace. Israel must
also recognize that its settlement policy in fact
undermines the possibility of a future viable and
contiguous Palestinian State. That also means that
Israel should reconsider the construction of the
separation barrier, and its route. We recognize that
Israel has a legitimate right to security. However, the
barrier is a unilateral act not in keeping with the road
map, and we call again on the Government of Israel to
halt its construction.

At this fragile time, each party must do more
towards the re-establishment of trust and continue to
explore mutual confidence-building measures.

Since the declaration of the 30 June ceasefire,
there has been a noticeable reduction in the numbers of
casualties on both sides. There were 21 Palestinian
fatalities and 60 injuries since 1 July, compared with 68
fatalities and 111 injuries for the month of June. On the
Israeli side, during the same period, there were five
fatalities and 21 injuries, compared with 33 fatalities
and 111 injuries in June.

The United Nations Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) reports that there has
been a significant decrease in the number of Palestinian
house demolitions, with eight cases reported in July,
compared with 57 in June.

However, there has been a disturbing increase in
violence in August. Tragically, on 12 August two
Israeli civilians were killed and some dozen injured in
separate suicide bombings in Rosh Ha'ayin and the
West Bank settlement of Ariel. Such terrorist attacks
are in clear violation of the ceasefire. The Palestinian
Authority should do all in its power to apprehend the
instigators of those attacks. The Israeli army has also
reported increased incidents of Palestinian fire against
its positions in Gaza.

The Israel Defence Forces (IDF), on the other
hand, launched military operations that have resulted in
Palestinian casualties. On 8 August, the IDF targeted a
suspected bomb-making facility in the Askar refugee
camp in Nablus. The IDF incursion resulted in the
death of two Hamas activists and two civilians. On 14
August, an IDF operation in the West Bank resulted in
the killing of the head of Islamic Jihad in Hebron.

The terrible cycle of violence and revenge must
not be allowed once again to gather momentum. I urge
both parties to exercise maximum restraint and to resist
the urge to respond to provocation. Clearly, the onus is
on the parties to agree to the conditions by which they
can commence security cooperation in all parts of the
West Bank as soon as possible, so that the Palestinian
Authority can resume full security responsibility in its
areas. This week the Palestinian Authority and the
Government of Israel will continue their discussions
concerning the handover of security responsibility for
the towns of Qalqilya, Jericho, Ramallah and Tulkarm.
This is a difficult process, but its resolution is key to
moving forward.

One of the key challenges to the fulfilment of the
road map's goal of a two-State solution is Israel's
settlement policy. Phase one of the road map calls for
the dismantlement of settlement outposts established
since March 2001 and for a freeze in all settlement
activity, including in the natural growth of settlements.

According to an Israeli monitoring group, some
60 settlement outposts were established between March
2001 and June 2003. The Government of Israel
dismantled eight of those outposts, one of which was
rebuilt in mid-July. A further 12 outposts were built by
settlers, of which five were dismantled. The result is
that as of 13 August the sum total of settlement
outposts remains at 60. That is to say that there has
been no improvement in the situation since the start of
the process.

Since the last briefing to the Council there has
been a significant rise in the number of reports of
settlement activity. Settlement expansion plans -
including significant incentives for potential settlers in
the Jordan Valley, East Jerusalem and elsewhere - are
being discussed by the Government of Israel. New
bypass roads have been approved in at least three
locations in the West Bank.

On 31 July, the Israel Lands Authority announced
that the Defence Ministry had approved the issuance of
a tender to build a number of new housing units in
Neveh Dekalim, a settlement in the Gaza Strip. That is
in addition to significant expansion of the lands
surrounding the Morag settlement, which is also in the
Gaza Strip.

As the Mitchell Committee noted in its report of 30
April 2001, "The kind of security cooperation desired by
the Government of Israel [with the Palestinians] cannot
for long co-exist with settlement activity".

The building of the separation wall, the continued
presence of settlement outposts and the policy of
settlement expansion have caused many Palestinians to
question Israel's intent in the peace process. As noted
previously, the continued creation of such facts on the
ground calls into question the viability of an
independent Palestinian State and contradicts the spirit
and intent of the road map.

There were some marked improvements in July
2003 in the humanitarian situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory, although the situation of
Palestinian civilians remains dire.

The movement of United Nations and
international staff into and within the Gaza Strip has
eased considerably. Fewer access incidents were
reported by international humanitarian organizations -
40 in July, compared with 302 in June - and delays
and denial of access for ambulances were reduced by
more than half - with 41 cases in July, compared with
113 cases in June. Most reported incidents continued to
come from the checkpoints in the Nablus area.

The IDF removed several key roadblocks in July
in the Ramallah, Bethlehem and Hebron areas, although
some of those were replaced by manned checkpoints.
Changes for the better were most felt in the Ramallah
area, with the removal of the Surda and Ain Arik
earthen-mound roadblocks, although so-called flying
checkpoints on those roads are often in operation.

However, most villages and towns continue to
experience severe access problems, and the majority of
Palestinians are forced to make long and complicated
detours to reach their homes, workplaces, educational
facilities and hospital services. Some 100 checkpoints
- combined with another 300 to 400 roadblocks,
earthen mounds, ditches and gates - remain in place
in the northern West Bank alone. In Gaza, despite the
new security arrangements, severe restrictions on
movement continue to be applied to the Palestinian
population living in some isolated areas. Restrictions
on access and freedom of movement remain the single
greatest impediment to any significant and long-term
improvement in the humanitarian situation of the
Palestinian population.

In fulfilment of Prime Minister Sharon's
commitments to President Bush at the Aqaba summit,
the Government of Israel has undertaken to release a
number of Palestinian prisoners. According to the
Palestinian Ministry of Detainees' Affairs, there are
some 6,500 Palestinians being held in Israeli detention
centres. As of 18 August, Israel had released 419
prisoners, according to Israel's prisoner services.
Conversely, the Palestinian Ministry of Detainees'
Affairs has indicated that since 1 June, 405 Palestinians
have been arrested. I urge Israel to address this issue in
genuine partnership with the Palestinians, and
encourage a more broad-minded policy of release.

Turning now to the situation along the Blue Line,
I note with regret the violent disruption earlier this
month of the relative calm that had prevailed in south
Lebanon, where there had been no major incident since
late January. The Council will recall from its briefing
last week that on 8 August there was a heavy exchange
of fire across the Blue Line when Hizbullah attacked
Israeli military positions in the Shab'a farms area.
Fortunately, no casualties were reported. The
Secretary-General was very concerned by that incident
and asked for all sides to refrain from actions that
would increase tensions.

I wish to remind all parties concerned that the
Council has on many occasions repeated its position
that attacks on the Shab'a farms are violations of the
Blue Line. We again call on the parties to ensure that
such violations cease. Also, consistent with Security
Council resolutions, it is the duty and responsibility of
the Government of Lebanon to ensure the return of its
effective authority and presence in the south. Recent
incidents make it imperative for the Government of
Lebanon to deploy its forces in southern Lebanon to
that end.

Members of the Council may recall that for most
of this year we have characterized the situation along
the Blue Line as having an uneasy, fragile calm. As we
did during our last briefing to the Council, and as the
Secretary-General did in his recent report on the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, we have continued
to draw attention to the dangerous cycle of overflights
and anti-aircraft artillery fire, some of which is not
related to overflights. As the Council is aware,
Hizbullah anti-aircraft fire caused the death of a young
Israeli civilian and the wounding four others in
Shelomi on 10 August. As has been stated on numerous
occasions, one violation cannot justify another. The
Secretary-General strongly condemned that action by
Hizbullah and reiterated his call for restraint.

In his briefing last month, Mr. Roed-Larsen
warned of the potential of this cycle for escalation and
recalled the many times that the United Nations and
concerned Member States have called on the Government
of Israel to respect Lebanon's sovereignty and to abstain
from overflights. As he said last month, those calls have
not been heeded. He also presciently warned of the
dangers of anti-aircraft fire from the Lebanese side.

Sadly, an innocent life has been lost. We again
wish to stress the need for all parties to abide fully by
their obligations under all relevant Security Council
resolutions, in particular resolution 425 (1978) and the
recently adopted resolution 1496 (2003), as well as to
respect the Blue Line in its entirety. The people of
south Lebanon and northern Israel deserve no less.

In conclusion, the situation in the Middle East as
described is indeed fragile. As Mr. Roed-Larsen has
stated repeatedly, "Peace processes, anywhere in the
world, thrive on forward momentum". Both parties -
Israelis and Palestinians - need courage and
determination to stay the course. They must not allow
themselves to fall back into the tragic and senseless
cycle of violence and revenge. I appeal to the parties to
continue to implement the steps called for in the road
map, in the interest of attaining peace and security for
both peoples.

The challenges are also great for the international
community, especially the members of the Quartet. We
must do everything in our power to encourage Israelis
and Palestinians to take risks for peace, and even
consider new initiatives to energize the process.

Only resolve, determination and full-hearted
commitment to the process by the parties, the Quartet
and key regional players can bring us to the goals we
all share: a just and comprehensive peace based on
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973),
and 1397 (2002).

