Mr. Laursen (Denmark): I thank you,
Mr. President, for giving the floor to Denmark.
Denmark aligns itself with the statement of the
European Union to be made later in this meeting. In
addition to that, we have some comments to make.
Attacks by pirates operating from the waters
adjoining the Horn of Africa region threaten regional
security, the global economy and the security of
seafarers. It is therefore necessary and legitimate for
the international community, including the Security
Council, to take action to repress this crime. The
international community needs to work together to put
an end to impunity for pirates. The prosecution of
pirates ensures justice, both in its broader sense as well
as concretely for seafarers who have been victims of

piracy.

Ensuring that pirates are prosecuted is therefore
in many ways a cornerstone of the international fight
against piracy. Progress has been made, in part due to
the effective work of the Contact Group on Piracy off
the Coast of Somalia. At the same time, statistics show
that still almost 60 per cent of the pirates apprehended
or disrupted by warships in the region are not
prosecuted. In other words, we still have work to
accomplish. The issue of prosecution will therefore
remain on the agenda of Working Group 2, on legal
issues, of the Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of
Somalia.

Denmark welcomes the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2010/394), which demonstrates the
commitment of the United Nations, including of the
Security Council, to contribute to putting an end to
impunity for piracy suspects. The intention by the
Secretary-General to appoint a special adviser is
another demonstration of this commitment. As Chair of
the Working Group on legal issues, Denmark looks
forward to cooperating closely with all partners,
including the Secretariat and the special adviser. We
will invite the special adviser to participate in the next
meeting of the Working Group, in October.

Let me now turn to the report of the Secretary-
General. Denmark has studied the report closely -
both in our national capacity and as Chair of Working
Group 2. We agree with the solutions outlined for the
prosecution of piracy in the report and are pleased to
note that the outcome of the discussions in the Working
Group is duly reflected in the report.

As I am sure the Council is aware, Working
Group 2 has dealt substantially with the issue of the
prosecution of pirates. Until now, the discussions in the
Working Group have shown a preference for a possible
mechanism where existing court chambers in one or
more States in the region would be specifically
dedicated to the prosecution of pirates. This would be
with extensive support from other countries and
organizations, financially and with regard to personnel.
This model also seems to be identified in the Secretary-
General's report. In that context, it is important to
commend the readiness and efforts of States in the
region to prosecute piracy suspects. However, other
States, and States in the region, must realize that they
have a strong interest in facilitating the prosecution of
pirates.

Finally, let me make the point that all States need
to examine their own systems and take the steps
necessary to ensure that their national legislation
allows jurisdiction over Somali pirates * and then
actually prosecute pirates within their own jurisdiction.
In particular, the flag States of commercial vessels
involved have a responsibility to consider how they
might prosecute pirates. We should all be aware that
many of the constraints hampering national prosecution
will apply to any internationally supported prosecution
mechanism, and that these have to be addressed
regardless of the mechanism chosen for prosecution.

