Mr. Sefue (United Republic of Tanzania):
Mr. President, my delegation thanks you for the
initiative to convene this open debate on the situation
in Somalia, a situation that is of great concern to us
because Tanzania is one of the Member States most
affected by insecurity and instability in Somalia.

We commend international efforts and
cooperation in deploying assets to combat piracy off
the Horn of Africa. We now ask that those welcome
efforts at sea be balanced by equal efforts to address, in
a comprehensive manner, the socio-economic and
security push-factors on land in Somalia. Increased
international presence at sea alone will not solve the
problem; it will only push the pirates further east and
southwards.

Tanzania will continue to do all it can to ensure
the safety of our waters. But our capacity to do so in
the face of increasing acts of piracy is limited. We
thank those bilateral partners who have provided some
help to build our capacity to act more effectively, but
there is no doubt that we need more support in building
our surveillance, monitoring and deterrence capacities
at sea. We ask for that kind of support from members
of this Council, as well as all others who can help.

Tanzania likewise stands ready to do its part,
within its own capabilities, in prosecuting accused
pirates. We look forward to working with the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to assess our
capabilities and the support we need in that regard.

The Transitional Federal Government in Somalia
has the primary responsibility to provide leadership for
an all-inclusive political process for a post-conflict
Somalia, as well as to build national institutions and
capacity that can deliver for the Somali people. We
welcome the commitments in that regard by the Prime
Minister, His Excellency Mohamed Abdullahi
Mohamed, in this Chamber this morning. We
encourage them and ask that they remain united,
determined and focused in driving this process
forward.

The implementation of the transitional tasks must
be stepped up. Tanzania does not support the decision
of the Somali Parliament to unilaterally extend itself
for another three years. Likewise, all the other parties
to the peace and reconciliation process have to be
forthcoming and contribute to a speedy and successful
outcome. The international community, and certainly
this Security Council, must stand ready to impose
sanctions on spoilers.

Tanzania is concerned about the deteriorating
security and humanitarian situation in Somalia, and we
urge increased support for humanitarian assistance. We
commend Uganda and Burundi for providing the bulk
of the troops for the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM). We ask the Security Council to support
AMISOM. fully. Africa is showing leadership in this
lssue.

It is important for the Council to support, endorse
and authorize the specific requests by the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union. They include
expanding and increasing support to AMISOM,
imposing a naval blockade and no-fly zone over
Somalia, imposing sanctions against those impeding
the peace and reconciliation process, adopting a
holistic, comprehensive approach that will address all
underlying issues that drive the piracy menace, and a
commitment to re-hat AMISOM. as a United Nations
peacekeeping operation.

Somalia poses a serious threat to peace and
security in the region and beyond. Somalia is not an
African problem; it is a global problem and is within
the full purview and mandate of this Security Council.
Tanzania applauds the efforts being undertaken, in very
difficult circumstances, by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, His Excellency Ambassador
Augustine Mahiga. He needs and deserves the genuine
support and cooperation of all parties in Somalia and of
all of us in the international community.

Finally, Tanzania pays tribute to all men and
women serving under AMISOM. and to those providing
humanitarian assistance, especially those who lost their
lives in the cause of peace and humanitarian assistance
in Somalia. Our sympathies and condolences go to
their Governments, their families and loved ones.

