Mr. Suarez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): It is an honour for the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to speak on behalf of
the 120 Member States that make up the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries (NAM).

First of all, on behalf of the States members of
the Movement, we would like to pay our respects to
His Excellency Mr. Andrzej Duda, President of the
Republic of Poland. We should also like to express our
gratitude to his delegation for organizing this open
debate on such an important topic and for drafting the
concept note (S/2018/417/Rev.1, annex).

Approximately one month ago, the Coordinating
Bureau of the Movement issued a communique' that in
due course was transmitted to the member States of
the Security Council. The communique reaffirmed the
validity of the purposes and principles enshrined in the
Charter of the Nations and the norms of international
law, as well as our unwavering commitment to the
peaceful settlement of disputes, in accordance with
Article 2 and Chapter VI of the Charter of the United
Nations and the provisions of General Assembly
resolution 2625 (XXV), of 24 October 1970, which are
key elements in both preventing and ending conflicts,
including prolonged conflicts.

In that respect, we would like to take this
opportunity to commend the role of the International
Court of Justice in fostering the pacific settlement of
international disputes under the relevant provisions of
the Charter of the United Nations and the Statute of the
Court, in particular Articles 33 and 94 of the Charter,
while at the same time we urge the Security Council to
make greater use of the Court as a source of advisory
opinions and interpretations of the relevant norms of
international law and controversial issues. In addition,
we urge the Council to consider having its decisions
reviewed by the Court, given the need to ensure its
compliance with the Charter of the United Nations and
international law.

NAM. reaffirms its commitment to the promotion of
the pacific settlement of disputes under the provisions
of the Charter of the United Nations, the entire corpus
of international law and the relevant United Nations
resolutions, including those adopted by the Council,
which are legally binding for every State Member of
the Organization and are intended to contribute to
strengthening international peace and security and save
future generations from the scourge of war and armed
conflicts, by bolstering the role of the United Nations
in the pacific resolution of disputes, the prevention and
settlement of conflicts, the establishment of trust and
national reconciliation, post-conflict peacebuilding,
rehabilitation, reconstruction and development.

In that connection, we reiterate our full willingness

to ramp up the role of the Movement as an anti-war and
peace-loving force. To that end, it is critically important
to defend international law, which is the only shield
that we, the small developing countries of the South,
can count on to protect ourselves against new threats
and the emerging multiple and complex challenges
that we face today, including acts of aggression by
imperial Powers. Similarly, in the context of the
maintenance of international peace and security and
the prevention of armed conflicts, there should be no
exceptions. International law must always be protected
and respected. Likewise, in cases in which violations
of international law occur 4 as stated in the concept
note for this debate 4 those responsible must be held
accountable so as to prevent any recurrence of violations
and find a path towards sustainable peace, justice, truth
and reconciliation. Otherwise, impunity will run amok
and perpetrators will be effectively encouraged to
continue the commission of their crimes.

During the eighteenth mid-term ministerial
conference of the Non-Aligned Movement, the
Ministers stressed that the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations and the principles and
norms of international law are essential to maintaining
and promoting peace and security, the rule of law,
economic development and social progress, as well as
human rights for all. In that context, they agreed that
the States Members of the United Nations, including
the members of the Security Council, must renew
their commitment to respecting, defending, preserving
and promoting the Charter of the United Nations and
international law with the goal of forging ahead until
full respect for international law is achieved. On that
occasion, they also emphasized that strict observance
of the principles of international law and compliance in
good faith with the obligations assumed by States under
the Charter is of vital importance for the maintenance
of international peace and security. Additionally, they
reaffirmed that NAM. member States must respect the
territorial integrity, sovereignty, political independence
and inviolability of the international borders of
Member States.

The States members of the Movement also
reaffirmed their commitment to refraining from
recognizing, adopting or implementing illegal,
coercive, extraterritorial or unilateral measures and
laws 4 including unilaterally imposed economic
sanctions, intimidation measures and arbitrary
restrictions on travel 4 whose purpose is to pressure
non-aligned countries while threatening their
independence, sovereignty and freedom of trade and
investment and preventing them from exercising their
right to decide, of their own volition, their own political,
economic and social systems, when such measures
and laws constitute flagrant violations of the Charter,
international law and the multilateral trading system,
as well as the norms and principles that govern friendly
relations among States. In that regard, we reaffirm our
opposition and condemnation of such measures and laws
and their continued implementation and enforcement,
and we ask States that apply such measures and laws to
revoke them immediately and in full.

Lastly, NAM. would like to take this opportunity
to appeal to the international community to keep its
promise with the peoples of the United Nations, as
enshrined in the founding Charter of the Organization,
in which we affirmed our commitment to save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war, which
twice in our lifetime has brought untold sorrow to
humankind. Let us redouble our efforts and show our
true political will so as to make peace a reality and not
a mere pipe dream, as part of our collective efforts to
create a prosperous and peaceful world,

In our national capacity, we would like to take
this opportunity on behalf of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela to reaffirm our full commitment to
the promotion and defence of international law.
Accordingly, before this organ, entrusted with ensuring
the maintenance of international peace and security,
Venezuela condemns the systematic campaign of acts
of aggression that the United States regime is waging
against our country. The adoption and implementation
of unilateral coercive measures, including even the
threat of military intervention, are in flagrant violation
ofthe norms ofinternational law, as well as the purposes
and principles of the Charter, and are intended not only
to try to destabilize Venezuelan society and institutions
but to destroy democracy in our country.

Today we therefore affirm that only the United
States regime, with the current Administration's
warmongering, supremacist, discriminatory, racist
and interventionist policy, represents a real threat to
peace and regional and international stability. How
can a country lacking any shred of authority purport
to set an example and try to assign itself the role of the
world's policeman, which no one has conferred upon
it, while trampling on decisions made by this organ?
International law clearly establishes the principle of
the legal equality of States. The United States is not
above any sovereign State and must strictly respect its
obligations under international law.

