Mr. Kawamura (Japan): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening this important meeting.
We commend France's leadership on this issue and
welcome the unanimous adoption of resolution 2462
(2019) this morning, of which we were a sponsor. I also
want to express my gratitude to the briefers for their
insightful remarks.

Despite the progress made in the fight against
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, we continue
to face the threat of terrorism, and it is vital that we
mobilize and concentrate our resources in order to
continue to combat international terrorism. Cutting
off the money flow is the crucial element in preventing
terrorism at its source, and we must cope with a wide
range of financing methods, new and old. In order to
address the complicated issue of terrorist financing
holistically, the strict implementation of the relevant
Security Council resolutions, including the one we just
adopted, is key. For effective implementation, action
should be taken both locally and globally. Japan will be
hosting a number of major sporting events in the next
few years, including the 2020 Olympic and Paralympic
Games in Tokyo, and it goes without saying that we
will take every measure to counter any potential threat.
Japan has always stood against terrorism, but with 2020
ahead, we are intensifying our activity even more.

Regarding the combating of terrorist financing,
Japan is taking firm and appropriate steps both locally
and globally. Domestically, we are actively cooperating
with the private sector. We have established a public-
private dialogue with banks and firms dealing with
financial activities that encourages the exchange of
information and ideas not just between the Government
and the private sector, but among private-sector actors
as well. We have set up guidelines for the private
banking sector that endeavour to provide a clear
picture of the rules and regulations that it is obliged
to follow, thereby encouraging an effective response
to any suspicious transfers. We are also reaching out
actively, through events and seminars, to staff-level
personnel, the people actually dealing with day-to-day
transactions, in order to share best practices and build
the capacity to counter the financing of terrorism at the
ground level.

Globally, cooperation with the United Nations and
the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) is crucial.
Japan strives to contribute to strengthening our
approach to combating the financing of terrorism in
alliance with organizations such as FATF. For example,
in 2017, Japan introduced a registration system in
order to link an individual with any account used in
the exchange of cryptoassets, consistent with the FATF
recommendations. Furthermore, capacity-building is
important. Through multi-donor trust funds such as the
International Monetary Fund and the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, Japan is contributing to
projects aimed at closing potential loopholes that could
be used for financing terrorism. It will be crucial to
further strengthen the sharing of information among
States in order to keep up with evolving technology and
the expansion of the areas in which terrorists operate.

In conclusion, I want to reiterate the importance
of the strict implementation of the relevant Security
Council resolutions and FATF recommendations in our
efforts to combat the financing of terrorism. Japan will
continue to engage with this issue both domestically
and internationally, including as Chair of the Group of
20 this year.

