Mr. Requeijo Gual (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation wishes to thank the Chairpersons of the
Committees established pursuant to Security Council
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004)
for the information they provided at this meeting.

However, while we are here analysing actions to
fight international terrorism, Luis Posada Carriles, one
of the most monstrous terrorists of this hemisphere, is
in Miami, in the United States of America. The lawyer
representing him has even requested political asylum
for his client, given the services that he performed for
the United States for more than 40 years as a member
of the Central Intelligence Agency and the United
States armed forces.
a;

In the name of the war on terror", the United
States Government has unleashed unilateral wars of
aggression, in violation of the Charter and the
principles of international law, in which thousands of
people have died and continue to die, including more
than 1,500 American young people.

Since last 11 April, the President of the Republic
of Cuba has publicly provided abundant and reliable
information on the criminal background of the terrorist
Luis Posada Carriles, on the means he used to enter
United States territory, and on those who, carrying out
instructions of the terrorist Cuban American National
Foundation, facilitated his voyage on board of the
shrimping boat Santrina from Islas Mujeres in Mexico
to Miami.

Therefore, my Government cannot understand
why the United States Government has not taken action
and has failed to conduct an in-depth investigation of
the most recent voyage of the Santrina, and why it did
not immediately detain and interrogate those who, like
the well-known terrorist Santiago Alvarez Fernandez
Magrifia, known as a Miami resident, know Posada
Carriles's whereabouts and who helped him in his
illegal entry into the United States.

United States law is clear: to provide entry into
the United States of an avowed terrorist, particularly
someone as notorious as Luis Posada Carriles, is one of
the most serious crimes that can now be committed in
the country that was victim of the atrocities of
11 September 2001.

Resolution 1373 (2001), adopted by the Council
on the proposal of the United States, is also clear in
invoking Chapter VII of the Charter, categorically
establishing the obligation of all States to take effective
measures to prevent the transit of terrorists, to deny
refuge not only to terrorists, but also to those who
protect them, and to exchange information leading to
their detention.

Moreover, on 26 August 2003, the President of
the United States of America said: "If you harbour a
terrorist, if you support a terrorist, if you feed a
terrorist, you are just as guilty as the terrorists".

Posada Carriles is not unknown to Washington.
He was trained and used by the Central Intelligence
Agency (CIA) to carry out terrorist actions against
Cuba for more than 40 years. He caused the in-flight
sabotage of a Cubana de Aviacien civil aircraft, in
which 73 persons were killed, and a string of Havana
hotel bombings in 1997, causing the death of the
Italian tourist, Fabio Di Celmo. He has also planned
many assassination attempts on President Fidel Castro;
he was tried for one of them in Panama, but was
fraudulently pardoned by then President Mireya
Moscoso on 26 August 2004.

My delegation calls upon the United States
Government, particularly its President, as President
Fidel Castro has repeatedly been doing since last 11
April, to say whether or not it is aware of the presence
of the terrorist Posada Carriles on United States
territory, and to state the measures it is taking to locate
his whereabouts in Miami.

We would consider it very serious, both for the
actions being carried out by the United Nations against
terrorism, and for the credibility of the United States
Government in its self-proclaimed "war on terror", if
Washington were to decide to harbour Posada Carriles
or were to resort to cunning legal arguments to permit
him to remain in the United States. Allowing this
avowed terrorist to move freely, enjoying total
impunity, while imposing long and unjust sentences on
five Cuban youths fighting terrorism, is immoral and
greatly irresponsible. It is an insult to all victims of
terrorism the world over and their relatives.

United States authorities are facing a serious
dilemma. Either they definitely align themselves with
terrorism by protecting this person, or they strike a
powerful blow, in compliance with their legal
obligations, by arresting Luis Posada Carriles and
extraditing him to Venezuela, where he escaped from
prison in 1985.

My Government reaffirms its willingness to
cooperate with the administration of justice by handing
over all the information it has on this terrorist and
urges the international community to remain alert to
the possibility that Posada Carriles might quit United
States territory with impunity or that he might be
eliminated by internal forces in the United States to
"solve" the dilemma in which he has dragged the
Government of that country by his presence. We do not
wish this man's death. We only want justice to prevail,
and for him to pay for the horrendous crimes that he
has committed during his long terrorist career.

Once again, my Government reiterates its request
to the Security Council Counter-Terrorism Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001) to
evaluate the information submitted by my country,
inter alia, in documents S/2002/ 15 and S/2004/753, in
the hope that its work can lead to putting an end to the
impunity enjoyed in the territory of the United States
by those who have committed, and still commit,
terrorist acts against Cuba.

