Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank Mr. Zerihoun, Mr. O'Brien, and
Ms. Fatima Yerima Askira for their briefings.

The situation in the Lake Chad basin region is very
alarming. Lake Chad, or the "vanishing lake", as it is
also known, has already lost 90 per cent of its surface
area over the past 40 years. Of the population around
the basin, there are approximately 10 million people in
urgent need of humanitarian assistance. That number is
equal to three times the total population of my country.
Unfortunately, however, that crisis has received very
little media coverage, and the international community
does not know very much about it.

Uruguay has been following the crisis in that
area from a comprehensive point of View. There are
a number of aggravating factors contributing to the
crisis, in particular the very difficult security situation
undermined by the terrorist group, Boko Haram, the lack
of food supplies, and the unmet needs ofthe population,
among others. The multidimensional nature of the
humanitarian crisis in the Lake Chad basin region has a
whole range of causes and consequences that everyone
here is aware of and which we do not need to spell out
in detail here.

Last Tuesday, we held an open debate (see S/PV.7857) at the ministerial level on conflict prevention
and sustaining peace, during which much was said
about the importance of preventing conflict and the
need to carry out activities that contribute to sustaining
peace. The Lake Chad basin region has been facing a
multifaceted structural crisis for many years now, and
it is necessary to undertake activities that not only
mitigate the terrorist threat and provide food supplies
to the population, but that also contribute to long-term
stability. The Security Council and the United Nations
as a whole should make full use of their interventions
so as to address and contain the crisis there.

According to the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, there are 1.9 million internally
displaced people in Nigeria alone, of which half are
children. The region is very insecure, with very high
population growth rates, and is affected by climate
change, poverty and low levels of investment and social
infrastructure. The region cannot have a promising
future unless its countries, and its communities in
particular, are given the necessary tools to emerge
from this severe crisis and build lasting peace. The
international community should spare no effort to
provide the region with those instruments. That is why
Uruguay considers it important to acknowledge the role
of the United Nations specialized agencies, as well as
that of the donor countries that have lived up to their
pledges of assistance. We would also like to recognize
the role of the Multinational Joint Task Force and its
progress in combating Boko Haram. That is a clear
example of the fact that coordinated regional efforts
are essential in crises of this type, where those who are
trying to undermine stability recognize neither borders
nor nations.

In a region where 10 million people need assistance,
where 7 million people are severely undernourished and
2.7 million people are internally displaced, we need to
address the deep-rooted causes of the crisis, including
hunger, lack ofeducation and access to water, insecurity,
lack of medical facilities, among other factors. We need,
therefore, to offer lasting solutions to the people in the
region that can bolster their capacity for resilience and
adaptability in the face of so much adversity.

