Mr. Bonser (Canada) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary
General for Afghanistan, Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, as
well as the other briefers, for their engaging briefings.

There are three themes that I will address today.

First, the full and equal participation of women in
all facets of Afghan society is essential. The future of
Afghanistan rests on the potential of its people, and
durable peace and security cannot be achieved without
the active and substantive participation of all members
of society. Although there has been progress in
women's rights, women continue to be at a disadvantage
in Afghanistan.

(spoke in English)

As we look forward to 2018 and the forthcoming
elections, I am sure that we can all agree on the
importance of encouraging and supporting the
meaningful participation of women, both as candidates
and as informed voters. It is essential that the election
process be inclusive, transparent and fair if it is to
yield credible results. That goes hand-in-hand with
strengthening of the representation of women in
governance structures. For political stability, economic
progress and development, Canada strongly supports
the view that women must join men at the centre of
decision-making at all levels ofAfghan politics, society,
and economy.

That brings me to my second theme: the importance
of economic development. There are many mechanisms
that seek to support economic progress and regional
integration in South and Central Asia. The Heart of
Asia-Istanbul Process and the Regional Economic
Cooperation Conference on Afghanistan are two of
them. Co-hosted by Azerbaijan and Turkmenistan,
which I sincerely thank for their efforts, both events
are illustrative of the important role that regional and
international actors can play alongside our Afghan
counterparts in promoting our common interests, in
particular regional stability, economic integration
and, ultimately, the creation of conditions for peace
and prosperity.

My third and final theme is the peace process
in Afghanistan. Fighting in Afghanistan intensified
in 2017, taking an unacceptable toll on the civilian
population. Peace negotiations between the Afghan
Government and the armed opposition, especially
the Taliban, are necessary. Canada fully supports an
Afghan-led, Afghan-owned peace process. It is my
hope that the Kabul Process will bear fruit and that the
level of violence that we have seen oflate will diminish.
Canada looks forward to participating in the next Kabul
process meeting in February 2018.

To conclude, I would be remiss ifI did not mention
Canada's deep concern over the deterioration of
security in Afghanistan, particularly the impact of
that instability and insecurity on women and children.
We look to Afghanistan's neighbours and partners to
continue to work with the Government of Afghanistan
with a view to increasing gender equality, economic
integration and regional stability and to advancing
peace negotiations. All of that is vital to the pursuit of
peace and security in Afghanistan.

