Mr. Al-Hussein (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I
wish at the outset to congratulate you most warmly, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of April. I am confident that the
skill and the spirit of innovation with which you are
guiding the work of the Council will ensure the success
of today's debate. My thanks go also to Ambassador
Kuchynski of Ukraine for the wisdom and ability with
which he guided the work of the Council last month. I
also thank you, Sir, for having made it possible for us
to participate in this important debate.

Because of the grim reality facing millions of
distressed civilians caught in situations of armed
conflict, in desperate need of assistance and protection,
the Security Council is duty-bound to take up a clear
course of action guaranteeing the rights of all civilians,
as spelled out in international law. The Secretary-
General has submitted to the Council a second report
(S/2001/331) on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, which is rich in analysis and comment and
which places the responsibility to implement his
recommendations on Governments and on the members
of the Security Council - where that responsibility
rightly lies.

My delegation wishes to offer some observations
on this subject. In the context of those reports, some
measure of attention should be paid to the protection of
civilians under foreign military occupation. After all,
occupation is not imposed on a civilian population
through human-kindness and good will, but through
force of arms and violence - and often for a long
period of time.

We believe that this category of vulnerable
civilian population must be covered by the rubric of
our discussion. For our delegation, the suffering of the
Palestinian civilian population in the occupied
territories, which has continued for decades, is a clear
case in point. This has been recognized by relevant
Security Council resolutions, and here we have
civilians Who are legally protected by virtue of two
realities - that is, the Council's own determination in
recognizing in its own resolutions the prosecution of a
belligerent occupation, and the existence of the Geneva
Conventions of 1949, to which the occupying Power
has, of course, acceded.

(spoke in English)

The second point is that while we support the
Secretary-General's recommendation that we continue
to develop a "culture of protection", we also urge
greater precision 4 not only because we use the word
"culture" perhaps too often at the United Nations in
referring to the requirement of a different mental
orientation, as in a culture of peace, of prevention, of
compliance, and so forth - but also because the
physical/legal boundary for "protection" is not always
clearly defined; and not defining it, or employing the
term "protection" too casually, as was the case in the
United Nations Protection Force, is unwise.

In your very useful introductory note,
Mr. President, you raise the question of what new
capabilities are required in the United Nations system
to ensure the recommendations are implemented. It is
our belief that, above all other considerations, if we are
to make an impact, a real impact, in the area of
physical protection of civilians in armed conflict,
particularly where it relates to peacekeeping
operations, Council members should lead the rest of us
by example. In the event the Council contemplates a
peacekeeping mandate where the provision of physical
protection to civilians is being considered, from which
we will reasonably infer the mission to be dangerous,
Council members themselves, and in particular the
permanent members, should be first in line to offer
their troops for service with the United Nations and not
leave it up to the Secretary-General to scramble for
contributors. All other points relating to enhancing
capacities, while important, are, in the modest opinion
of my delegation, of only subordinate significance to
this one point.

