Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): Malaysia condemns
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations and makes no
excuses for its perpetrators whatever their motivations,
when innocent civilians are deliberately targeted and
considered fair game. Terrorism does not limit itself to
the domestic scene only. It poses a serious and complex
security challenge to the international community because
of its ability to create fear and intimidation, striking with
impunity wherever and whenever it chooses. We believe
in the need for internationally coordinated efforts,
including strong enforcement measures to combat the
menace.

Nonetheless, my delegation has certain reservations
on the draft resolution before us. We are concerned about
the effects and impact of the draft resolution on the
ordinary, innocent people of Afghanistan. It is our
conviction that sanctions against a country and a people
should be resorted to only when all other peaceful
measures have been utilized and have failed. As an
instrument of coercion they should be used with great
caution because of their unintended grave consequences
to the innocent population. Their effectiveness and likely
humanitarian impact should be assessed at all stages -
both prior to their adoption and periodically during the
implementation phase.

My delegation has reservations on the use of
sanctions to effect the desired changes on a targeted
regime. Experience has shown that they rarely work on
the intended target or targets. Instead, they have brought
unmitigated suffering to ordinary people. The imposition
of sanctions on the Taliban is tantamount to imposing
sanctions on the people of Afghanistan as a whole, as
much of that country is under the effective control of the
Taliban, which, in effect, is the de facto Government of

 

Afghanistan despite its non-recognition by the United
Nations and most Members of the Organization.

Therefore, sanctions directed at the Taliban will have
a direct and indirect effect on the general population in
virtually every aspect of their lives, be it air travel, trade
and commerce or other economic activities covered by the
sanctions. In the end it is the ordinary people that bear the
price, not the intended target or targets.

There should have been a more careful and exhaustive
analysis of the likely impact of the proposed sanctions.
Among the pertinent questions that should have been
considered in some depth are the extent and location of the
assets of the targeted elites and the kinds of sanctions that
are likely to have the greatest impact on the intended
targets, as well as positive elements that can be built into
the sanctions regime to motivate compliance by the targeted
individuals or entity.

My delegation would have preferred a phased
approach in handling the situation. The Council should have
adopted, as a first step, a strong resolution signalling the
serious intention of the Council to institute measures to
impose sanctions on the Taliban if certain stipulated actions
in respect of its support for terrorism were not taken by the
Taliban. This serious warning on the part of a solidly united
Council might have done more to achieve the desired result
of effecting a change of attitude and policy on the part of
the Taliban than proceeding to impose the sanctions in one
fell swoop with promises of more to come. If that warning
were ignored, then at least the Council would have satisfied
itself and the international community that ample warning
had been given and that there was no other alternative but
to proceed with a draft resolution effecting sanctions.

Allow me to reiterate my delegation's serious concern
about the effects and impact of the sanctions on the people
of Afghanistan. They are among the poorest of the poor on
earth, the tragic victims of over two decades of bitter
conflict and their fair share of natural disasters. The
sanctions intended for the Taliban will most certainly affect
them in a punitive way since they are in effective control
of most parts of the country and administer virtually every
aspect of life in the parts of Afghanistan under their
control.

For these reasons, my delegation feels compelled to
make this statement before the voting. We will vote in
favour of the draft resolution before the Council with a
heavy heart and with a request to the Taliban to comply
with the requirements of the draft resolution so as to spare
the hapless people of Afghanistan from further sufferings
and misery, as well as with an appeal to the Council to
ensure that in the implementation of this draft resolution
the welfare and well-being of the people of Afghanistan
will be taken to heart.

