The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Australia, Brazil, Cuba, Iceland, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel, Japan, Lebanon,
Morocco, Norway, Pakistan, Qatar, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Turkey and the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Ms. Shalev
(Israel) took a seat at the Council table; the other
aforementioned representatives took the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber.

The President: I would like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 11 December
2008 from the Charge d'affaires of the Permanent
Observer Mission of Palestine to the United Nations,
which will be issued as document S/2008/794 and
which reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council will invite the Permanent
Observer of Palestine to the United Nations to
participate in the meeting of the Security Council
which will be held on Thursday, 18 December
2008, regarding the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question."

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the meeting, in accordance with the rules
of procedure and the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mansour
(Palestine) took a seat at the Council table.


The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Robert Serry,
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process
and Personal Representative of the Secretary-General.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Serry to take a seat at the Council
table.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 15 December 2008 from His
Excellency Mr. Paul Badji, Permanent Representative
of Senegal, in which he requests to be invited, in his
capacity as Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council's agenda. If I hear no objection, I shall take it
that the Security Council agrees to extend an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Paul Badji.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Badji to take the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Robert Serry, Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process and Personal
Representative of the Secretary-General. I now give
Mr. Serry the floor.


