The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Angola, in which he requests to be invited to participate in
the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Van Danem
"Mbinda" (Angola) took a place at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III), document
S/1995/842.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the Secretary-
General's report of 4 October 1995 (S/1995/842) on
the United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM. Ill) pursuant to paragraph 21 of Security
Council resolution 1008 (1995) of 7 August 1995.

"The Security Council has noted the positive
developments in Angola since the Secretary-General's
report of 17 July 1995 (S/1995/588). The Council is
encouraged by the meetings in Franceville and

Brussels between President Dos Santos and
Dr. Savimbi which provided the opportunity to
discuss the critical issues and reach agreement on
consolidation of the peace process. These meetings,
particularly the round table in Brussels, provided
important reassurance to the international
community. The Council welcomes the continued
commitment of both parties to the process of
dialogue. The Council commends the efforts of the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative, of
the observer States to the Angola peace process, and
of States in the region, to help in carrying forward
the process.

"The Security Council notes with satisfaction
the progress in the implementation of the Lusaka
Protocol (S/ 1994/ 1441, annex) including the
reduction of cease-fire violations, the disengagement
of forces, the enhanced cooperation between the
parties and UNAVEM. III, the signing of the status
of forces agreement, the provision of logistic
facilities for the mission and the conclusion of the
joint declaration on the free circulation of persons
and goods. The Council also welcomes the ongoing
deployment of UNAVEM. III support units and
stresses the importance of a timely deployment of
the infantry battalions of UNAVEM. III. The Council
stresses the importance of an independent UNAVEM
radio and urges the Government of Angola to
provide, without delay, the facilities to allow it to
operate.

"The Security Council none the less remains
concerned at delays in the peace process, in
particular in respect of quartering of UNITA and the
Rapid Reaction Police, demining, disarmament, the
return of the FAA to barracks and the formation of
the new armed forces as well as the repatriation of
mercenaries. The Council underscores the peril that
may result from further delays. The Council is also
deeply concerned at allegations of renewed laying of
mines and demands that all parties refrain from such
actions.

"The Security Council emphasizes that
continuing cooperation between the parties is
essential if a sustained cessation of hostilities is to
take hold. In this regard, the Council calls on the
parties to refrain from troop movements or military
activities that might create tension or lead to
renewed hostilities.

 

"The Security Council is concerned about the
continuing complaints of human rights violations, and
endorses the decision of the Joint Commission to
inscribe human rights in the agenda of all its regular
sessions.

"The Security Council wishes to emphasize that
post-peace-keeping elements can make an important
contribution to a viable long-term peace. The Council
notes the linkage between political and economic well-
being and the need to ensure that displaced people and
refugees are able to return to their places of origin.
The Council reaffirms the Secretary-General's call for
a comprehensive coordinated and integrated effort on
the part of all relevant international organizations to
help rebuild the Angolan economic infrastructure. The
Council requests Member States to continue to support
the ongoing humanitarian activities in Angola. It
welcomes the commitments made at the Round
Table Conference, held in Brussels, in September
1995 and urges those that have made pledges to
fulfil their commitments as soon as possible.

"The Security Council will continue to monitor
closely the situation in Angola and looks forward to

future reports of the Secretary-General."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/1995/51.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 6.05 pm.

