The President (interpretation from Spanish): I shall
now make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Chile.

On 25 May there was a military coup that overthrew
the democratically elected President of Sierra Leone. The
international community was not slow to deplore and
condemn that situation; it reacted simultaneously at the
three levels that have recently characterized international
action with regard to crises in Africa: the subregional level,
through the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS); the regional level, through the Organization of
African Unity (OAU); and the international level, through
the United Nations Security Council.

It was initially at the regional and subregional levels
that the decision to act was made. The Harare summit
strongly condemned the military coup. The members of
ECOWAS, for their part, took measures to reverse the
situation, primarily using peaceful means to seek to achieve
restoration of the democratically elected Government.

Unfortunately, the military junta did not even agree to
sit down at the negotiating table, at an appropriate level, to
bring about a peaceful transition to constitutional order.
Accordingly, ECOWAS had to adopt measures at the end
of August to make the junta understand the situation it
was in. Now ECOWAS has asked, through its Committee
of Five, that the Security Council support its actions.

The draft resolution before us, which was beginning
to take shape, benefited from consultations held by the
interested States, particularly the members of
ECOWAS and the legitimate Government of Sierra Leone
itself. There was great harmony in this action. The
Council was able to intervene at the subregional and
regional levels, to the benefit of all. I believe that the way
in which this draft resolution was prepared is very
important, as is its content, which all speakers have
highlighted.

We should acknowledge that the ministerial meeting
of the Security Council on the situation in Africa gave
priority to the kind of relationship that should exist
between the Council and the regional level.

We will adopt a draft resolution which was the
subject of lengthy and intense consultations, due to the
nature of the measures it includes. We have received
valuable information from the Department of
Humanitarian Affairs, which has indicated that the May
coup has had a series of grave humanitarian
consequences, which continue to this day. These include
displacement of the population, deterioration of the health
and food situation and collapse of basic services.
Meanwhile, humanitarian needs continue to grow. The
draft resolution aims to change this situation, by changing
the structural humanitarian situation in Sierra Leone
today.

It is important to emphasize that the Security
Council is increasingly moving towards imposing
sanctions on leaders, not on innocent populations. At the
same time, this draft resolution contains the concept of
periodic review of the humanitarian situation in Sierra
Leone, including the impact of sanctions.

It seems to us very important that the Secretariat of
the United Nations continue to coordinate closely its
activities with ECOWAS with regard to the humanitarian
effect of these sanctions, as there is agreement that the
United Nations should make recommendations to be
applied in this matter.

The Security Council will adopt today a draft
resolution designed to ensure that the military junta in
Sierra Leone gives up power. We are taking every step

 

possible to ensure that these measures do not cause
unnecessary harm to innocent people, but we should not
lose sight of our political objective, which is that the
military junta in Sierra Leone leave power and permit the
restoration of the democratically elected Government.

We hope that the members of the illegitimate junta
realize that the international community is not prepared to
accept coups. They should shoulder their responsibilities to
the people of Sierra Leone, whom they have deprived of
their legitimate Government and of regional solidarity and
the international assistance necessary to move out from
underdevelopment, something which is indispensable to that
country.

In closing, I would like to quote what the Secretary-
General said in his letter to the President of the Security
Council when he explained the meaning of the action we
are taking today:

"At stake is a great issue of principle, namely,
that the efforts of the international community for
democratic governance, grounded in the rule of law
and respect for human rights, shall not be thwarted
through illegal coups." (S/1997/776, p. 2)

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I now put to the vote the draft resolution contained
in document S/1997/777.

A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:

Chile, China, Costa Rica, Egypt, France, Guinea-
Bissau, Japan, Kenya, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Russian Federation, Sweden, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America

The President (interpretation from Spanish): There
were 15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 1132 (1997).

There are no further speakers on my list. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage of
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 12.50 pm.

