Ms. Mapisa-Nqakula (South Africa): Let me
join other speakers in congratulating the Republic
of Angola, as President of the Security Council this
month, for convening this thought-provoking and
timely debate. We also recognize your vital role, Sir,
as Chair of the International Conference of the Great
Lakes Region, in steering and leading all the relevant
stakeholders towards peace and stability in the region.

South Africa has always recognized the importance
and the urgency of peace, security and development in
the region. For the Great Lakes region to thrive, regional
and subregional organizations, together with the United

Nations, should work in a coordinated manner in order
to achieve stability.

Following the visit to Burundi of the African Union
high-level delegation, led by President Zuma, we are
encouraged to note that all the relevant stakeholders,
including the Government of Burundi, the opposition
and civil society, agreed that an inclusive political
dialogue was the only means to address political
differences confronting their country. South Africa
believes that the people and the Government of Burundi
have the ability to overcome their challenges through
inclusive national dialogue, as well as through peaceful
political means, just as they demonstrated with the
Arusha Agreement, which ended the civil war that
killed thousands of Burundians.

We also welcome the mediation efforts led by
President Museveni of Uganda on behalf of the East
African Community, particularly with regard to
the need to ensure that all stakeholders in Burundi
participate in the inclusive dialogue and actively
preserve the gains of the Arusha Agreement. South
Africa also acknowledges the efforts by the East African
Community in reinforcing the mediation process by
appointing the former President of Tanzania, His
Excellency Mr. Bejamin Mkapa, to further expedite the
peace process in Burundi. We call upon the international
community to support the Government of Burundi by
making resources available to help make the possibility
of peace a reality.

With regard to the issue of natural resources in
the region, we are all aware that Africa, particularly
the Great Lakes region, is endowed with rich natural
resources, as well as fertile land for agricultural
purposes, and therefore has immense potential for
realizing economic prosperity and development. The
Congo River, for example, could provide half the energy
needs of the African continent. The mineral resources
of the land have the potential to make this region the
epicentre of commerce in the African continent.

Unfortunately, its true potential has not been
realized, as the subregion has been plagued by endless
conflicts. It is perhaps because of the abundance of
wealth that it is threatened by instability, because
often a paradox exists whereby resource-rich countries
are threatened with stagnation, less growth and
instability. That is partly as a result of the exploitation
of such resources, often by those outside the region. We
therefore encourage greater responsibility and national

ownership of those resources, good governance and
greater investment in order to grow all those sectors
of those economies. It is important to realize that
peace and stability are dependent on development, and
vice versa.

The Republic of South Africa wishes to make the
following observations and remarks pertaining to the
situation in the Great Lakes region.

First, South Africa recognizes that there has been
a relative improvement in the security situation in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
through a reduction of the threat posed by Congolese
and foreign armed groups. Secondly, we acknowledge
that not all the negative forces in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo have been disarmed. Thirdly,
we further recognize that some negative forces have
found refuge in neighbouring countries and that efforts
to realize their repatriation are under way. Fourthly,
we are concerned about the possible broadening of
the Islamization of some aspects of the conflict in
the region. Fifthly, we note that recently allegations
have surfaced of interference in the internal affairs of
neighbouring States in the region and that those have
been met with counter-accusations.

It is the View of the Republic of South Africa that the
total neutralization of the negative forces in the eastern
part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo requires
optimum utilization of the military resources deployed
in that country. South Africa believes the objective of
neutralizing negative forces should not be perceived as
implying only the use of force against the armed groups,
but also including the application ofall possible methods
to influence the negative forces to renounce violence
as a means of attaining their objectives, and to opt to
disarm and demobilize. That would enable the fast-
tracking of the process of restoration and consolidation
of State authority in the eastern part of the country.
South Africa supports the extension of the mandate of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, taking into
account the concerns of the Government of the country.

As the international community, collectively, we
need to go back to basics and identify the root causes
of the conflict in the Great Lakes region. In addition to
the resource paradox mentioned earlier, we should also
take into account the interwoven interest groups whose
pursuit of power and natural resources overshadows the
importance of developing the area and redistributing
the wealth of the land to the people ofthe region so that
they too, as in many societies in the world, can thrive
and live a prosperous life.

We also need to provide as much support as
possible to those countries as they emerge from crisis
in order to prevent a relapse into conflict, which
typifies the instability in the region. We therefore call
on the Peacebuilding Commission to do everything
it can in advocating for assistance for post-conflict
reconstruction in affected countries of the region.

South Africa has committed to work towards an
African continent that is unified and free, whose people
can thrive and realize their true potential as members
of the global society. The stability and prosperity of the
Great Lakes region is at the heart of that endeavour.
