Mr. Ivanov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Our meeting today is in its way a unique
occasion in the history of the United Nations. The
Security Council is meeting again as an urgent matter
at the level of Ministers for Foreign Affairs to seek a
solution to a most acute problem: a settlement of the
situation concerning Iraq. This fact is further evidence
that the world community sees the United Nations as
the most suitable mechanism for settling the most
burning issues facing the world today.

For it is precisely within the United Nations and
the Security Council that all States have an
opportunity, on an equal footing, to seek solutions to
problems involving the interests of general security.
That is why, with each additional meeting of the
Security Council, the international community is
further engaging hopes for strengthening the unity and
solidarity of States in the face of common threats and
challenges.

The reports today by Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei,
whom we welcome and whom we thank for the
enormous amount of useful work that they are doing,
have shown very clearly that in Iraq a unique potential
has been established in the area of inspections and
monitoring. I think that, in our discussions and
conclusions, we should be guided not by feelings,
emotions, sympathies or antipathy with respect to any
particular regime. Rather, we should be guided by the
actual facts and, on the basis of those facts, should
draw our conclusions. This is why we supported the
inspectors' return to Iraq and why we must continue to
provide them with all necessary assistance. It is only
on the basis of the professional data they provide us
with that we can, without making a mistake, come to a
correct conclusion.

The international inspections, carried out daily,
are proceeding smoothly with Iraqi cooperation. There
is unimpeded access to all sites, including the most
sensitive sites, as required under resolution 1441
(2002).

During the last visit of Mr. Blix and
Mr. ElBaradei to Baghdad, substantial progress was
made, and we cannot disregard that. Now there is no
obstacle to aerial monitoring of Iraqi territory, using
the American U-2, the French Mirage IV and the
Russian Antonov.

The situation is improving with regard to
interviews with Iraqi scientists. They are now being
held without minders. The Iraqis have provided to
UNMOVIC a number of new documents about past
military programmes and have also set up two
commissions to search for additional materials.

We simply cannot ignore these facts. We can
think back to our meeting of 5 February, when these
matters were discussed as pending, and we asked Iraq
to resolve them. Thanks to the last visit by Mr. Blix
and Mr. ElBaradei these matters have now been
resolved. In fact there is forward movement which, I
repeat, we must not ignore.

We strongly urge Baghdad to further increase its
cooperation with the international inspectors. After all,
this is first and foremost in its own interest. Clearly,
UNMOVIC and IAEA have the necessary conditions to
carry out the tasks assigned to them. As far as we
know, nobody is proposing changing the mandate of
UNMOVIC or IAEA or introducing any changes into
the unanimously adopted resolution 1441 (2002). But
all States - or at least the overwhelming majority of
States in the world - are saying the United Nations
Security Council must continue to provide the
inspectors with all the support they need.

At the same time, however, the work of the
inspectors must be made more systematic and focused.
It is necessary to set clear tasks and then consistently
monitor their implementation. In this connection I
would like to recall the responsibilities of the
inspectors as enshrined in resolution 1284 (1999),
according to which UNMOVIC and IAEA are to
submit for Security Council approval their work
programme, including the list of key disarmament
tasks. The adoption of such a programme would
provide us with objective criteria, not only for
assessing the degree of Baghdad's cooperation with the
United Nations, but, most importantly, for helping us
answer whether Iraq is today a threat to international
peace and security, and, if so, what specifically must be
done to remove that threat. This work programme must
be submitted as soon as possible.

Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei may be asked small
questions of clarification. But there is one point of
principle we must all answer: must the UNMOVIC and
IAEA inspectors continue their work in Iraq in the
interest of a political settlement, and have all the
necessary conditions to that end been met? Russia
answers "yes" to that question. Yes, the conditions are
there; yes, the inspectors must continue their
inspections. This position is shared by the
overwhelming majority of States in the world,
including within the Security Council.

We have a unique opportunity to reach agreement
on how to solve this most urgent international problem
through political means, in strict accordance with the
United Nations Charter. This is a real opportunity, and
it must not be missed. Force may be resorted to, but
only when all other remedies have been exhausted. As
may be seen from today's discussion, we have not yet
reached that point. I hope we will not reach that point.

We are all fully aware of the exceptional
responsibility placed on us by the international
community in accordance with the United Nations
Charter. Our energies today must therefore be directed
not to competing against each other, but rather to
uniting our efforts.

It is symbolic that today's meeting is being held
on St. Valentine's Day. This is a day when people get
engaged, cementing their greatest hopes. It is our hope
we will be able to do likewise.

