Mr. Naranjo (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
After a year of implementing the agreement that
ended the armed conflict with the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia (FARC), the Government
of Colombia has come to the Security Council with the
belief that that milestone in the history of peace is the
best piece of news our citizens received and that our
country conveyed to the world during the latter half of
the previous century.
It is for that reason that we begin by thanking
the United Nations and the Security Council for their
effective support and dedication to peacebuilding efforts
in our country, through its Special Verification Mission
in the areas of reincorporation and security guarantees.
We thank Special Representative Jean Arnault for
his professionalism, effective work and leadership as
the Head of the Mission. We would also like to thank
Ambassador Matthew Rycroft for his commitment and
dedication to the peace process in Colombia. With his
peers present, we reiterate that we never will we forget
him for his efforts in bringing about peace in Colombia.

Today, I would like my statement, in my capacity
as the Vice-President of Colombia and representative of
President Juan Manuel Santos Calderon, to be viewed
as the manifestation of a vision brought forth by the
efforts of various generations that sought peace. We are
now building and ensuring such peace. As an officer
of the Colombian armed forces, I witnessed at first
hand the tragedies caused by a war that lasted many
years. I attended the funerals of many civil servants
and innocent Colombians. There were 240,000 violent
deaths caused by the conflict and more than 8 million
victims throughout the decades. Today I am pleased
to inform the Council that the peace process was
effective and allowed the lives of at least 3,000 people
to be spared in the last year alone after the agreement
was signed. That is without a doubt another piece of
good news.

Based on an assessment of the implementation of
the agreement one year after it was signed, we can state
without hesitation that the peacebuilding process is
progressing in structural terms and that the agreement
has been an effective covenant for ending the war and
silencing the guns. As the Council knows, we have been
able to develop an effective process of laying down of
weapons, which heralded the end of the FARC as an
armed organization and its transformaton into a political
party. To meet the new challenges of the post-conflict
and peacebuilding era, we have established various
Government institutions and rolled out mechanisms
for interaction and coordination that have enabled us to
respond to the challenge we face.

Over the past year, the legislative agenda of
the Congress of the Republic of Colombia led to the
adoption of six pieces of legislation that introduced
constitutional reforms and various laws and decrees
including more than 100 norms and decrees, which laid
the foundation for peacebuilding in our country.

Let me now mention the progress made in the
areas of reintegration and security guarantees, which
are included in the Mission's mandate. With regard
to reintegration, I must underscore that Colombia has
more than 14 years of experience. More than 50,000
Colombians have passed through our programmes,
who left criminal organizations and reintegrated into
society. We can therefore safely state that our country
can serve as a model in that area. That experience is
the starting point for ensuring the reintegration of the
FARC's former combatants. We now have 12,848 former
combatants involved in the process, of whom - and
this is very important - 11,362 already receive a basic
monthly stipend. We have sought to provide literacy
and primary and secondary education courses in the
territorial areas for training and reincorporation. More
than 5,000 people were involved in the first phase of the
initiative - former combatants and members of local
communities alike.

To facilitate reincorporation, Ecomun was
established. It is the main cooperative for former
members of the FARC, which is now a political
party. Forty-two other cooperative organizations
have been established through a special system for
former combatants. We established the National
Reincorporation Council and 26 territorial councils
to coordinate reincorporation efforts from the local
to the national level. At the same time, there has been
a major change in the political sphere, with FARC
elements disappearing as an armed organization and
now becomig a new political party that will take part in
the upcoming parliamentary elections in March. It has
already decided to field a presidential candidate.

With regard to security, we think it essential to
inform the Council that 2017 was the least violent
year in Colombia in the past 42 years, with the lowest
murder rate recorded in four decades. That is another
piece of good news. Sadly, it is true that people linked
to the former FARC organization, community leaders
and human rights defenders have been murdered.
Nonetheless, during the negotiations, in order to end the
conflict, we were careful to design new institutions and
mechanisms that ensure that life and personal integrity
would always be protected. To protect former FARC
combatants in particular, 160 protection schemes have
been approved and more than 800 former combatants
have been included and trained to serve jointly in
inter-agency bodies alongside State staff in personal
protection services.

I would like to reassure the Council that the
Government shares public concerns about the murder
of former FARC combatants, community leaders and
human rights defenders. We do not deny the situation.
We acknowledge and highlight it. However, we are
taking action and hope to do so with determination and
efficiency. The President himself chairs the National
Commission for Security Guarantees, in which civil
society, the public prosecutor's office, the office of the
ombusdman and other members of the Government take
part, in order to assess and take decisions on security-
related issues. Such efforts have enabled us to accelerate
investigations undertaken to combat impunity and
ensure that those responsible are held accountable.

We believe that we must not only work on speeding
up investigations, but also on the prevention of such acts.
To that end, we have designed and implemented a new
prevention and rapid reaction system for the regions,
which, with the help of the Ombudsman's Office, seeks
to ramp up a preventive capacity that will truly allow
us to prevent the violent deaths of social leaders. Here
before the Security Council, I can affirm that, as we
have done in the past in order to combat organized
crime that has emerged from drug trafficking, we will
not let up in our efforts to overcome such networks.

My presence here today coincides with the strategic
decision taken by my counry's President to move
forward the consolidation of a secure and peaceful
Colombia. Plan Victory, implemented by the military
forces, and the safe communities and peace plan of
the national police have just been overhauled so as
to respond comprehensively in neutralizing any type
of violence in the country reported by Colombians.
Over the next several days beginning now, we will be
deploying approximatley 80,000 soldiers and police
officers whose duties will be focused on controlling
territory abandoned by the FARC so that it is not taken
over by any criminal entity.

Lastly, the President of Colombia wishes to
acknowledge that he has received and taken due note
of the first report (S/2017/1117) of United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia, and, at the same
time, reaffirms his resolve and full commitment to
comply with the Final Peace Agreement. We are certain
that the historic achievement of ending the conflict will
prevail over obstacles and major challenges inherent in
its implementation.

We regret and genuinely deplore recent events,
but the Council must know that the Government has
maintained a willingness to pursue a negotiation
process with the Ejercito de Liberacion Nacional
in order to extend the bilateral ceasefire in order to
allow us to make progress, pursue dialogue and bring
to fruition the Peace Agreement. Inexplicably, the
Ejercito de Liberacion Nacional has not only rejected
the good-will gestures of the Government, but it has
also failed to consider the appeals of the Catholic
Church, non-governmental organizations, academics
and the international community to continue talks and
relaunch a ceasefire that would ensure its sustainability.
Nevertheless, I reaffirm before the Council that the
Government will not waver in its mission to bring
about peace - given that peace is the expression of the
collective will that must prevail over concrete acts.

Accordingly, the events of the past few hours and
minutes have led the chief Colombian negotiator to
consult with the President to assess the situation, and
under no circumstances will we ever abandon a goal
that is of the utmost importance to our Government,
which has unequivocally demonstrated to the entire
world that its leader, the President of the Republic, is a
champion of peace, peacemaker and peacebuilder.

