Mr. Bolton (United States of America): Eleven
days have passed since the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea brazenly defied the international
community and fired seven ballistic missiles, including
a Taepo Dong 2 intercontinental ballistic missile, into
the waters surrounding its neighbours, notably Japan.
Despite intense diplomatic efforts by a number of
countries prior to those launches, North Korea chose to
recklessly disregard the collective will of its
neighbours and, indeed, that of the world.

In so doing, it violated several international
commitments it had entered into, most recently the
joint statement of the six-party talks from September
2005. Since the words of the North Korean leadership
and the agreements it signs have consistently over time
been shown to hold little value, it is only appropriate
for the international community and the Security
Council to evaluate North Korea based on its
actions - actions which have been deeply disturbing.

It would be dangerous for the Council to look at
these missile launches in isolation from North Korea's
unrelenting pursuit of a nuclear-weapons capability.
When North Korea launched a missile over Japan in
1998, we were not aware at that time that Pyongyang
was pursuing a covert uranium-enrichment programme,
in violation of the 1994 agreed framework.

In the intervening eight years, North Korea has
withdrawn from the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT), kicked out inspectors of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and
declared not just that it is pursuing a nuclear-weapons
capability but that it already possesses them.

We are pleased that the Council has taken clear,
firm and unanimous action in adopting this resolution.
The launching of seven ballistic missiles by North
Korea constitutes a direct threat to international peace
and security and demanded a strong statement from the
Council in the form of a strong resolution. The past 11
days have witnessed intense diplomatic activity here in
New York, in a number of capitals around the world,
and notably in Pyongyang itself, where a high-level
delegation from the People's Republic of China made

one last attempt to make the North Korean leadership
see reason.

It was appropriate for us to show this flexibility
on timing and allow diplomatic efforts a chance to
succeed. Those efforts are now exhausted, however,
and the continued intransigence and defiance of the
North Korean leadership demanded a strong response
from the Council. The resolution we have just adopted
does just that. It also sends a much stronger signal than
the weak and feckless response of the Council in 1998,
which issued only a press statement.

In condemning the multiple launches of these
ballistic missiles, the Council is affirming in this
resolution that these launches threaten international
peace and security. It is not just launching of these
missiles that poses a threat but the propensity of North
Korea to proliferate this technology. North Korea is the
world's leading proliferator of ballistic missile
technology, so it was entirely appropriate for the
Council to reaffirm its resolution 1540 (2004), whose
first preambular paragraph states that the

"proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons, as well as their means of delivery,
constitutes a threat to international peace and
security".

This resolution also demands action. It sends an
unequivocal, unambiguous and unanimous message to
Pyongyang: Suspend your ballistic missile programme.
Stop your procurement of materials related to weapons
of mass destruction, and implement your September
2005 commitment to verifiably dismantle your nuclear
weapons and existing nuclear programme.

It is not just Pyongyang, though, that must act.
The resolution also requires Member States to do what
they can to prevent the transfer of resources to the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea's missile
programme and cease procurement of missile-related
items and items relating to WMD programmes from the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea.

The United States expects that North Korea and
all other States Members of the United Nations will
immediately act in accordance with the requirements of
this resolution.

This is the first Security Council resolution on
North Korea since 1993, reflecting the gravity of this
situation and the unity and determination of the
Council. We hope that this resolution will demonstrate
to North Korea that the best way to improve the
livelihood of its people and end its international
isolation is to stop playing games of brinkmanship and
restore its missile moratorium, return to the six-party
talks and implement the terms of the joint statement
from the last round of those talks.

We look forward to North Korea's full,
unconditional and immediate compliance with this
Security Council resolution. We hope that North Korea
makes the strategic decision that the pursuit of
weapons of mass destruction programmes and
threatening acts like these missile launches makes it
less, not more, secure. We need to be prepared,
however, that North Korea might choose a different
path. That is why it is important that, if the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea does not comply with the
requirements of the resolution, the United States and
other Member States have the opportunity at any point
to return to the Council for further action.

In closing, I would like to thank all members of
the Council for their efforts in helping us to secure a
strong and unanimous resolution. In particular, I would
like to thank my friend and colleague, Ambassador
Kenzo Oshima, for his work in leading the effort to
bring the resolution to finality.

