Mr. Danon (Israel): I expected Mr. Abbas to stay
with us and have a dialogue. Regrettably, once again he
has run away. Look what just happened in this room.
Mr. Abbas entered, put his demands on the table and
left. He expects the Security Council to deliver the
result. It will not work that way. The only way to move
forward is through direct negotiations between Israel
and Palestine.

It is unfortunate that we are meeting here today.
For the past seven and a half years, the Chairman of the
Palestinian Authority, Mahmoud Abbas, has refused
to meet even once with Prime Minister Netanyahu.
He has refused to negotiate peace. Yet, during that
same time, Mr. Abbas has made seven trips here to the
United Nations. Today, once again, rather than driving
just 12 minutes between Ramallah and Jerusalem, he
has chosen to fly 12 hours to New York to avoid the
possibility of peace. Mr. Abbas has made it clear with
his words and actions that he is no longer part of the
solution; he is the problem.

What has he done to improve the life of a single
person in Ramallah or Gaza? The Palestinians need
leadership that will invest in education, not glorify
violence. They need leadership that will build
hospitals, not pay terrorists. They need leadership that
will negotiate with Israel, speak to us and not run away
from dialogue.

Mr. Abbas just addressed the members of the
Security Council and spoke about his commitment to
peace. That is what he often does when speaking in
international forums. But when he addresses his people
in Arabic, he conveys a very different message. A few
weeks ago when Mr. Abbas spoke to the Palestine
Liberation Organization Central Council, he called the
national movement of the Jewish people "a colonialist
project that has no connection to Judaism". In that same
shameful speech, he had the audacity to accuse Jews of
supporting anti-Semitism in order to promote Zionism.
It was not the first time he used such hateful language. In
September 2015, as part of his attempts to delegitimize
the connection between the Jewish people and the land
of Israel, he stated that "the Jews have no right to the
Temple Mount and other holy sites. The Jews desecrate
them with their filthy feet". He then went on to incite
his people to violence, saying, "we welcome every drop
of blood spilled in Jerusalem".

Mr. Abbas inspires a culture of hate within
Palestinian society. He names schools and public
squares in honour of terrorists. He encourages
Palestinian children to hate by teaching them in school
that Jews are descendants of apes. Just this month, his
Fatah faction praised the terrorists who killed Rabbi
Raziel Shevach, and he remained silent and refused to
condemn the terrorists who killed a father of six as he
was driving home to see his children.

Mr. Abbas's incitement does not end with rhetoric.
He has made it official Palestinian policy to sponsor
terrorism. In 2017, he spent $345 million to pay
terrorists for killing innocent Israelis. That is 50 per
cent of the total foreign aid donated to the Palestinian
Authority - 50 per cent of its money - which is money
he could have spent building 40 hospitals. That is money
he could have used to build 172 schools - every year.

His travels around the world to seek international
intervention are an attempt to avoid the hard choices
necessary for peace. He looks to every possible
forum because he does not want to actually negotiate
with Israel.

It is unfortunate, but this reckless behaviour by
Chairman Abbas is nothing new. It is a pattern set
throughout over 70 years of missed opportunities by
Palestinian leadership whose spirit he continues to
embody. We recently celebrated 70 years since the
adoption of General Assembly resolution 181 (II). For the
Jewish people, it represented international recognition
of our historic rights to our homeland. We accepted the
resolution immediately. It was not perfect. It did not
provide us with all that we deserved. But it gave us hope
for a better future. Yet, this past November, as Israel
celebrated this milestone, the Palestinians marked the
anniversary with grief and mourning, just as they did
70 years ago when they chose to reject it. Since that
moment in 1947, Israelis valiantly fought in too many
wars against enemies intent on destroying our country.

Over time, brave leaders emerged in Egypt and
Jordan - leaders who were willing to negotiate,
compromise and ultimately sign peace agreements
with Israel. But the Palestinian leadership continued to
choose conflict over coexistence. At the Camp David
summit, in 2000, Prime Minister Ehud Barak presented
the Palestinians with an unprecedented offer. What
was Mahmoud Abbas's reaction? He chose to side
with Yasser Arafat, claim it was a trap and reject the
proposal. That was back in 2000.

In 2005, Mahmoud Abbas was elected to chair the
Palestinian Authority. The world hoped he would follow
in the courageous footsteps ofPresident Sadat and King
Hussein, seek peace with Israel and forge a better future
for Palestinians. But he let his people down. Since the
day he took office, peace plan after peace plan has been
accepted by Israel and rejected by Mr. Abbas. Time and
again, Israeli leaders have sat with Mr. Abbas - three
different Israeli Prime Ministers, three different
American Presidents - but every time an inch towards
progress is made, Mr. Abbas runs away.

In 2007, Prime Minister Ehud Olmert offered
the most generous deal since resolution 181 (11): an
almost complete withdrawal from Judea and Samaria
and a direct link to the Gaza Strip. The offer even
included a plan to place the Old City of Jerusalem, the
gateway to our holiest sites, under international control.
