Mr. Naidu (Fiji): It is a pleasure for us to have
Ambassador Kamalesh Sharma amidst us, and we
thank him most sincerely for the very comprehensive
report he has presented to the Council.

In all previous meetings of the Security Council
on East Timor, we had leaders from Dili, but it is now a
great pleasure for us to see post-independence Timor-
Leste represented by the Permanent Representative,
Ambassador Guterres in the Council today.

Mr. President, I requested the floor to contribute
to this debate on behalf of the Pacific Islands Forum
(PIF) members in New York: Australia, Republic of the
Marshall Islands, Federated States of Micronesia,
Nauru, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, Samoa,
Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu, Vanuatu and my own
country, Fiji, as well as Kiribati and Palau. The subject
of Timor-Leste is close to our members owing to its
affinity and proximity to our region. We are aware of
the fact that the future sustainability and stability of
Timor-Leste has a significant bearing on our own
subregional and wider regional good-neighbourly
relations, security and stability. It is at least for those
reasons that several PIF members have taken active
roles in both the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) and the
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET).

The Pacific Islands Forum group wishes to thank
the Secretary-General and his Special Representative
for a candid account of the UNMISET targets that have
been met, some beyond projections, but some goals are
still outstanding. We are pleased to see the Mission
adhering closely to the agreed downsizing phases and
timetable, neither faster nor slower, and we are very
hopeful that goodwill from all parties will ensure a
final withdrawal under phase 4 in June 2004.

We welcome the positive developments that have
taken place since the independence of, and transition of
governance to, T imor-Leste.

The fragility of the country's nascent institutions
in the sectors of justice, internal security and law
enforcement, external security and border control and
development constitutes an uphill challenge. As can be
expected, its first Human Development Report shows
poor indicators on poverty, literacy and life expectancy,
and it confirms Timor-Leste as the poorest nation in
Asia in terms of financial and human development. The
Secretary-General's report also serves as an
opportunity for Timor-Leste to chart its own course of
development away from poverty, and our Group
endorses the Secretary-General's recommendations for
continued engagement towards this goal.

For its part, the activities of the Timor-Leste
Government in making laws and in building national
institutions and international networks are significant
achievements. They are also evidence of its growing
integrity and deep commitment to working with the
United Nations Support Mission. In addition to Timor-
Leste's participation in meetings of the Association of
South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) and the third
Summit of the African, Caribbean and Pacific Group of
States (ACP), we also note Timor-Leste's special
observer status, with equivalent rights of an observer,
in the 33rd Pacific Islands Forum, held also in Fiji this
year, as reported in United Nations document
A/57/331. We urge United Nations entities system-
wide, Bretton Woods institutions, civil society and
organizations to build on that Government's bilateral
and multilateral efforts to promote sustainable
development.

We now want to highlight two areas in the
Secretary-General's report that require continued
international assistance. We recognize that
development of the public administration is significant
for good governance. In this respect, we welcome the
recruitment of stability and development advisors to
act as mentors in the transfer of skills to the
Government. We encourage UNMISET to maintain its
focus on the development of a self-reliant civil service.
Secondly, positive efforts in building on human
rights institutions in Timor-Leste are generating
international confidence in the Government's work. We
note progress made in the work of the Commission for
Reception, Truth and Reconciliation, and in the parallel
innovative concept of a community reconciliation
process. The more stable security situation, the
growing number of indictments issued by the Serious
Crimes Unit, the non-violence training in police units
and the awareness programmes on gender and
HIV/AIDS are timely responses to the multiple
vulnerabilities facing Timor-Leste. Despite some
progress in meeting agreed targets, much remains to be
achieved in the justice and police systems.

