Mr. Larrain (Chile) (interpretation from Spanish):
I have the honour to speak on behalf of the sponsors of
the draft resolution that we will be adopting today:
Botswana, Egypt, Germany, Guinea-Bissau, Honduras,
Indonesia, the Republic of Korea, the Russian Federation,
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, the United States of America and Chile.

The draft resolution that we will be adopting by
consensus today reflects the position of the Security
Council: united in support of the goal of helping Burundi
reach a comprehensive political settlement with the
participation of the entire international community.

It also reflects an unequivocal stand to lend the
strongest support to regional leaders, to the Arusha
agreements of 31 July and to the Organization of African
Unity. In particular, we are lending our strongest support
to former President Julius Nyerere in his laudable efforts
to assist Burundi to overcome peacefully the crisis it is
undergoing.

The Security Council declares its readiness to
support Burundi if its leaders set out on the path to peace,
political negotiation and reconciliation through
international cooperation and other initiatives.

It also indicates with unwavering resolve that if
within 60 days, those leaders have not initiated the
necessary negotiations to bring about a comprehensive
political settlement, the Council will then consider the
imposition of measures under the Charter, including an
arms embargo and other measures targeted against the
leaders of the regime and of the factions that continue to
promote Violence and to stand in the way of a peaceful
solution. In that case, the measures will meet objective
criteria based on the information submitted to us by the
Secretary-General.

This draft resolution also expresses the consensus in
the Council that the present crisis should not exacerbate
the humanitarian suffering of the population of that
country, and it mentions the need to ensure that
humanitarian corridors are established so that all in
Burundi may have access to assistance. As can be noted,
together with the hope that that country will once again
take the path of political negotiation, we are moved by a
strong concern over the humanitarian situation of the
population and of those who are working with them to
alleviate their suffering.

 

The draft resolution unambiguously condemns the use
of force and violence in Burundi, both in the overthrow of
the legitimate Government and in the resort to violence by
the parties to attain their political objectives. We are also
calling on the regime to bring about a return to
constitutional order and legality, to restore the National
Assembly and to lift the ban on all political parties.

The Security Council will meet again on 31 October
to assess the situation. It is the sincere hope of the
sponsors - and of the international community - that that
meeting will serve to support the negotiations that should
by then have begun in Burundi. But if that is not the case,
let there be no doubt that we shall proceed to consider
whatever measures may be deemed appropriate to achieve
the initiation of those negotiations.

