Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting on a very this
important subject with these impressive briefers. We
thank Under-Secretary-General Lowcock and Special
Representative of the Secretary General Gamba for
their sobering briefings.

Frankly speaking, I was shocked to hear yet again

about the terrible suffering of Syrian children. Children
should be protected, including in times of war, yet such
protection is completely lacking in the Syrian conflict.
We express our strong support for the mandate of
the Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict. We are grateful for the extremely valuable
work that the Special Representative and her team
have done regarding Syria - valuable work in spite
of the lack of access and cooperation from the Syrian
regime. It is deplorable that the Syrian regime ignores
its international obligations, even when it comes to the
protection of children. We expect the upcoming country
report to address those issues in clear terms, and we
support the idea of more frequent country reports.
Today we are talking about the humanitarian situation
in Syria, but let us not forget the fate of the 6.5 million
refugees who have been forced to flee their country.

In my statement I will address three points: first,
the situation in southern Syria; secondly, the situation
in Idlib; and thirdly, the continuing violation of
humanitarian law and humanitarian principles in Syria

First, we express grave concern about the violence
in southern Syria. Hostilities in the past few weeks
have been marked by civilian casualties, attacks on
schools and hospitals and the rapid displacement of
around 180.000 individuals. We strongly condemn the
recent series of suicide attacks by the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant. As Mr. Staffan de Mistura told
us on Wednesday, 180,000 civilians have become
internally displaced as a result of the ground and aerial
offensives of the Syrian regime and its allies in the
south-west. Some of the internally displaced persons
(IDPs) near Quneitra remain without shelter and are
exposed to the sun, in temperatures reaching up to
40°C. Humanitarian partners based in Damascus have
not been granted access due to a lack of necessary
approvals by the regime. Cross-border humanitarian
operations are also suspended.

The Syrian regime should respect international
humanitarian law and provide sustained access for
humanitarian actors and protection to all people in
need, including IDPs located near the Golan border. We
call on all parties to provide cross-border humanitarian
convoys with the necessary security guarantees,
including the relevant guarantors of the de-escalation
zone, as it was called at the time. Cross-border aid
delivery remains of paramount importance and must be
facilitated where it is the most effective, or the only
way to reach those in need.

Let me welcome the humanitarian operation that
has led to the evacuation of a group of White Helmets
and their family members from southern Syria. The
Kingdom of the Netherlands is currently looking into the
possibilities of a contribution to the resettlement plans.

We pay tribute to the selfless work of the White
Helmets in all parts of Syria, who have saved countless
Syrian civilian lives. Let me underline that all sides of
the conflict should accept and protect all aid workers.
It is deeply disturbing that instead, many have to fear
for their lives because of the advance of Syrian troops
and their allies. We regret that the White Helmets in
particular have been targeted both on the ground and
here at the United Nations, by slanderous accusations.
Let me also underline the point made by our French
colleague about the need to guarantee the safety of
journalists in conflict.

That brings me to my second point - the situation
in Idlib. Currently, the Idlib region is completely
surrounded by forces of the Syrian regime. We are
deeply concerned about the fate of the 2.3 million
civilians in Idlib, of which approximately 1.3 million
are displaced persons from elsewhere in Syria. They
are under constant threat of air strikes and of hostilities
between armed groups. An assault by the Syrian regime
will lead to a humanitarian catastrophe with grave
regional consequences.

Let me stress that the civilians in Idlib are neither
terrorists, nor combatants. Civilians must be protected
during armed conflict. Medical facilities need to be
protected too, as the Council so clearly underlined in
resolution 2286 (2016). The Astana guarantors have a
particular responsibility to work on arrangements to
prevent further human suffering, protect civilians and
provide a non-violent exit to this growing tragedy. In
our opinion, the Council should send a very strong
signal to the regime and its allies not to attack Idlib. We
regret that we were unable to agree on such a signal last
Wednesday in our meeting.

That brings me to my third point - the continuing
violations of humanitarian law and humanitarian
principles in Syria. Years of bombardments, sieges and
deprivation by the Syrian regime have in the past months
led to the regime taking over several severely damaged
areas. Even now, United Nations access to those areas
is consistently denied by the regime. The Organization
is often banned from inter-agency convoys, meaning
that United Nations coordination and monitoring of the

distribution of aid is hampered. As a consequence, aid
is not being delivered to those who need it most.

Let me give an example. Between January and
April, a mere 22 per cent of aid in territories controlled
by the Syrian regime was delivered to those in acute
need. That is simply unacceptable. We therefore call
on the Syrian regime, the Russian Federation and Iran
to immediately allow unimpeded and sustained access
for all humanitarian actors. If the regime continues to
obstruct the ability of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs to work from Damascus,
it effectively blocks the possibilities for principled,
evidence-based humanitarian action in Syria. As a
consequence, many more innocent people and many
more innocent children will suffer.

In conclusion, let me stress the need for
accountability for the ongoing crimes committed in
Syria by all parties. We will continue our efforts in
that regard both on and off the Council. We call on
those with influence to ensure that Syrians in need can
be helped by the United Nations. Furthermore, they
should convince the regime to reconsider Law Number
10, as stressed by our French colleague. Complying
with international humanitarian law and providing
humanitarian access remain essential to improve
the conditions of the suffering Syrian civilians. That
particularly applies to the suffering Syrian children,
as Virginia Gamba so clearly described. Respect for
international humanitarian law is key if we want to
prevent a repetition of eastern Aleppo, eastern Ghouta
and Dar'a.

Finally, we call for assurances that humanitarian
workers in areas that have recently changed control
will be protected and that humanitarian services for the
people in those areas will continue to be available.

