Mr. De Aguiar Patriota (Brazil): I thank you and
your delegation, Madam President, for organizing this
open debate. In the face of new and evolving trends
in international terrorism. This meeting constitutes a
timely opportunity to exchange views on international
cooperation to combat terrorism and violent extremism.

Allow me to recall that there is no better forum in
which to consider this issue than the United Nations.
Terrorism is a global threat and must be treated as
such. Terrorism must be condemned in all its forms
and manifestations. The repudiation of terrorism is
enshrined in the Brazilian Constitution as a guiding
principle of our foreign policy. As a country with no
history of terrorist acts, Brazil has been attentive to
prevention, both domestically and at the regional and
subregional levels.

Prevention is always the best policy, including
in the context of fighting terrorism. We are facing a
multidimensional threat, which will be efficiently
countered only through an approach that takes into
consideration its underlying causes, in particular those
associated with protracted social, political, economic
and cultural exclusion.

As resolution 2178 (2014) acknowledges, repressive
measures cannot eliminate terrorism by themselves.
Border control, air and maritime security and law
enforcement may be the more visible features of our
common endeavour, but they can become ineffective or
even counterproductive if not coupled with efforts to
address structural factors conducive to terrorism. That
comprehensive perspective informs the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, which we support.

In that context, I would also like to recall the
importance of the dialogue among religions and
cultures. Initiatives such as the United Nations Alliance
of Civilizations can, by seeking to promote tolerance
and mutual respect, contribute to dispelling stereotypes
that tend to associate terrorism with specific cultures,
religions or ethnic groups. We must all be wary of
dangerous rhetoric and narratives that fuel xenophobia
and prejudice. I commend those Governments around
the world that have spoken out against such distortions.

International cooperation is an essential tool for
our strategy to fight terrorism. Many countries have
the political will to implement the pertinent resolutions
issued by the Security Council, but lack the capacity
to do so. As a member of the United Nations Counter-
Terrorism Centre Advisory Board, Brazil welcomes
the fact that capacity-building for Member States and
regional organizations will remain a priority for the
Centre.

Security Council resolutions 2170 (2014) and 2178
(2014) and this debate on how to better implement
them can be considered significant strides in this
Organization's efforts to counter terrorism. The
further development of international law would also
bring new impetus to our endeavour. Brazil strongly
supports the adoption of a comprehensive counter-
terrorism convention, on the understanding that it
would complement existing instruments, provide a
legal framework and direct our joint efforts in a more
coordinated way.

We insist on the importance of ensuring that all
efforts to counter terrorism are consistent with the
Charter of the United Nations, international refugee and
humanitarian law and all other norms of international
law. The fight against terrorism must also be undertaken
with full respect for human rights, including the right
to privacy. The protection of that right is crucial in
safeguarding individuals against the abuse of power.
Without it there can be no true freedom of opinion and
expression, nor can there be effective democracy.

In that context, I would like to call attention to
the recently issued report of the Special Rapporteur
on the promotion and protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism,
contained in document A/69/397. In it, Special
Rapporteur Ben Emmerson examined the use of mass
digital surveillance for counter-terrorism purposes and
considered the implications of bulk access technology
for the right to privacy. Brazil reiterates that if counter-
terrorism measures are undertaken at the expense of
international law or respect for human rights, their
legitimacy will be compromised, rendering them
ineffective. As the Secretary-General recently noted,

"Efforts to prevent and combat terrorism will fail if
the international community creates more terrorists
than it defeats by its actions" (A/68/84], para. 112).

The most pressing root causes of violent extremism
and radicalization are of a political nature. Allow me
to quote King Abdullah of Jordan, who addressed this
Council immediately after the adoption of resolution
2178 (2014):

"We cannot underestimate the recruitment power
emanating from a sense of exclusion from the
enjoyment of basic human rights" (S/PV. 72 72, p. 11).

One of the side effects of our collective failure to deal
with ongoing crises in the Middle East, especially the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, is the dissemination of
extremism and radicalization. Overcoming terrorism
necessarily involves diplomatic efforts to bring
peace, founded on justice, to conflicts that directly or
indirectly fuel terrorist agendas.

I would also like to recall that the Security Council
has a duty to condemn terrorism and to prevent its
spread in a coherent and universal manner, that is,
wherever and whenever international terrorism strikes.

Let me reaffirm the Brazilian position, according
to which there are no excuses for terrorist acts. We
reiterate our commitment to a multidimensional
response to the challenges posed by terrorism and
remain convinced that cooperation and dialogue
within the United Nations will enhance our capacity
to counter this dangerous matter. As with many items
on our agenda, we are convinced that we will succeed
only if we join efforts on the basis of shared values and
enhanced multilateral cooperation.

