The Secretary-General: Needless to say, I fully
share the regrets expressed by many members of the
Council at the fact that it has not been possible to reach
a common position. Whatever our differing views on
this complex issue, we must all feel that this is a sad
day for the United Nations and the international
community. I know that millions of people around the
world share this sense of disappointment, and are
deeply alarmed by the prospect of imminent war.

Let me here pay tribute to the United Nations
staff - both international and Iraqi - who have
worked so hard in Iraq up to the last possible moment.
That includes the inspectors, whose work has now
sadly been suspended. I would want to pay a special
tribute to Mr. Blix, Mr. ElBaradei and Mr. Lopez
Da Silva, the Humanitarian Coordinator under whose
leadership the staff worked in Iraq.

It is the plight of the Iraqi people that is now my
most immediate concern, and I have been glad to hear
that sentiment shared by all the speakers in this debate.
In the past 20 years, Iraqis have been through two
major wars, internal uprisings and conflict and more
than a decade of debilitating sanctions. The country's
vital infrastructure has been devastated, so that it no
longer meets the most basic needs of clean water,
health or education.

Already, Iraq's most vulnerable citizens - the
elderly, women and children, and the disabled - are
denied basic health care for lack of medicine and
medical equipment. Already, nearly one million Iraqi
children suffer from chronic malnutrition. Already,
Iraqis are heavily dependent on the food ration that is
handed out each month to every family in the country.
For more than 60 per cent of the population, this ration
is their main source of income. Many families have to
sell part of it to buy clothes or other essentials for their
children.

All that is true as we speak. In the short term, the
conflict that is now clearly about to start can make
things worse - perhaps much worse. I am sure all
members of this Council will agree that we must do
everything we can to mitigate this imminent disaster,
which could easily lead to epidemics and starvation.

Under international law, the responsibility for
protecting civilians in conflict falls on the belligerents.
In any area under military occupation, responsibility
for the welfare of the population falls on the occupying
Power.

Without in any way assuming or diminishing that
ultimate responsibility, we in the United Nations will
do whatever we can to help. As you know, the
humanitarian agencies of the United Nations have for
some time been engaged in preparing for this
contingency, even while we hoped it could still be
averted.

We have done our best to assess the possible
effects of war, in terms of population displacement and
human need, and to position our personnel and
equipment accordingly. For these preparations we
requested $123.5 million from donors a month ago, but
only $45 million has been pledged, and $34 million
received to date. I am afraid that we shall very soon be
coming back with an appeal for much larger sums to
finance actual relief operations - and I earnestly hope
that Member States will respond with generosity and
speed.

We have also examined the situation caused by
the suspension of the activities of the oil for food
programme in Iraq and ways that the programme could
be adjusted temporarily to enable us to continue
providing humanitarian assistance to the people of Iraq
during and after hostilities.

Such adjustments would require decisions by the
Council. I will therefore submit my specific proposals
for the Council's consideration, as suggested in your
note (S/2003/337), Mr. President.

In conclusion, let me express the hope that the
effort to relieve the sufferings of the Iraqi people and
to rehabilitate their society after so much destruction
may yet prove to be the task around which the unity of
the Council can be rebuilt.

