Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I would like to
start by thanking Mr. Mladenov for his overview of
recent developments. It is a sobering list that underlines
the urgent need for positive steps. We commend him
and his team for their persistent efforts for peace. We
also thank him for his briefing on the implementation
of resolution 2334 (2016).

Let me refer to the letter that was sent to the
Secretary-General in May, signed by 10 of the current
Security Council members, in which we requested
written reports on the implementation of resolution
2334 (2016). We welcomed the written report we
received in June and look forward to receiving written
reports in the future.

I have three points to make: first, the anniversary
of the first Oslo agreement; secondly, the threats to the
two-State solution; and thirdly, the situation in Gaza.

First, I would like to look back at the 25 years since
Oslo. On 13 September 1993, the first Oslo Accords were
signed. The handshake between Rabin and Arafat was
historic and it heralded a period in which peace could
be achieved, or so we all anticipated or hoped. Much
has been accomplished since then. The Palestinian
Authority has been set up, a transfer of competences
has taken place and the Palestinian institutions were

judged to be ready to take on the responsibilities of a
State. That is no small feat in such a short period.

However, the process remains incomplete. The
transfer of responsibilities has stopped. The division
between Gaza and the West Bank is entrenching itself
further. Settlements continue to grow unabated. In
1993, it seemed difficult to have to resettle 100,000
settlers. But to resolve the current challenge of 600,000
settlers in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, is a
task of enormous proportions. In July and August, over
2,000 new housing units were announced by Israel. The
Kingdom of the Netherlands condemns those decisions.
The number of advanced housing units increased
severely in the second quarter of 2018, compared
to the first quarter of the year, and also compared to
the same period in 2017. Settlements are illegal under
international law, and that policy undermines the
prospects for peace, as was also reconfirmed by the
Council in resolution 2334 (2016).

The stalled peace process has led to disillusion and
frustration over the past 25 years. Three-quarters of
the Palestinian people believe that the situation today
is worse than before the Oslo Accords. Among Israelis
and Palestinians, support for the two-State solution
is now below 50 per cent, yet nobody sees a better
alternative. We are deeply worried by those trends and
the lack of positive steps on either side that would help
to reverse them.

Secondly, I turn my attention to the threats to
the two-State solution. Nothing shows better why the
trends must be reversed than their impact on the lives of
Israelis and Palestinians. As others have said, the entire
village of Khan Al-Ahmar is slated for demolition and
eviction. We reiterate the call of the European Union
on the Israeli Government to reconsider its plan to
demolish the village, including its school, and displace
its residents. Its demolition would have very serious
consequences, both for the residents of that community,
including its children, and for the prospects of the two-
State solution.

The slated demolition does not stand on its own.
For Palestinians, it is nearly impossible to obtain
building permits. According to the United Nations,
in 2016 over 16,000 demolition orders were pending
against Palestinian buildings in Area C alone. At the
same time, the Israeli settlements continue to grow.
Last weekend, an Israeli civilian was again stabbed
to death. The Kingdom of the Netherlands strongly
condemns such terrorist attacks. There is no excuse
for terrorism.

Thirdly, I will speak on the situation in Gaza.
The humanitarian situation there is getting worse by
the day. We were close to a complete resumption of
hostilities in the summer. We welcome the progress
made towards calm, under the leadership of the United
Nations and Egypt. However, the underlying issues
remain unresolved, as Nickolay Mladenov again made
clear today.

Unemployment has risen to over 50 per cent.
Protests continue at the border, as sadly illustrated
by yesterday's events, with more victims as a result.
We call on all relevant parties to ensure that protests
remain peaceful. We also urgently repeat our call upon
Israel to ensure that its responses are proportionate and
necessary at all times, in line with its obligations under
international law. The high number of victims raises
serious questions regarding the proportionality of the
Israeli response.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands supports initiatives
to improve living conditions in Gaza. Large-scale
desalination projects in Gaza or connecting Gaza to
natural gas can contribute substantially to improving
the lives of people in Gaza. However, Gaza should not
need to be a recipient of humanitarian aid. All sides
must take steps to revive the economy, through, inter
alia, a predictable opening of the crossings, while
taking into account Israel's security needs.

The steps called for in resolution 1860 (2009) are
still as relevant today as they were in 2009. In that
regard, let me reiterate our support for the efforts of
Mr. Mladenov. We call upon all sides to constructively
engage in order to find a durable solution for many of
the problems Gaza faces. In the absence of economic
recovery, people are dependent on humanitarian aid.

We remain deeply concerned by the financial
crisis of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA).
We support it in its tremendous work for the most
vulnerable people in Gaza and the other areas of
operation. We welcome the additional funding by new
and old partners of UNRWA. We commend UNRWA
for its cost-saving measures and decision to open its
schools, despite the uncertain situation.

In conclusion, I started by reflecting on the 25
years that have passed since Oslo. Nobody thought
peace would be easy. We take hope from the fact that
many times parties have come close to an agreement.
We encourage the Palestinian and Israeli leaderships
not to turn their backs to each other, but to continue on
the complex road towards peace. Only they can decide
the final status issues, and in our view all final status
issues can be resolved if the political will exists.

We believe that the well-known parameters still
hold the best framework for any resolution. First, there
must be an agreement on the borders of the two States,
based on the 4 June 1967 lines, with equivalent land
swaps as may be agreed between the parties. Secondly,
security arrangements for the Palestinians must respect
their sovereignty and show that the occupation is over;
and for the Israelis, they must protect their security. The
resurgence of terrorism must be prevented and security
threats, including the new and vital threats in the
region, must be addressed. Thirdly, a just, fair, agreed
and realistic solution to the refugee question must be
put in place. Fourthly, the aspirations of both parties
for Jerusalem must be fulfilled. A way must be found
through negotiations to resolve the status of Jerusalem
as the future capital of both States.

