Mr. Spatafora (Italy): I warmly welcome Special
Envoys Jan Eliasson and Salim Ahmed Salim back to
New York, and I thank them for the very lucid
briefings, as well as for their tireless efforts to achieve
peace in Darfur. In fact, what we have seen today is a
very disturbing and gloomy picture - indeed, the word
"gloomy" was used by Mr. Salim. And as Special
Envoy Eliasson put it, "this intractable conflict is still
unfolding" (supra).

We understand that there is frustration and fatigue
there. I think that we have to prevent frustration and
fatigue from overcoming us in the Security Council as
well. We have to react, and we have to prevent. Like
others, we regret that despite all the efforts there has
been no real progress in the political process for Darfur
since the Addis Ababa conclusions of November 2006.
Since the various tracks - political, security
and peacekeeping, humanitarian, rule of law and
impunity - are interrelated and mutually reinforcing,
lack of progress in one has a negative impact on the
others. Breaking this vicious circle should be our
priority. In this we will require a higher degree of
cohesion and unity among Security Council members.

I wonder also whether what Mr. Salim said was
exactly the right point, that there is "a need to rethink
the strategy on the way forward" (supra). I will come
back to that. Is it a question of rethinking the strategy
or is it a question of shortcomings in the delivery of the
strategy that we have. We will have to think about that.

Of course, I think that any new strategy has to
remain within the six milestones described by
Ambassador Eliasson. I shall not elaborate on this, as
Ambassador Sawers has already done so and I fully
agree with what he said. Whatever our strategy, it must
remain within those milestones. Of course, as
Ambassador Kumalo said, we have to be sure that all
the pieces are in place; we must not be selecting,
picking and choosing here and there. What I am not so
sure about is whether I can agree with Ambassador
Kumalo when he says that we have to be humble
enough, when we hear the appeals for help, to say that
we are not in a position to help. I do not know ifI
would be comfortable with that. Yes, there is
frustration and fatigue, but what is important is that
there is still hope. I think we must not remove the
oxygen from that hope. If we give the perception that
for the moment we cannot help, that hope might fade,
which I would not like to see. It is our responsibility
not to betray the small hope that, one hopes, remains,
and we must ensure that there is follow up.

The Security Council has been limited in its
action on Darfur by a sort of hesitation to openly and
resolutely address each problem on its own terms. Too
often we around this table have been constrained by the
self-imposed attitude that we must be comprehensive at
all costs. We have not been strong enough in
addressing the Government's responsibilities regarding
UNAMID or the protection of civilians because of the
Government's valid concerns with respect to the
political process. At the same time, we have refrained
from using all the means at our disposal to persuade
the rebel movements to join the peace process, because
we did not want the Government to see this as a reward
for its behaviour.

The result of the situation is there for everybody
to see. I think we should honestly assess our
performance and renew our collective capacity to
address each track of the Darfur crisis with the same
determination, but with the necessary individual focus.

Italy sees merit in the proposal mentioned by
Special Envoy Salim of a high-level meeting on
Darfur, put forward during the recent informal
consultations held in Geneva on 4 and 5 June.
However, the meeting would have to be well prepared
in advance. What is needed now is leadership, direction
and a new strategy, not just brainstorming. The time for
brainstorming has passed. As I said before, we should
also be clear on whether we want to adapt our strategy
or to improve its delivery. But the idea is worth
studying, and my delegation is ready to engage in any
further work on it.

I would also like to support what was said by the
Special Envoys about the crucial need to ensure the
participation of civil society. This is particularly
important in a situation in which, because of the
fragmentation of the rebel movements, on which
Ambassador Eliasson has put the accent, it is difficult
to understand who is representing whom. The
representation issue is particularly serious ahead of
next year's national elections. Italy has in fact chosen
to direct much of its aid to Darfur to civil society, most
recently through a contribution of $3 million to the
Darfur Community Peace and Stability Fund.

Finally, Mr. President, thanks to your delegation
we had the privilege last week of hearing important
representatives of broader public opinion, who
reminded us of the reality of the conflict and of what is
expected of the Security Council.

Following that meeting, I am even more
convinced that the worst thing we can do is to become
accustomed to the lack of progress and give in to the
sense of frustration and fatigue that I mentioned earlier.
We must accept responsibility, individually and
collectively, for resolving the crisis and not let this
sense of fatigue prevail, both for the sake of the people
of Darfur and for the sake of the credibility of the
United Nations.

