Mr. Helg (Switzerland) (spoke in French): Peace
does not last unless it is founded on justice and respect
for the law. This idea is expressed in the Preamble to
the United Nations Charter and is one of the
foundations of the Organization.
Justice and respect for law must prevail first and
foremost in relations between States. They must also
constantly guide the action of the Security Council and
the other bodies of the United Nations. Those two
aspects are fundamental. However, our attention today
is focused on a third aspect: the promotion of justice
and the rule of law within societies that have been torn
apart by war. I thank the United Kingdom for having
taken the initiative to launch a process of reflection on
the role of the United Nations in this area.

In his statement to the Security Council last week
(4833rd meeting), the Secretary-General addressed the
dilemmas which the simultaneous search for peace and
justice can sometimes encounter. When the immediate
objective is to stop a bloody civil war and to save the
lives of innocent people, justice perhaps seems like a
remote ideal. Sometimes, it is even perceived as an
obstacle to peace. But peace does not just mean a halt
to hostilities. It is lasting only if the society concerned
finds a way leading to justice and reconciliation. In the
long term, justice always acts in the service of peace. It
is therefore important to prevent impunity. A peace
agreement is not worthy of its name if it contains an
amnesty for war crimes, genocide or other crimes
against humanity.

In creating the two International Criminal
Tribunals, the Security Council acknowledged the link
between peace and international justice. The
establishment of the International Criminal Court is a
response to the same logic of complementarity between
the pursuit of justice and the promotion of peace.
While the International Criminal Court is independent
from the United Nations, both institutions will benefit
from a close and cooperative relationship.

The establishment of democratic institutions and
the institution of the rule of law are equally essential to
prevent conflicts or re-igniting hostilities. Special
assistance must be given to the parliament, the courts,
lawyers associations and the police. Elections often
signal the end of international involvement, but in
themselves they are not enough to guarantee the rule of
law. More is required to ensure the submission of
institutions to the law, the separation of powers and the
free exercise of fundamental freedoms.

From El Salvador to East Timor and Kosovo, the
United Nations has acquired solid experience in
promoting justice and the rule of law. Henceforth it is
important to integrate this dimension in United Nations
peace operations more systematically. Every Security
Council mandate concerning post-conflict situations
should include provisions on promoting justice and the
rule of law.

Justice - with its three pillars of the judiciary,
the police and a correctional system - must be a
constituent part of any peace and reconstruction
process. In concrete terms, this means that as soon as a
peacekeeping operation is being considered, the United
Nations must start to plan its engagement and must be
given the means to act rapidly and in coordination with
the other potential players.

Switzerland welcomes the proposal of the
Secretary-General to present a report on this subject. It
invites him to highlight examples of good practice. In
preparing that report it is desirable to undertake the
broadest possible consultations within the United
Nations system, but also among relevant institutional
players and civil society.

International organizations such as the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), the Council of Europe and La Francophonie
have been involved in promoting democracy and the
rule of law for many years. Their experiences should
be better known within the United Nations to allow
opportunities for strengthening institutional
partnerships. Switzerland also invites the Secretary-
General to address in his report the obstacles which
prevent national authorities from prosecuting
international crimes and to assess ways to overcome
such obstacles.

I conclude by emphasizing that Switzerland is
very interested in this initiative on the promotion of
justice and the rule of law. It is very keen to contribute
to the current reflection on ways to strengthen United
Nations action and offers its assistance in those areas
where it possesses relevant experience, such as
constitutionalism and transitional justice.

