Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to start by expressing Egypt's firm condemnation
of any use of chemical weapons or weapons of mass
destruction by any party. We especially condemn the
confirmed use of chemical weapons in more than one
incident in Syria against our brothers the Syrian people,
as reported by the Joint Investigative Mechanism of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) and the United Nations, which is responsible
for investigating such incidents.

We do not understand how such crimes can continue
to be ignored, with no thorough or just accountability.
Egypt has therefore always affirmed the importance of
holding any party responsible for such inhumane acts
accountable, whatever their justification, including by
the Security Council and based on agreed rules and
principles and on effective evidence-gathering and
investigation. In that regard, I deplore the division
within the Council and our failure to come up with a
resolution that can ensure accountability untainted by
the politicization and polarization that have afflicted
the international arena.

With regard to the reports of yesterday's sad
incidents in Khan Shaykhun in Idlib, I urge all parties
to cooperate closely with the OPCW Fact-finding
Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic in order to enable
it to determine the facts on the ground. I call on the
Mission to reach its conclusions as quickly as possible
so as to enable the Joint Investigative Mechanism to
conduct its activities in accordance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions. We will therefore support
any serious action in the Council to address this and
other incidents and hold those responsible accountable.
In that regard, we stress the importance of focusing on
and addressing the issue of the production, possession
and use by any non-State actors of weapons of mass
destruction, which constitutes a threat to the region
and the world, particularly in View of the fact that the
Security Council lacks the legal instruments that could
deter and address such threats.

The killing and targeting of civilians have become
a painful reality that is part of the Syrian people's
daily life. We are now used to hearing death and
displacement in Syria spoken of in terms of figures
and numbers, to be used and exploited purely for
political purposes. Regrettably, after the Council had
succeeded in agreeing on the parameters of a political
process for addressing the threat of chemical weapons
and ensuring humanitarian access in Syria, divisions
and infighting within the Council - even on issues
unrelated to Syria f appear to be threatening the
prospects for a settlement once again. I would like
to once again emphasize the importance of ensuring
that the international mechanisms can investigate
all war crimes committed in Syria in order to ensure
accountability through a serious and honest approach.

I urge Council members to resume serious
political dialogue with a View to addressing the Syrian
crisis, while avoiding the atmosphere of competition,
polarization and mutual blaming in the media that
has characterized recent years. It is worth noting that
millions of innocent civilians are paying the price, and
that the people of the region will bear the brunt of this
crisis for years to come.

