Mr. Baylan (Sweden): Let me begin by thanking
the Secretary-General, the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission and especially Ms. Fatimata Toure
for their very strong testimony to what this all about.
Let me also thank you, Mr. President, for offering a
platform for today's discussion.

I align myself with the statement to be delivered
later today on behalf of the Nordic countries.

Never has the world been in greater need of
effective peacekeeping, and never have the challenges
peacekeepers encounter been more complex or more
immense. Consequently, it has never been more
important for United Nations peace operations to be
optimally configured to deliver for peace and security
and to meet today's challenges.

In recent years, important and thorough reviews
have been conducted, seeking to adapt United Nations
peace operations in light of changing conflict dynamics
and limited resources. Yet progress on implementation
has been limited. We welcome renewed efforts,
spearheaded by the Secretary-General, to strengthen
global partnerships for peacekeeping and to move
from policy to practice and from words to action. We
need more action. Otherwise, we will not make peace
operations fit for the twenty-first century.

We must strive to ensure that the United Nations as
a whole is able to engage early, flexibly and effectively
across the conflict spectrum. That is essential if we
are to deliver on our ultimate goal of peace, security
and sustainable development. Therefore, Sweden
stands firmly behind the Secretary-General's reform
agenda, putting prevention and sustaining peace at
the heart of our efforts. Peacekeeping is one of the
instruments available in that regard, and effective and
efficient peacekeeping can reduce the human suffering
costs and save resources in the long run. Our guiding
principle must be to make the most possible difference
on the ground.

Like the Netherlands, Sweden has a long and broad
history in United Nations peacekeeping operations.
Since 1948, when the first observers were sent to the
United Nations Truce Supervision Organization, more
than 80,000 Swedish women and men have participated
in United Nations peace operations. Sweden currently
deploys about 350 military, police, correction officers
and civilians to United Nations peacekeeping and
contributes approximately $70 million to peacekeeping
operations per year.

In 2014, Sweden reinforced its contribution to
United Nations peacekeeping through its contribution
to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). Drawing
on that experience, I would like to raise three points
in particular that we believe would contribute to more
effective peacekeeping.

First, let us ensure that we can make informed
decisions. The purpose of today's debate is to clarify
the responsibilities of each and every actor involved
in peacekeeping. To assume those responsibilities and
make informed decisions, we need the relevant facts.
The Security Council should be provided, ahead of
mandate renewals, with information on options and
trade-offs between mission tasks, costs, safety and
security and resources and on significant changes in
operational environments.

We always need to apply a gender perspective
and a whole-of-mission approach and make sure that
gender-disaggregated data is available. Integrated
analysis should also guide the force generation
process. Reporting on risks and under-performance, in
particular as related to the protection of civilians, must
be coherent and systematic. We need to encourage and
find models for frank dialogue in that regard, bringing
together all the relevant actors.

Secondly, visions and mandates must be translated
into results on the ground. Peace operations must
be integrated and fit for purpose. Three aspects are
particularly important in that regard: situational
awareness, adequate leadership and the performance
of troops.

In our own experience with MINUSMA,
peacekeeping intelligence is vital to ensure informed
decisions and operational planning, as the President
highlighted. Joint analysis and information-sharing
must be systematized from the outset of a mission
in order to contribute to more effective protection of
civilians and of United Nations personnel. It is also
crucial that missions are able and ready to act on the
information and early warnings they receive.

That brings me to the issue of leadership. The
Secretary-General's reform agenda foresees greater
delegation of authority to the field. That, together
with the multidimensional nature of peace operations,
requires well-prepared and cohesive leadership with
clarity of roles in crisis management situations. Current
selection processes for senior mission leadership should
be reviewed and thejoint training of management teams
enhanced, encompassing both civilian and military
staff, and also police components.

The legitimacy of peacekeeping depends on the
performance and accountability of troops. We all have
responsibilities in that regard. Uniformed units must
have the right training, skills and equipment to be able
to protect civilians and themselves and to deliver on
mandates in accordance with applicable law. To achieve
that, we need to hold troop-contributing countries
accountable, support capacity-building with mobile
training teams and focus on training Headquarters staff
and on the selection of qualified staff officers.

The sexual exploitation and abuse of the most
vulnerable people by those sent to protect them is a
despicable act. We strongly support ongoing efforts to
prevent and combat sexual exploitation and abuse within
the United Nations system. However, more can and
must be done, including ensuring that all perpetrators
are held to account. The Secretary-General's proposed
measures must now be properly implemented so
that zero tolerance of sexual harassment becomes
a reality. That is crucial to maintaining the legitimacy
of peacekeeping.

Thirdly, peace is best pursued in partnership. With
regional organizations actively engaged in political
processes and security efforts in United Nations
mission settings, strategic coherence is a prerequisite
for success. Our interventions should be based on a
joint political strategy that clarifies roles, end states
and mandates. Training and capacity-building, counter-
terrorism operations, and the fight against human
trafficking and organized crime also need to be part of
the dialogue with partners.

In addition, frank discussions should characterize
our relations with host nations, before and during the
deployment of missions. We need the political will to
be open and transparent on mission performance, and
the courage to continuously ask ourselves how we can
do better and to act when we can.

Let me end on a positive note. Even if there are many
challenges ahead of us that can be solved only by all
of us together - the Security Council, the Secretariat,
troop-contributing countries and host nations - we
have seen successes in peacekeeping missions. The
United Nations Mission in Liberia, which is closing
after 15 years, is a powerful example of the positive
contribution that peacekeeping can bring by supporting
national efforts to build sustainable peace and stability.
Careful and early planning for the transition across
the whole of the United Nations, including through the
Peacebuilding Commission, has also laid the foundation
for those gains to be sustained into the future. A long-
term commitment and adequate support and funding
are needed to ensure that this is possible. We must learn
from those kinds of success stories.

Former Secretary-General Dag Hammarskjold
once said:

"The concept of loyalty is distorted when it
is understood to mean blind acceptance. It is
correctly interpreted when it is assumed to cover
honest criticism."

That is our main message today. Our loyalty to and trust
in United Nations peacekeeping remains firm, but our
loyalty also requires us to continue to critically assess
and review our respective roles and responsibilities. We
must move from talk to action.

