Mrs. Chikava (Zimbabwe): At the outset, as this is
the first time that I take the floor during your presidency
of the Security Council, let me congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency for
the month of July and for the able manner in which you
have conducted the business of the Council.

Zimbabwe aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on
behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, as
well as with the African Union decision adopted at the
Summit of Heads of State and Government in Malabo
in June.

I wish to convey deep sorrow and sincere
condolences to the Palestinian people and their
leadership on the tragic loss of life and the devastation
they have suffered as a result of the indiscriminate and
disproportionate acts ofviolence by the occupying force
in the Gaza Strip. The senseless killing of civilians
clearly constitutes deliberate reprisals and collective
punishment against a whole civilian population, in
serious breach of international humanitarian law.

Zimbabwe is extremely outraged at the ongoing
bombardment, coupled with the ground invasion, against
densely populated civilian areas, which is causing
wanton destruction to vital civilian infrastructure and
disrupting all aspects of life in Gaza, where people are
already suffering under the illegal Israeli blockade.

Israeli Defense Forces actions in Gaza are
unjustifiable under any pretext. Zimbabwe calls
for an immediate halt to the violence. Israel should
respect international humanitarian law and ensure the
protection of civilians.

Zimbabwe expresses grave concern about the dire
humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip caused by
widespread destruction and damage to civilian property.
There is an urgent need to assist the Palestinian people
through the provision of emergency aid and relief to
meet the needs of vulnerable civilians. We call on
the international community to provide emergency
assistance to alleviate the suffering of the Palestinian
people.

It is unacceptable that the Israeli military violates
the territorial integrity of Gaza and the human rights
of the Palestinian people, killing hundreds and injuring
thousands, while the Security Council fails to intervene
decisively. The Security Council must uphold its
Charter responsibilities and act to protect innocent
Palestinian civilians. The international community
must act in unison to stop Israel's relentless acts of
collective punishment on the Palestinian people.

The ongoing injustice and culture of impunity by
Israel must stop. The Security Council must hold Israel
accountable for its actions and compel it to comply with
international law. The collective failure of the Security
Council and the international community has fostered
Israeli's flagrant violations of all Security Council
resolutions on the Arab-Israeli conflict. We also call on
Israel to stop the expansion ofillegal settlements, to lift
the blockade on Gaza and to return to the negotiating
table.

We urge the Security Council to play a more active
role to encourage the resumption ofpeace talks aimed at
resolving the Arab-Israeli conflict in accordance with
the principles of international law and all the relevant
United Nations resolutions. Zimbabwe supports
negotiations towards a just, comprehensive and lasting
peace in the Middle East leading to the restoration of
the Palestinian people's legitimate right to establish
an independent State co-existing peacefully with the
State of Israel. There is no option to peaceful dialogue
to achieve a two-State solution based on the June 1967
borders.

In conclusion, Zimbabwe reaffirms its unwavering
support and solidarity with the Palestinian people
in their quest to realize their inalienable rights and
legitimate national aspirations for freedom, justice,
dignity and peace.

