Mr. Gunnarsson (Iceland): Allow me to thank
the Japanese presidency of the Security Council for
organizing this quarterly open debate on the situation
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.

The Middle East region remains steeped in
conflict and crisis. Despite determined efforts by the
international community, the suffering of millions
of civilians continues. Neighbouring countries to the
conflicts continue to be severely impacted. Among
the intractable problems facing the region, the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict should be soluble, but actions by
both sides have continued to undermine the only viable
path to peace, namely, the two-State solution.

We welcome the Quartet report, which provides a
clear description of the principal threats to achieving
a negotiated peace in the form of a two-State solution.
Violence and incitement to violence on both sides
receive due attention. The wave of violent acts against
ordinary Israelis, settler Violence against Palestinians,
rocket attacks from Gaza and disproportionate security
action by Israeli forces all widen the gulf that will need
to be bridged.

The report also describes the detrimental effects of
settlement expansion, land designations for exclusive
Israeli use and the denial of Palestinian development and
demolitions of Palestinian structures, and urges Israel
to implement positive and significant policy shifts,
including transferring powers and responsibilities in
Area C.

We welcome France's initiative to assist in finding
a way for the parties to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
to achieve peace, as well as France's offer to coordinate
an international conference before the end of the year.

The Quartet report provides a basis for action,
first of all by the parties to the conflict. The
10 recommendations are addressed mainly to them.
But the report also provides a basis for concerted
action by the Security Council. The report calls upon
each side to independently demonstrate, through
policies and actions, a genuine commitment to the
two-State solution. But breaches of commitments have
been ongoing. There is an opportunity for the Security
Council to back up the recommendations of the Quartet
with clear instructions to the parties. It is time that the
Council put its weight behind the Quartet's conclusions
that continuing on the current course will make the
two-State solution increasingly remote. The alternative,
according to the Quartet, is entrenching a one-State
reality of perpetual occupation and conflict that is
incompatible with realizing the national aspirations of
both peoples.

We encourage the Security Council to take action
and to back the recommendations of the Quartet by
way of a draft resolution. We also join in encouraging
both parties to foster a climate of tolerance that can
strengthen the foundations for peace and counter
Violent extremism.

