Mr. Benmehidi (Algeria) (spoke in French): I
would like first of all to convey to you, Sir, my
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council. I would also like, on behalf of the
Algerian delegation, to thank Ambassador Motoc and
the Romanian mission for their excellent work during
the Romanian presidency in July.

I would like to thank Mr. Hedi Annabi for his
excellent introduction to the report on the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK). I would also like to pay tribute to Mr. Harri
Holkeri for his endeavours and for the dedication that
he showed at the head of UNMIK. Our congratulations
also go to his successor, Mr. Seren Jessen-Petersen,
and we wish him every success.

The current report is of particular importance as it
comes four months after the clashes and acts of
violence that shook Kosovo in March. It is important
also because it enables the Council to assess the
progress made in implementing the Kosovo Standards
Implementation Plan, in restoring trust and in
reconstructing property damaged or destroyed during
those deplorable events. Those are priority tasks that
promote understanding and coexistence among all
Kosovars.
In that regard, we welcome the progress achieved
in those areas. The commitment of Kosovo leaders to
completing rapidly the reconstruction of damaged
property and to relaunching the return process for
displaced persons, the adoption of a joint declaration
on the establishment of a ministry for community
matters, human rights and returns and the finalization
of a framework document for the reform of local
administration signal Kosovo's positive development
and the beginning of a process of detente, which
augurs well for the improvement of the situation in the
interest of all. Such measures well help consolidate
Kosovar society and prevent regrettable inter-ethnic
clashes from recurring. They will also create
conditions of security and will have a positive impact
on the process of sustainable return for displaced
persons and on the freedom of movement.

The creation of an economically prosperous,
democratic, tolerant and multi-ethnic Kosovo remains
our common goal. Achieving that goal will inevitably
require great effort and the full implementation of
resolution 1244 (1999) and the policy of "standards
before status". The leaders of Kosovo must shoulder
their responsibilities and constructively support their
implementation. We believe that a discourse promoting
unity and not the division of Kosovars according to
their ethnic background would assist the efforts
undertaken in Kosovo, because Kosovo belongs to all
Kosovars.

The international community must create the
right conditions for the rapid and successful
achievement of the eight standards in order then to
address the fundamental question of the final status of
Kosovo.

Furthermore, we believe that direct dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina, the active participation
of all in the Provisional Institutions and the settlement
of the problem of parallel structures in Kosovo are all
necessary for the success of efforts to restore trust,
strengthen ties and promote reconciliation among all
Kosovars.

Finally, we believe that Kosovo's economic
recovery, the reduction of the troubling unemployment
rate and the improvement of social conditions will
contribute to the implementation of all priority
measures and enable progress in achieving the
standards for Kosovo.

In conclusion, I would be remiss ifI failed to
welcome Mr. Zoran Loncar of Serbia and Montenegro,
and I thank him for his excellent presentation on the
situation in Kosovo.

