Mr. De Ruyt (Belgium) (Spoke in French): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union.
The countries of Central and Eastern Europe associated
with the European Union - Bulgaria, the Czech
Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland,
Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia - the associated
countries of Cyprus, Malta and Turkey, as well as
Liechtenstein, the European Free Trade Association
country belonging to the European Economic Area,
align themselves with this statement.

The document before us, the addendum to the
report of the Panel of Experts on the Illegal
Exploitation of Natural Resources and Other Forms of
Wealth of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
provides us with a detailed account of a grave and
rather cheerless situation. It must nevertheless be read
and, more to the point, studied, and we feel that it is
essential to consider it with minute attention. We would
like to warmly thank Ambassador Kassem and his team
for the remarkable efforts they have made and the
meticulousness with which, in a difficult context, they
carried out this investigation.

The report shows that a conflict that was initially
political and security-related in nature is becoming a
struggle for riches. The parties involved have an
interest in perpetuating the conflict, whose economic
dimension, at the cost of war, is becoming a guiding
force. Based as it is on a particularly cynical approach,
this situation is above all tragic for the Congolese
people, who, in the rationale being followed, see no
peace and security on the horizon. The fate of the
Congolese people is in part determined by this rush for
lucre. They are the victims of their country's natural
resources, whereas they should instead be the
beneficiaries.

What is more, this situation is seriously
complicating the efforts to restore peace. Specifically,
the parties, with the help of the international
community, are using political tools in a conflict which
has to some extent become an economic struggle in
which shifting alliances and the fragmentation of rebel
movements seem to be dictated in part by the profit
motive. Therein lies one of the key elements of a
resolution of the conflict.

The European Union condemns this plundering of
natural resources of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. It must stop, and here the primary
responsibility lies with the parties themselves. The
international community, for its part, must take action,
setting up control mechanisms and appropriate
measures to halt smuggling. There have been
praiseworthy initiatives, such as the Kimberley process
on the role of diamonds in conflict, and we consider
that this course should continue to be followed. We
welcome the encouraging outcome of the meeting held
in Gaborone, and eagerly await its follow-up by the
General Assembly. But individual countries also have a
contribution to make. Those cited in the report in
particular must seriously study the information it
contains and take the necessary measures. It is in that
spirit that the States members of the European Union
have taken due note of that information.

It is clear that finding appropriate ways to combat
this exploitation is no simple matter. Today's meeting
is one step in the process of consideration and analysis
that must be pursued; the recommendations of the
Panel of Experts can enhance that process. The
mandate of the Panel should be renewed in order to
maintain the very useful monitoring that its activities
have thus far made possible. In that context, we feel
that, in determining what follow-up it intends to give to
the report, the Security Council should be guided by
certain fundamental objectives. First, the follow-up
must contribute to the dynamic of the Lusaka process,
and must thus form part of the overall framework for
seeking a political solution to the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Secondly, the fate
of the Congolese people must be at the centre of all
concerns.

We note that the Panel proposes a moratorium on
certain resources. We believe that we must ensure that
the few resources still genuinely in the hands of the
Congolese people are not taken away from them, and
that any restrictive measures should be carefully
targeted against those responsible for the plundering.
Here I would point out that the aim of the measures
should be precisely to enable the Congolese people to
benefit from the natural resources of their country.

The report also makes reference to a plan for
rebuilding the Democratic Republic of the Congo. That
is the objective of the European Union, which remains
fully prepared to mobilize considerable resources,
depending on the concrete progress made on various
aspects of the peace process. The inter-Congolese
dialogue is an important element of the peace process.
We welcome the progress already made in that regard,
and we encourage the parties to make every possible
effort to make the planned meeting in South Africa a
success.

In that connection, the European Union fully
shares the concern of the Panel of Experts about the
role that international aid could be playing in financing
the continuation of the conflict. That issue requires a
responsible approach by both bilateral and multilateral
donors.

Finally, the European Union considers that the
recommendation that all concession agreements and all
commercial agreements and contracts be reviewed and
revised to address and correct all irregularities is a
measure that ought to be pursued.

The exploitation of natural and human resources
is a key factor in the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. It must be the object of very
close and urgent attention by the international
community, on the basis of a comprehensive strategy.

