Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
thank Ambassador Takasu for his report and for his
truly able leadership of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006).

It has been a busy and difficult three months for
the Committee, a period in which, as the report makes
clear, a pattern of sanctions violations has emerged. As
the report notes, there were two violations of Security
Council resolution 1747 (2007) of a similar nature in
this reporting period: first, the M/V Hansa India
interdiction in October and, later, the F rancop seizure
in November.

09-642 1 7
We are grateful for the prompt, effective and
responsible action of all States concerned with those
interdictions and seizures and for their cooperation
with the Committee in investigating the cases. That has
ensured that the prohibited arms and related material
have been neither returned to Iran nor allowed onward
to their intended destinations.

Those incidents leave no doubt that Iran is
determined to flout the requirements of the Security
Council, but they also show that the international
community is determined that Iran abide by
international rules and that mandatory Security Council
resolutions must be upheld.

It is worth restating the reasons for these
measures. Iran lost the trust of the international
community by hiding the most sensitive aspects of its
programme for nearly 20 years, by failing to
implement International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) transparency measures, and by refusing to
answer all the questions put to it by the IAEA as it
sought to establish the facts.

The most recent report by former IAEA Director
General Mr. ElBaradei concludes, as his previous
reports have done, that he was unable to verify that
Iran's nuclear programme is for exclusively peaceful
purposes. It makes clear that Iran has not suspended its
enrichment-related activities or its work on heavy
water-related projects, as required by the Security
Council.

The report also covers the IAEA's initial
conclusions following its inspection of the enrichment
facility at Qom. Development of that site was in
contravention of five Security Council resolutions. The
Agency makes clear that it was inconsistent with Iran's
obligations under the subsidiary arrangements of its
Safeguards Agreement. Those state that Iran must
inform the Agency of new nuclear facilities at the time
of the decision to construct.

It is essential that Iran suspend all enrichment-
related activities, including any further construction
work at Qom. Iran asserts that it began construction of
the Qom facility in 2007. The Agency makes clear that
it has information that shows that Iran started
construction before that date, noting that Iran's
explanation about the purpose and chronology of its
design and construction requires further clarification.
The report also shows that Iran has continued to
ignore the Agency's crucial questions over its
weaponization activities. The report states that the
Agency is also still awaiting Iran's response to its
repeated requests for access to persons, information
and locations identified in the alleged studies
documents. The report concludes again that, until those
issues are clarified and until Iran implements the
additional protocol, the Agency will not be in a
position to provide credible assurance about the
absence of undeclared nuclear activities by Iran.

Iran's refusal to respond positively to the IAEA's
proposed agreement on the provision of fuel to the
Tehran nuclear research reactor is also disappointing.
The deal offered a fair, viable and transparent means of
meeting Iran's needs. It would have improved the
prospects for a successful negotiation with Iran.
Instead, Iran has shown once again its unwillingness to
engage seriously with the international community.

That proposed agreement showed that the
international community does not wish to deny Iran its
right to civil nuclear power. We would support its
development of peaceful nuclear energy providing that
it meets its international obligations, and the generous
E3+3 offer contains everything that Iran needs to
pursue a modern civil nuclear power programme,
which it claims is its aim.

However, Iran has taken every opportunity to
delay and protract our efforts to reach agreement on
that issue. The only reasonable conclusion that can be
drawn is that its responses are calculated to buy time
and to try to divide the international community.

The IAEA Board of Governors voted
overwhelmingly to support the IAEA in its efforts to
get answers to important questions. The vote sent a
8

strong signal to Tehran. Iran's response was to
announce the construction of even more enrichment
facilities, to threaten to cease contact with the IAEA
and to speculate about leaving the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. Instead of
engaging with us, Iran chooses to provoke and
dissemble. Iran can flaunt its isolation, but that will
only increase the determination and unity of the
international community. I urge Iran to recognize that
and to accept the outstretched hand that is on offer.

We need to dissuade Iran from continuing to
develop and acquire proliferation-sensitive technology
and materials. That risks sparking a regional nuclear
arms race. In a region that already faces huge security
challenges, nuclear proliferation would be disastrous
for regional stability.

The international community has been very
patient, but that patience is running out. If Iran
continues to choose not to engage with us, we shall
need to seek further sanctions. Our dual-track strategy
will continue. It involves pressure to encourage the
Iranians to comply and to negotiate seriously, at the
same time as engagement to allow negotiations to
begin when the Iranians are prepared to take the E3+3
offer seriously.

We are 100 per cent committed to solving those
issues diplomatically. We hope that Iran's leaders are
too, but ultimately that is a Choice that only they can
make.

