Mr. Meron: I would like at the outset to thank
the members of the Council for their support, their
comments and their questions. I note in particular
comments made with regard to the overarching
principle of justice and accountability and to the denial
of impunity, and in the context of the target date for the
completion strategy.

I am also grateful to several members of the
Council for their comments regarding the negative and
dangerous effects of the current financial freeze. I hope
that the membership at large will note the appeals
voiced today by members of the Council to the
membership at large to pay their arrears as soon as
possible. What is involved here is not just a question of
a technical payment; it is nothing less than the
commitment of our United Nations community to
principles of justice.

I would now like to turn to specific questions
asked of me and of my colleagues. I will start with the
representative of France. The question was, how and
when would cases be transferred to national
jurisdictions, and under what conditions? As I
indicated very briefly in my report this morning, the
situation is somewhat different with regard to the
several States formed on the territory of the former
Yugoslavia. As regards Bosnia and Herzegovina, the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) has worked very hard with the
Office of the High Representative and with
governmental authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina to
help establish a special war crimes chamber in
Sarajevo at the level of the State court that already
exists there. As I pointed out briefly this morning,
courtroom facilities should be operational in Sarajevo
in January 2005. I voiced my confidence this
morning - and I would like to repeat now - that that
special chamber in Sarajevo would comply with the
entire panoply of due process and human rights. I
would like to hope that detention facilities in Sarajevo
meeting international standards will be available in
January, but if they are not available then, they will be
available just a few short months later, so that cases
can start moving to Sarajevo from the ICTY very early
in 2005 .

As regards Croatia, as I have pointed out, reports
presented recently by the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and by the Council of
Europe still indicate some continuing problems with
regard to due process and fairness, particularly in some
instances of persistent bias concerning the ethnic
identity of accused and of victims. We in the Tribunal
are committed to working with the Government of
Croatia to enhance the capability of Croatia's judiciary
in order to be able to conduct in Croatia, before long,
fair war-crimes trials that take full account of
international human rights and due process. There is
room for optimism concerning the potential transfer of
a limited number of cases to courts in Croatia - courts
whose judges and prosecutors have received and
continue to receive special training. We in the ICTY
are very much involved in that training.

As regards Serbia and Montenegro, the prospects
for the transfer of cases have, of course, been
inevitably diminished by the past lack of cooperation
between Serbia and Montenegro and the Tribunal. In
that context, I would also like to mention the fact that a
mission report prepared by the OSCE, based on the
monitoring of trials throughout 2003, found that the
national judiciary lacked full capacity to conduct war-
crimes trials in accordance with universally accepted
standards. We in the Tribunal remain committed to
assisting Serbia and Montenegro in bringing the
judicial bodies in that country up to international
standards in terms of their capability to conduct fair
war-crimes trials.

The representative of France also asked me about
conditions under which we operate, and I would like
now to briefly sum them up. The first condition,
especially under the amended rule 11 bis, is fairness of
the trial and the existence of due process in the
receiving country. Then, of course, there is the
exclusion of the death penalty. We consider in this
context, under rule 11 bis, the gravity of crimes and the
level of responsibility. Finally, we should take into
account Security Council directives under recent
Security Council resolutions which establish the
benchmark of seniority. Under those directives, only
lower-level and intermediate-level accused can be
transferred to national jurisdictions.
In addition, may I remind the representative of
France of the innovation introduced in the recent
amendments of rule 11 bis, which enable us for the
first time to transfer cases to jurisdictions outside of
the former Yugoslavia when the country concerned has
the necessary jurisdiction and when it is ready and
willing to accept such cases. This provides a safety
valve which can, in due course, be very important,
because should there still be some kind of a deficit in
due process in the judiciaries of the area itself, we
would be able - should countries outside of the area
be ready and willing - to transfer cases to those
additional jurisdictions and thus help the completion
strategy. I salute my colleagues in the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, who showed us the way
to model our own rule on the rule which they adopted
in April.

Finally, on this point I would like to draw the
attention of the Council to the fact that any speculation
regarding the transfer of cases would be dangerous
because, in every single case, the decision of whether
or not to transfer a case would be made by a panel of
judges - by a trial court - which would take into
account all the facts, including the underlying rules
which I have summarized for the representative of
France.

I would now like to turn to a question asked by
the representative of the United Kingdom with regard
to the extension of the mandate of judges whose trials
have lasted, at the very least - if I understood him
correctly - six months by the time their mandate has
expired. I believe that some action along the lines
suggested by the United Kingdom will be necessary.
Whether the cut-off length of the continuing trial
should be six months, as the representative of the
United Kingdom suggested, or not is a question on
which we would want to reflect a little bit more. There
is no question, however, that there is a very strong
interest of the international community that judges who
have not been re-elected and who are trying a case
should be allowed to sit on that case until it is
completed.

Now, some of the difficulties and dangers of
disruption will be attenuated, but not eliminated by the
proposal which we, the judges, have made to the
Secretary-General and which he has accepted, to
advance the elections to November 2004. This would
enable us to have a more efficient assignment of
judges, based on our knowledge at that time of who
will stay on after November 2005 and who will not.
This is also a good opportunity to remind the Council
again that there will definitely be a need to extend the
mandates of individual ad litem judges who will be
involved in continuing cases at the time when their
mandates, under the existing statute, come to an end in
June 2005. It will also be necessary, if I may so
suggest, to elect a new list of ad litem judges, just as
we will be electing a new list of permanent judges. I
have made a commitment to discuss this matter with
the Secretary-General and with the Security Council in
the fall.

The representative of Russia asked me about
certain questions which will arise in connection with
the winding up of the Tribunal. More specifically, what
do we propose with regard to a mechanism to
substitute for existing mechanisms to deal with
requests of convicted persons for pardons or
commutations of sentence? An additional question
pertains, of course, to a review mechanism which now
exists under article 26 of the statute. Once the Tribunal
has completed its work, it will be necessary to find
some kind of a mechanism to deal with those
questions. Presently, with regard to pardons and
sentences, for example, the procedure lays down that
this is up to the President of the Tribunal, after
consultation with the bureau and the judges of the
Chamber that originally sentenced the convicted
person.

I think it is too early to create a mechanism to
deal with these questions after the completion of the
work of the Tribunal. In my own View, some
mechanism will be necessary, but such a mechanism
should be a minimalistic one that would not be costly.
It must not cost too much money to the United Nations.
For instance, one could envisage a panel of judges on
whom one can draw when questions come up and who
thus would not be actively or remuneratively
employed. In other words, they would not be paid for
just being on that panel's list, in order to economize on
expenses to the United Nations.

The representative of Germany asked a question
about the victory of Mr. Boris Tadic in Serbia. The
members of the Council will, of course, understand
that I would not be comfortable commenting on the
elections which took place recently. All that I wish to
say about that - and I take into account the comments
made just a few minutes ago by the representative of
Serbia and Montenegro on cooperation with the
Tribunal being a matter of priority for the new
Government in Belgrade - is that there is nothing that
I could wish for more than full cooperation between
the Government of Serbia and Montenegro and the
Tribunal. This cooperation should be in deeds and in
acts, and not just in words, and I offer to assist the new
Government in any way it considers appropriate in
order to serve that important goal.

The representative of Germany also asked about
what third States can do in order to encourage
cooperation between the Government in Belgrade and
the Tribunal. All I would like to say on that subject is
this: The more the international community and its
members impress on the new Government the benefits
and the importance of cooperation with the Tribunal,
the better. I think the education of the public is
extremely important; the training of the judiciary is
also very important.

The representative of Spain asked me about
progress in negotiating new agreements on the question
of where our convicted persons could serve their
sentences - the so-called enforcement of sentences
agreement. I would like to say that the last agreement
which we have concluded - I believe it was the
tenth - was an agreement concluded with the United
Kingdom, for which we are very grateful to that
country. The Registrar of our Tribunal is continuously
approaching various Governments, asking them to start
negotiations on the conclusion of additional
agreements. I would like to use this forum to appeal to
Governments to conclude such agreements with the
Tribunal. As the number of convicted persons
increases, our capacity to find places where they can
serve their sentences is definitely not adequate.

I believe that I have answered the questions that
have been directed to me and I thank the members of
the Council for their attention.

