Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): I want to thank the
Secretary-General for his report and Mr. Ivo Petrov, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for the additional
information.

My delegation welcomes the success achieved in the
peace process in Tajikistan. We also commend the role
played by the United Nations Mission of Observers in
Tajikistan (UNMOT) and other parties. There is no doubt
that their perseverance, often through difficult times, hugely
contributed to the current positive state of affairs.

While acknowledging the overall success of the peace
process, my delegation notes the difficulties that remain, in
particular the existence of armed elements outside the
control of the Government, which contributes to insecurity,
as well as the daunting economic and social challenges. We
hope that, in time, these problems can also be solved
effectively.

My delegation is grateful for the excellent summary by
the Secretary-General of the activities of UNMOT since its
establishment. When reading through the report, I could not
help drawing a parallel between difficulties experienced by
that Mission, which achieved success, and missions
currently under way, in particular in Africa. There is a clear
message that, with perseverance by all parties, a mission
can be successful, despite the existence of numerous and
protracted difficulties.

Even more striking for my delegation are the
characteristics cited that contributed to the overall positive
outcome of the Mission. These include the early
engagement of the United Nations in the conflict; the
sustained political support of the Security Council and
interested member States in the region; cooperation with
other organizations; effective crisis management; and the
clear will of the people of the country to end the war and
pursue a political solution.

It seems that if these requirements could be met by
the United Nations and the international community as a
whole, other peace efforts could also succeed. What is
required is the political will of all the parties concerned.

Finally, I would like to join the Secretary-General in
paying tribute to the men and women who served in
UNMOT and we look forward to his opinion about the
possible establishment of a post-conflict peace-building
office in Tajikistan. Furthermore, we support the draft
presidential statement that was submitted by the Russian
delegation.

