Mr. Oshima: After hearing my agency colleagues
and the President of the International Committee of the
Red Cross (ICRC) so extensively and professionally
cover the key issues, I am not certain what is left for
me to say. But I would like to make a few salient
points, if I may.

First of all, I too would like to convey my thanks
for the support and encouragement expressed by all the
members of the Security Council for the work done by
United Nations humanitarian agencies. This is very
encouraging and important to all of us engaged in the
current humanitarian relief activities at Headquarters
and, in particular, in the field under very difficult
conditions.

My own recent visit to Baghdad, Basra and Umm
Qasr, and my meetings with many of the actors
involved and with the representatives of organizations,
including the Office of Reconstruction and
Humanitarian Assistance (ORHA) in Baghdad, confirm
the key issues that have been touched upon repeatedly
in today's discussion. Those issues are, first, security-
related problems; secondly, the law and public order
situation; and, thirdly, problems related to meeting
recurrent costs, including the payment of salaries. My
visit also confirmed the impression that, while a
humanitarian catastrophe has been averted in Iraq,
there are nevertheless very acute humanitarian needs in
a number of sectors that must be addressed speedily.
The security situation in Iraq, coupled with the serious
salary, electricity and fuel problems, among others,
clearly raises the prospect of a declining humanitarian
situation that, if not addressed rapidly, could soon
develop into serious humanitarian problems.

We therefore all welcome the measures that have
been taken or are being planned by the coalition
authorities. Those measures have been explained today
by the representatives of the United States and the
United Kingdom. They have also been explained to me
in my meetings with Ambassador Bremer of ORHA, as
well as by the military representatives of the United
Kingdom at Basra. This is a welcome step, and we all
hope that these additional measures to improve the
security situation will really begin to bear fruit soon.

I would like to mention that, as far as the
coordination of humanitarian relief activities in Iraq is
concerned, I believe that we have a reasonably well
functioning mechanism in place, starting with the
Humanitarian Coordinator, who is responsible for
overall coordination, both within the United Nations
system and between the United Nations system and
other important actors, which of course include non-
governmental organizations, our colleagues in the
ICRC and, most important, ORHA. I believe we have a
good team there working for the same objective, which
is to bring relief and assistance to the people in need in
Iraq. Along with ORHA, the United Nations
Humanitarian Coordinator and his team have
established a cordial operational relationship that is
functioning in Baghdad. That working relationship is
being duplicated in various areas and in certain
governorates in the north, centre and south of Iraq.

With regard to the Flash Appeal, as the Deputy
Secretary-General mentioned in her remarks, we are
looking at revising the Flash Appeal that was launched
shortly after the outbreak of the conflict, at the end of
March, with a view to revising it in the light of the new
situation on the ground, as well as in the light of the
resolution adopted by the Security Council today. To
the extent possible, we will be conducting a needs
assessment, covering as wide an area of the country as
possible in order to come up with an appeal that will be
sufficient to deal with current humanitarian problems.
We intend to launch that revised humanitarian appeal
some time in the second half of June.

Finally, I wish to say a word regarding the
working relationship with the Iraqi people themselves.
As has been noted by a number of members today and
by my agency colleagues, there is a considerable
amount of reliable and capable human resources, high
skill levels and an institutional base available in Iraq. It
has been disrupted momentarily, but it can be
redeployed quickly once the security situation permits
and salaries are paid.

Already, Iraqi professionals and senior ministerial
officials - some of whom I met in Baghdad - have
expressed their expectation that they will be consulted
and involved early on and at all levels in the priority-
setting and planning exercises for the revision of the
humanitarian appeal and subsequent reconstruction
project. I believe that this wish should be respected as
far as possible.

