Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya has always
sought to promote peace, security and stability in the
Horn of Africa. As President of the African Union, our
brother, the Leader of the Revolution of the Libyan
Arab J amahiriya, President Al-Qadhafi, has made many
contacts with our African brothers to seek a solution to
the problems of the States of the region.

However, this complex, tangled web of problems
will require greater efforts, more time and concerted
international cooperation in order to persuade all
parties to accept the good offices available to them and
to bravely face these problems, find solutions to them
and establish mechanisms to deal with them.

Libya has encouraged the States of the region to
make use of international legal bodies to resolve their
border disputes, which are the main cause of conflict
and tension. Libya has resolutely stood by the
Transitional Federal Government under the presidency
of Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed and has welcomed the
Djibouti Agreement as a mechanism that will enable
national reconciliation and the creation of a national
unity government.
09-66454

Such a government would make it possible to
bring together all components of Somali society and
guarantee peace and security in the country. Libya
believes that the Djibouti Agreement will promote the
establishment of lasting peace in Somalia. We hope
that all Somali parties will join the Agreement, lay
down their weapons and follow the path of dialogue to
resolve their differences.

Libya calls for the resolution of all problems
between Somalia and Eritrea.

We believe that the resolution just adopted takes
an unrealistic and excessively hasty approach.
Sanctions are not the ideal way of resolving the current
problems. Their humanitarian impact will further
exacerbate the situation in the Horn of Africa, and it is
our View that this creates an obstacle to the peaceful
solutions to which we aspire, to be attained in the
framework of the good offices of the African Union
and of the Secretary-General, supported by other
international partners.

As members know, the African Union will
convene a summit in January. There we shall consider
the problems of the Horn of Africa, including Eritrea's
role in the region. We look forward to the Secretary-
General or his representative participating in the
summit, and we would thus have preferred the
postponement of today's consideration of this item
until the African Union summit outcome was available.

Libya was the victim of sanctions for many years
and has therefore committed itself to not being party to
the imposition of sanctions against any African country
whatsoever. That is why we voted against the
resolution adopted today.

