Ms. Cavanagh (New Zealand): I would like to
thank the delegation of Bosnia and Herzegovina for
convening today's open debate. In the interest of time,
I will deliver a shortened version of my statement.
Hard copies of the full version are being circulated.

Experience has shown that laying the foundations
for effective Government institutions is fundamental to
securing durable peace. However, despite the global
community's best efforts, it is easier to point to
examples of qualified failure than to any of unqualified
success. Put simply, institution-building is inherently
difficult. No clear blueprint exists for doing it
effectively. Considerable work remains to be done to
develop our understanding of best practices and the
practical tools to do the job.

New Zealand has been an active participant in
peacebuilding efforts in our region and beyond,
including as a significant contributor to United Nations
and United Nations-mandated operations in Timor-
Leste, Bougainville, Afghanistan and Solomon Islands.
I would like to share the following lessons we have
drawn from our past involvement in institution-
building in post-conflict societies.

First, missions with an institution-building
component must make national capacity-building a
core consideration in their planning and operations
from day one. That requires a careful assessment of
existing domestic capacities and priority capacity-
building needs from the earliest stage of mandate
formation. It is crucial that those assessments also
include how the benefits of institution-building can be
spread beyond capital cities to regions and local
communities. It is important that consideration be
given to how a mission's activities can best foster
national capacities and, conversely, how to avoid
displacing such capacities or stifling their emergence.
Effective institution-building also requires a clear
definition of the specific objectives being pursued and
of how assistance will transition to traditional
development partners once those have been achieved.
At the same time, it is important to balance that clarity
in direction and goals with sufficient flexibility to
enable mission leadership to adapt to changes on the
ground.

Secondly, institution-building must be pursued in
accordance with nationally agreed priorities and
objectives. That is crucial to ensuring national
ownership, effective coordination and a greater chance
that capacities built will be sustained over the long
term. An inclusive approach to priority-setting is
required. Local communities and civil society play a
crucial role in holding together conflict-affected
societies.

Thirdly, institution-building assistance must be
grounded in a clear-eyed assessment of what capacities
are appropriate and sustainable over the long term.
Missions must ensure that the institutions they help
develop are capable of surviving their departure
without placing excessive strain on host Governments.
To do otherwise is to risk generating expectations that

cannot be fulfilled or to set States up for long-term
dependence on external assistance.

Fourthly, coordination of institution-building
assistance is crucial to ensuring its coherence and
effectiveness. Important strides have been made within
the United Nations system on delivering as one. But
that remains a work in progress. It is particularly
important that clarity be established early on among
actors and leadership teams on the ground regarding
respective roles and responsibilities. Better
coordination is also required with other actors, notably
international financial institutions, bilateral donors and
civil society. In particular, we welcome ongoing efforts
by the Secretary-General to enhance United Nations-
World Bank coordination on post-conflict institution-
building. Significant scope still remains to make such
coordination work more systematic and effective.

Fifthly, there must be a clear recognition of which
institution-building tasks Council-mandated missions
should lead on and which tasks other actors are better
equipped for. United Nations missions have a crucial
role in carrying out immediate stabilization tasks, in
supporting the early development of core State
institutions essential for maintaining stability and
security, in the early articulation of institution-building
priorities and in facilitating the delivery of assistance
by others. However, many institution-building
challenges remain better suited to agencies and donors
with a longer-term focus and with a greater
accumulation of relevant skills and experience.

Finally, there is an urgent need to enhance the
United Nations ability to identify and deploy relevant
civilian expertise in a timely manner. Effective
institution-building requires a complex and diverse mix
of skills. Recent experience has made it clear that
existing mechanisms for generating such expertise are
inadequate. Too often the expertise provided is
determined by available supply, rather than identified
need. Too often the process of identifying and deploying
experts drags on for a year or more. And too often the ad
hoc manner of its supply results in a plethora of actors
with differing approaches and advice.
If we are truly serious about the United Nations
playing a leading role in post-conflict institution-
building, there is an urgent need to significantly
strengthen the United Nations ability to rapidly
identify and deploy appropriately skilled civilian
experts. To achieve that, the Secretariat requires greater

flexibility to mobilize and utilize existing expertise
within the United Nations system. It needs to explore
more flexible arrangements for utilizing the resources
offered by Member States. We also need to consider
how the United Nations can better draw on external
pools of relevant civilian expertise, particularly those
from the global South. We hope the upcoming report of
the review of international civilian capacities will
provide concrete suggestions in these areas.

We have much to learn about how post-conflict
institution-building is best carried out and much work
to do to provide ourselves with the tools necessary to
undertake these tasks successfully. But it is vital that
we do learn the lessons, both positive and negative,
from our collective experiences to date, if we are to
meet the goals we have set ourselves in this area.

