Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Mr. Minister, we are grateful to the delegation
of Egypt for the very timely initiative of convening this
open debate on the theme of "Countering the narratives
and ideologies of terrorism". We regard this meeting as
an important contribution to Security Council efforts
within the broad agenda of international counter-
terrorist cooperation.

We are grateful to the briefers for their substantial
contributions to the discussion.

The growth of radicalism of late has, to a large
extent, been fed and fuelled by unprecedented terrorist
propaganda, aimed primarily at youth and the socially
underprivileged strata of the population. It constantly
takes on new shapes and adapts to the potentials offered
by modern technologies, such as the Internet. Terrorists
are spreading a perverted ideology of intransigence and
violence not related to any of the religions. Despite
that, there is, unfortunately, a demand for such ideas,
which is demonstrated, for example, by the large-scale
recruitment of foreign terrorists fighters into the ranks
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
(Da'esh) and associated terrorist groups.

What is required are effective recipes for responses
to those dangerous trends. Currently, the time has
come to accumulate the resources and expertise of the
international community to erect a bulwark against
terrorist ideology.

We are convinced of the need for the organic
incorporation of preventive measures into the broader
counter-terrorist efforts. That work must be carried out
on the basis of international law and Security Council
resolutions and must be free of double standards and
any division of terrorists into good ones and bad ones.
States cooperation must be based on the existing
international legal framework and the Global Counter-
Terrorist Strategy. It is of fundamental importance
that the Council continue to focus on such important
tasks as combating radicalization and the incitement
to terrorism and countering the use of the media, the
Internet and social networks for terrorist practices.

The decisive role in combating the ideologies of
terrorism, just like in all counter-terrorist actions, must
reside with States and their relevant agencies. At the same
time, State agencies must, in a targeted way, also seek
to involve the efforts and potential of non-governmental
organizations and civil society, religious communities,
academia, educational institutions, the mass media and
the business community.

In our country, priority attention is being paid to
effectively countering terrorist ideology and preventing
the radicalization of political and social forces through
its influence. Those tasks have become pressing in the
light of the unprecedented propaganda and mobilization
campaign being mounted by international terrorists,
first and foremost ISIL (Da'esh) and Jabhat Al-Nusra.

Preventive counter-terrorist work traditionally
actively includes religious representatives, eminent
theologians and leading experts in the field of law
and religion. The Government provides the necessary
support to public associations acting in favour of
strengthening interfaith and inter-ethnic trust. National
cultural events and social programmes are being
organized, including interregional youth forums in the
North Caucasus and seasonal youth clubs. Successful
examples of such efforts, with the involvement of
civil society, include the Peace for the Children of the
Caucasus project and the International Theological
Conference with the participation of religious
representatives from our country, the Commonwealth
of Independent States and Africa. The introduction of
a course entitled "Fundamentals of Religious Cultures
and Secular Ethics" into the curricula of Russian
schools was also quite successful. There is also the
regular preparation of publications for the mass media
and the posting online on various Internet sites of
various materials explaining the criminal essence of
terrorist organizations.

We welcome the presidential statement
(S/PRST/2016/6) adopted upon Egypt's initiative,
which quite rightly underscores the Security Council's
priorities in the field of counter-terrorism. The
United Nations Counter-Terrorism Committee is
entrusted with the task of preparing and submitting,
in a timely manner, for the Council's consideration a
"comprehensive international framework" containing a
set of recommendations to counter the pseudo-ideology
ofISIL (Da'esh), Al-Qaeda and associated groups.

We intend to participate actively in the elaboration
of that document and stand ready to provide support
to the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate in that regard. We expect that,
in the process of agreeing and implementing the
"comprehensive international framework", we will
fully utilize the positive experience of the work on
Security Council resolution 1624 (2005) on combating
the incitement to terrorism. We view the adopted
presidential statement as a significant contribution to
the process of implementing that resolution.

