Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): Greece fully associates
itself with the statement to be delivered shortly by the
Permanent Representative of Austria on behalf of the
European Union.

It is with grave concern that we have noted the
escalation of violence in Israel and the occupied
territories in the past few days. Greece firmly and
unconditionally condemns all forms of terrorism,
including rocket attacks against Israel from Gaza and
senseless suicide bombings, like today's in Tel Aviv.
We call upon the Palestinian Authority to take firm
action against such unjustifiable acts and their
perpetrators.

We recognize the right of Israel to defend itself
and protect its citizens. We underline, however, that
this right has to be exercised within the boundaries of
international law. Greece deplores the disproportionate
nature of Israeli military activities, which cost - or, in
any case, endanger - the lives of innocent Palestinian
civilians, and calls upon Israel to fully respect and
comply with the Fourth Geneva Convention.

We call upon both parties to exercise maximum
restraint and we expect them to demonstrate political
maturity and wisdom and to refrain from provocative
actions and rhetoric. As tensions are running high, it is
necessary that both parties do their utmost to curb
attacks and counterattacks, including extrajudicial
killings, so as not to allow a return to the vicious circle
of violence that has beset the region for so long.

Greece remains committed to the achievement of
a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle
East based on all relevant Security Council resolutions,
including resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397
(2002) and 1515 (2003), as well as on the Madrid
terms of reference and the principle of land for peace.

We remain committed to the realization of a two-
State solution - Israel and an independent Palestine
living side by side within internationally recognized
borders in peace and security. In that context, it is
important to reiterate that the road map remains the
framework of our efforts and that both parties should
strive to fulfil their relevant respective obligations and
commitments. They should also refrain from taking
any and all unilateral actions that threaten to prejudge
the outcome of final status negotiations and which
undermine efforts to build confidence on the ground.

Over the past couple of months, Israelis and
Palestinians alike have had the opportunity to exercise
their democratic rights and to elect their
representatives. The results of the Palestinian
legislative elections, however, gave rise to a number of
concerns for the international community. We want to
reiterate that it is in the interest of the new Palestinian
Government to commit itself to the three principles set
out by the Quartet in its statement of 30 January. It
must renounce violence and disarm, recognize Israel's
right to exist and respect all previous agreements and
understandings, including the road map.

Finally, we firmly believe that both peoples have
a true desire for peaceful coexistence and that their
leaderships will respond to that desire and act
accordingly. The international community should stand
ready to encourage and assist any steps in that
direction.

