The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of Chad.

At the outset, I would like to thank the delegation
of Jordan for having introduced draft resolution
S/2014/916 on the Palestinian question, on behalf of the
Arab States.

In recognition of the right of the Palestinian people
to a viable sovereign State within the pre-1967 borders
and with East Jerusalem as its capital, Chad voted
in favour of the draft resolution, which the Security
Council unfortunately did not adopt. We can only
express our deepest disappointment and staunch regret
at the rejection of this text, the relevant, moderate and
balanced nature of which were such that it should have
garnered the support of all members of the Security
Council.

The text of the resolution would have allowed us
to put an end to the interminable cycle of negotiations
that have served only to perpetuate the Israeli
occupation and undermine all international efforts
seeking to resolve the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
The text does not go against the principle of direct
negotiations between the two parties but rather
envisions a new framework for negotiations that would
guarantee the active participation of all stakeholders
alongside the two parties concerned. Moreover, the
text clearly defines the parametres of a solution: the
security mechanisms guaranteeing and respecting the
sovereignty of a Palestinian State with the gradual
and complete withdrawal of the Israeli security forces
from the occupied territories, and the fair and equitable
settlement ofthe issue of Palestinian refugees as well as
inherent final status issues.

In rejecting the draft resolution, the Security
Council has again squandered an historical opportunity
and disappointed all of those who have been outraged
for many years by the absence of any prospect of a
political solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
The rejection of the draft resolution also sends a very
negative message encouraging the continuation of
the occupation, injustice, oppression and destruction,
thereby promoting the entrenchment of the most extreme
positions on both sides. Furthermore, the Council had
the opportunity to strengthen the advocates of peace
in the region and to give the Palestinians a glimmer
of hope after the failure of direct negotiations that had
gained next to nothing.

Today, the international public has seen the sad
reality of the Palestinian people being deprived once
again of their legitimate right to live in an independent,
sovereign State. In view of the unrest in the Middle
East and the spread of violence and terrorism, it is
in the interests of all parties, including the Security
Council, to urgently find a durable solution to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Chad remains persuaded
that the only solution is two independent, democratic
States, living side by side, in peace and security within
mutually and internationally recognized borders.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the Permanent Observer of the
Observer State of Palestine.

