Mrs. Haley (United States): I would first like to
thank Mr. Mladenov for his briefing.

During the past year, as the representative of the
United States I have most often taken the position that
this monthly meeting on the Middle East is miscast. As
I have pointed out many times, we spend far too much
time in this meeting on Israel and the Palestinians and
far too little time on the terrorist regimes and groups
that undermine peace and security in the region, chief
among them Iran, the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Sham, Hizbullah and Hamas. That remains my view,
and I expect that in the months to come I will continue
to focus on the threats from the Middle East that
attract too little attention at the United Nations. Today,
however, I will set aside my usual practice, and I too
will focus on the issue of peace between Israel and the
Palestinians. What has changed?

The events of the past month have shed light on
a critical aspect of the Israeli-Palestinian problem,
and it is important to ensure that we do not miss the
opportunity to bring attention to it here at the United
Nations. The aspect I will address is the single most
critical element to achieving peace. No, it is not the
issues of security, borders, refugees or settlements. All
those are important parts of a peace agreement, but the
single most important element is none of them. The
indispensable element is leaders who have the will to
do what is needed to achieve peace. Real peace requires
leaders who are willing to step forward, acknowledge
hard truths and make compromises. It requires leaders
who look to the future rather than dwelling on past
resentments. Above all, such leaders require courage.

The Egyptian President Anwar Sadat was such
a leader. Forty years ago, President Sadat did an
exceptional thing. Egypt and Israel were still in a state
of war. In fact, Sadat himself had led Egypt in war
with Israel only a few years before. But Sadat made the
courageous decision to pursue peace, and when he had
made that decision, he went to Jerusalem and delivered
a speech before the Israeli Knesset. The fact that he
went to the Knesset was courageous in itself, but what
took real courage was what he said there. He did not go
to Jerusalem on bended knee. He spoke in no uncertain
terms about the hard concessions he expected from
the Israelis. And then he said the words that both he
and the world knew marked a turning point. He said to
the Israeli legislators,

"You want to live with us in this part of the world.
In all sincerity, I tell you, we welcome you among
us, with full security and safety We used to
reject you Yet today, I tell you, and declare it to
the whole world, that we accept to live with you in
permanent peace based on justice."

Those were the words that led to peace between Egypt
and Israel. It was not an easy process; it took another
16 months of tough negotiations to reach a peace
treaty, and both sides made difficult compromises. But
Sadat's words helped make Israel understand that it
had a partner with which it could make those painful
compromises. Some have said that those were the words
that got Anwar Sadat killed, but no one can question the
generations of Egyptians and Israeli citizens that have
enjoyed a peace that has stood the test of time.

Compare those words to what Palestinian President
Abbas said to the Palestine Liberation Organization
Central Council 11 days ago. In his speech, President
Abbas declared the landmark Oslo peace accords
dead. He rejected any American role in peace talks.
He insulted the American President. He called for
suspending recognition of Israel. He invoked an ugly
and fictional past, reaching back to the seventeenth
century to paint Israel as a colonialist project engineered
by European Powers.

Once more, let us contrast Sadat's words with
Abbas's. President Sadat acknowledged that some Arab
leaders did not agree with him, but he told them that it
was his responsibility to

"exhaust all and every means in a bid to save my
Egyptian Arab people and the entire Arab nation
the horrors of new, shocking and destructive wars".

President Abbas also acknowledged criticism from
other Arab leaders, and he too had a message for them.
His response was that they should get lost. Curiously,
his speech has gotten little attention in the media. I
encourage all who care about the cause of a durable
and just peace in the Middle East to read President
Abbas's speech for themselves. A speech that indulges
in outrageous and discredited conspiracy theories is not
the speech of a person with the courage and the will to
seek peace.

Despite all of this, the United States remains fully
prepared and eager to pursue peace. We have done
nothing to prejudge the final borders of Jerusalem. We
have done nothing to alter the status of the holy sites.
We remain committed to the possibility and potential
of two States, if agreed to by the parties. Just as it
did for Egypt, peace requires compromise. It requires
solutions that take into account the core interests of all
sides, and that is what the United States is focused on
for the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Hate-filled speeches
and end runs around negotiations take us nowhere.
Ultimately, peace will not be achieved without leaders
with courage.

King Hussein of Jordan was another such leader. In
1994, he ended 46 years of war and entered into a peace
agreement with Israel that holds to this day. When he
signed the peace treaty, he said:

"These are moments in which we live. The past
and the future [W]hen we come to live next to
each other as never before, we will be doing so,
Israelis and Jordanians together, without the need
for any to observe our actions or supervise our
endeavours. This is peace with dignity. This is
peace with commitment".

I ask here today, where is the Palestinian President?
Where is the Palestinian King Hussein? Where is
the Palestinian Anwar Sadat? If President Abbas
demonstrates that he can be that type of leader, we will
welcome it. His recent actions demonstrate the total
opposite. The United States remains deeply committed
to helping the Israelis and the Palestinians reach a
historic peace agreement that brings a better future
to both peoples, just as we did successfully with the
Egyptians and the Jordanians. But we will not chase
after a Palestinian leadership that lacks what is needed
to achieve peace. To get historic results, we need
courageous leaders. History has provided such leaders
in the past. For the sake of the Palestinian and Israeli
peoples, we pray that it does so again.

