Mr. Messone (Gabon) (spoke in French):
Towards the end of 2011, important elections -
elections that will be decisive for the future of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo - will take place.
This debate is all the more important as it affords us
the opportunity to examine issues of major importance
for the future of that country, in particular the State

regaining full control of its sovereign functions, the
future role of the United Nations in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the support it must provide
to this electoral process, the measures to strengthen
security, and the issue of combating the illicit
exploitation of natural resources.

My delegation would like to congratulate France
and to thank it for having convened this debate. We
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
contribution to this debate and to voice to him our
support for the United Nations contribution in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. I welcome the
presence of Mr. Raymond Tshibanda Mulongo,
Minister for International and Regional Cooperation of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We thank him
for the information he has shared with us, and we
associate ourselves with his appeal for action based on
dialogue and partnership in the Democratic Republic.
Finally, I welcome Mr. Tegegnework Gettu of the
United Nations Development Programme, Mr. Colin
Bruce, and Mr. Pedro Serrano for their participation in
this debate.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo is the
scene of the biggest United Nations peacekeeping
operation - the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) - hence our interest in a
return to security, peace and stability in that country.
The mandate of MONUSCO, which was established in
2010 in cooperation with the Congolese authorities,
will come to an end on 30 June. The objective is to
gradually transfer to the Congolese authorities the
entirety of their sovereign responsibilities. That
transfer will of course be supported with all the
assistance necessary to enable the country to continue
to pursue stabilization, peacebuilding, reconstruction
and the resumption of its economic activity.

The question then arises of the role of the United
Nations and, in general, that of the international
community in that transfer of responsibility, which will
of course not take place without difficulties.
Challenges related to the security and political
situation and the economic reconstruction of the
country will lie at the very heart of this process.

With respect to security, we congratulate the
Government for the efforts made in this field.
However, the situation remains difficult, and the
priority should be strengthening security, especially

with the approach of elections. Eventually, however,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo will require
enhanced assistance.

The extent of the eastern border makes it very
difficult to control the armed groups that operate on
either side of it. Strengthening security along the
borders of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
involves, first, capacity-building for the Congolese
security and defence forces. In this respect, Gabon
would like the United Nations, as well as other
multilateral and bilateral partners, to continue to
support the Government in its efforts to reform this
sector. We encourage and welcome the steps already
taken by the Government to that end.

Secondly, improving the security situation will
require ongoing involvement of the countries of the
Great Lakes region in the search for a joint solution to
the crisis. In this regard, strengthening cooperation
among the countries of the subregion and the
assistance of the international community are
important preconditions for improving dialogue
between the Congolese authorities and the various
groups within the framework of political dialogue
resulting from the Goma agreements of March 2009.

Thirdly, improvements to the security situation
will not be effective without a genuine plan for
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration. We
would like to welcome the efforts in this area by the
Congolese authorities, who to date have reintegrated
around 32,000 ex-combatants in the armed forces and
the national police force.

With regard to justice, we would also like to
welcome the commitment of the Congolese authorities
to the fight against impunity, as demonstrated by the
legal proceedings taken against high-level officers of
the armed forces and rebel leaders accused of rape.
Beyond that, however, we should continue to support
reform and the strengthening of the justice sector.

The Congolese situation is also political. It is
crucial that the authority and sovereignty of the State
be fully restored throughout all of the country's
territory. The success of the upcoming general
elections will contribute to consolidating the authority
and legitimacy of the State. Furthermore, the
Congolese political class overall wishes to see these
elections take place.

To this end, the international community and the
United Nations must provide the technical and
logistical support necessary for the electoral process.
At the conclusion of that process, the setting up of
national reconciliation mechanisms and a strengthening
of the democratic institutions of the rule of law, health
and education, especially for young people, can only
contribute to creating a more tranquil political climate.

The stabilization of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the conduct of the elections will create
an environment conducive to restoring economic and
social activity. The macroeconomic initiatives and
measures already undertaken by the authorities should
be encouraged. That is why my delegation would like
to endorse the Congolese Stabilization and
Reconstruction Plan for Areas Emerging from Armed
Conflict, whose interface with the international plan is
the International Security and Stabilization Support
Strategy.

With respect to the issue of mines, Gabon
welcomes the convening of the Lusaka Summit at the
conclusion of which the countries of the Great Lakes
endorsed the guidelines of the Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development on tracing
mineral resources, which is a very important
achievement given the link between the financing of
armed groups and the illicit exploitation of natural
resources. In that regard, we would like to welcome the
recent decision by the United States of America to
provide $11 million to support actions to combat the
illicit trade in mineral resources in the eastern part of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

In conclusion, at a time when we are thinking
about the future of MONUSCO, the objective should
be to enable the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to regain its authority
throughout the country. The future of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is a matter for the Congolese
people. The quest for peace should be the constant
concern for the people, the Government and the
international community. The international community
must support the country in finding a lasting solution
to the crisis and achieving lasting peacebuilding, Of
course, the priorities are those that Minister Tshibanda
has just shared with us, namely elections, security
sector reform, justice, mineral resources,
administration and economic reconstruction.
