Mr. Prendergast: We are meeting at a low point.
It is urgent to re-establish momentum towards a just,
lasting and comprehensive peace in the Middle East.
Sadly, however, the trend is increasingly in the
opposite direction. Instead of moving forward, we are
seeing backward movement, away from a peaceful
settlement and away from the negotiating table. Instead
of mutually reinforcing confidence-building measures,
we are seeing far too much by way of mutually
reinforcing confidence-destroying measures. Instead of
policies and actions that encourage the parties to move
towards one another, meeting in the centre, the effect
of actions taken by both Israelis and Palestinians has
been to weaken moderates on both sides and to
encourage extremists. Suicide bombings, rejectionist
language, extrajudicial killings, walls that extend deep
into the occupied Palestinian territory, the destruction
of homes, expropriations and continued settlement
activity lead both Israelis and Palestinians to feelings
of hopelessness, despair, hatred, rage and revenge.
Worst of all, they leave each side doubting whether it
has in the other a partner for peace and questioning the
viability of the two-State solution.

Since the previous briefing, we have witnessed an
escalation of violence that has crossed previously
respected lines, principles and borders. Events during
the past month include a suicide bomb in Haifa, the
first Israeli air strike into Syria in 30 years, serious and
fatal violations of the Blue Line, Israeli army
incursions into Rafah in the Gaza Strip, increasingly
tight closures in the West Bank and Gaza that have
exacerbated the already dire humanitarian conditions of
Palestinians and a terrorist attack on a United States
diplomatic convoy in Gaza that killed three innocent
people. During the past three days alone, 21
Palestinians were killed during Israeli military
operations and 3 Israeli soldiers were killed in the West
Bank.

It ought to be clear by now that violence only
begets violence, and that there is no military solution to
the conflict. Lasting stability will be found only when
the parties reach a just, lasting and comprehensive
peace agreement.

The Secretary-General has repeatedly called on
the parties to return to the negotiating table. It is clear,
however, that they are unable to do so on their own.
The level of trust between them is too low and the lines
of communication too weak. This makes it imperative
that the international community reassert its role in
Middle East peacemaking. The Quartet must assist the
parties along the road map to peace. Implementation of
the road map has been stalled for too long.

Since the last briefing to the Security Council, 80
people have lost their lives to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict: 27 Israelis, 50 Palestinians and, now, 3
American diplomatic security officers. This raises the
death toll since September 2000 to 2,858 Palestinians
and 857 Israelis.

On 4 October, a suicide bomber struck a crowded
restaurant in Haifa, resulting in a death toll that has
recently risen to 21. The casualties were both Jewish
and Arab. I reiterate the Secretary-General's strong and
consistent condemnation of such acts of terrorism. The
deliberate targeting of civilians is a war crime, and
cannot be justified by any cause. We call on the
Palestinian Authority to bring to justice those who plan
and carry out such attacks and to live up to its
obligations under the road map as regards security.

On 5 October, Israel launched an air strike against
Syrian territory. An attack by one State on another's
sovereign territory is a dismaying new escalation in the
regional dimension of the conflict. The Secretary-
General strongly deplored this action, and called on all
sides to exercise restraint. By disturbing a front that
has been stable for many years, the Israeli action risks
broadening and deepening the already complex
network of conflicts in the region and encouraging
extremists everywhere.

Since 9 October, the Israeli army has conducted
operations in Rafah, in the southern Gaza Strip, aimed,
according to the Government of Israel, at destroying
tunnels used for the smuggling of arms. According to
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), 12
Palestinians were killed, including 2 children and an
UNRWA schoolteacher. UNRWA reports that 189
buildings were demolished or rendered uninhabitable,
and some 1,780 people have lost their homes as of 20
October.

We recognize Israel's right to defend itself
against terrorist attacks. However, the right of self-
defence is neither unconditional nor unlimited. It must
be exercised in proportionate terms, and in keeping
with Israel's obligations under international law. It
should not be exercised in such a way that large
numbers of Palestinians are made to suffer for the acts
of a violent minority. The consequences of these
actions could be viewed as collective punishment,
which is a violation of international humanitarian law.

On 15 October, last week, a bomb attack in the
Gaza Strip on a United States diplomatic convoy
resulted in the deaths of three American security
officers. This deliberate attack on diplomatic
personnel, which we condemn in the strongest terms,
was unprecedented and completely unacceptable. The
Secretary-General has condemned it as a terrorist act.
The bombing, which was clearly carefully planned,
represents a worrying widening of the conflict, and
raises serious security concerns for United Nations and
international personnel working in Gaza.

Yesterday, at least 14 Palestinians were killed,
with scores of civilian casualties, in a series of Israeli
air strikes on Gaza. These attacks appeared to be aimed
at carrying out extrajudicial killings. They followed a
series of rocket attacks by Palestinians into southern
Israel. Again, Israel has conducted military operations
in crowded civilian areas, with sadly predictable
results. We once more call on the Government of Israel
to cease the use of disproportionate and indiscriminate
force in civilian areas. We also again call for a halt to
extrajudicial killings.

If the parties are to re-engage with the negotiation
process, they must be in a position to send to the
negotiating table representatives who can commit to
credible confidence-building measures.

In this connection, we note the Palestinian
Authority's efforts to appoint a new prime minister. As
called for in the road map, that prime minister should
be empowered and credible, and, with the Minister of
the Interior, should be the person to whom consolidated
Palestinian security forces would report. We would
expect the new prime minister to take immediate steps
to establish law and order, diminish violence and start
operations to confront those who engage in terror.
These steps would begin to address Israel's security
concerns and build the confidence necessary to develop
a partnership for peace.

For its part, in keeping with its obligations under
the road map, and in order to build confidence on the
Palestinian side, the Government of Israel must reverse
its policy of settlement expansion and implement a
settlement freeze. In addition, it must halt construction
of the security wall that it is building on Palestinian
land and remove those sections already constructed.
These steps would begin to address Palestinian
concerns about the viability of the future Palestinian
State and assist in building support among the
Palestinian people for the peace process.

The Quartet principals - the Secretary-General,
Russian Foreign Minister Ivanov, United States
Secretary of State Powell, Italian Foreign Minister
Frattini, European Union High Representative Solana
and European Commissioner Patten - met on
26 September to review the situation in the Middle
East. The Principals noted that they viewed the
situation with great concern, and reaffirmed their
commitment to continue working together to achieve
progress towards peace. They remained eager to assist
the parties to meet their road map obligations. In his
own capacity, the Secretary-General called for a
revitalized and active international involvement,
asserting that, if steps are not taken, all of us will pay a
heavy price.

Let me mention a rare positive note amid the
general gloom, in the shape of the track-two effort
referred to as the Geneva Accord. Mr. Yossi Beilin and
Mr. Yasser Abed Rabbo and others have reportedly led
Israelis and Palestinians through a process of
imagining a future final status settlement that details
possible solutions based on the same goal as that of the
road map: a two-State solution and the end to
occupation. The Secretariat has not yet seen the text of
this plan, and we cannot comment on the details. But
we welcome any initiatives that bring Israelis and
Palestinians together to discuss their common future.
Real and lasting peace will be made as much by people
working together for reconciliation as it will be by
official parties reaching agreement. However, there is
no substitute for the official representatives of the
Israeli and Palestinian people returning to the
negotiating table and progressing down the road to
peace, as called for in the road map.

The disappointing setbacks in the quest for peace
have had a continuing deleterious effect on
humanitarian conditions in the occupied Palestinian
territory. We continue to observe increased economic
hardship and further reduced capacity of the
Palestinian Authority to deliver essential services to its
population. Unemployment rates in the West Bank and
Gaza Strip have risen to 36 per cent, and the number of
Palestinians below the poverty line is at 60 per cent.

Severe restrictions on the movement of
humanitarian goods and aid workers remain in place.
The aid and donor community recognizes Israel's
security concerns and wishes to be responsive to them.
However, donors fail to understand the logic of
measures that increase insecurity for the civilian
population and the aid community, and that raise the
complexity and cost of providing assistance. The aid
community feels that the Government of Israel has thus
far failed to appoint a high-level empowered
interlocutor to discuss these policy issues, and that, as
a result, it has to spend substantial time responding to
unpredictable and seemingly arbitrary regulations and
procedures that make its work increasingly expensive,
dangerous and frustrating.

A meeting of the capitals-level Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee, which is composed of key donors, is
scheduled to take place on 18 and19 November. The
meeting will enable donors to discuss Palestinian
economic stabilization and emergency needs. The Ad
Hoc Liaison Committee will also address the donor
community's ongoing support to the Palestinian
Authority's reform efforts and the problems
encountered in this endeavour. The meeting will
coincide with the launch of the United Nations
Consolidated Appeal, which highlights the need to
address the deepening humanitarian crisis faced in the
occupied Palestinian territory.

Allow me to say a word about the construction of
the separation barrier, or wall, which continues to
deeply worry not only Palestinians but the international
community as a whole. Over the last month, the speed
of construction has accelerated. In a recently released
report, the co-chairs of the all-donor Local Aid
Coordination Committee - namely, the Office of the
United Nations Special Coordinator in the Occupied
Territories (UNSCO), the World Bank and Norway -
drew particular attention to the rapid expansion of
Israel's separation barrier around East Jerusalem. There
alone, the wall affects tens of thousands of Palestinians
as it divides communities and families and threatens to
seal Jerusalem off from the rest of the West Bank.
Palestinians along the barrier's route face land loss and
severely restricted access to jobs, markets and essential
social services. We repeat our call to the Israeli
authorities to halt construction of the wall.

On 2 October the Israel Defense Forces (IDF)
issued an extensive military order declaring those areas
between the separation wall and the Green Line to be
militarily closed areas. The order covers the entire
northern trajectory of the wall - approximately 25,000
acres, where as many as 12,000 Palestinians would be
left in enclaves between the wall and the Green Line.
The order prohibits any person from entering or exiting
these areas except, as it states, "those entitled to the
law of return, Israelis, or Palestinians who have special
permanent or temporary permits". It explicitly specifies
that people age 12 and older who resided in those areas
before the military order was issued must now have
entry permits to continue doing so. Free access will be
granted only to Israelis. The order marks an
unacceptable deepening of restrictions against the
Palestinians caught between the barrier and the Green
Line.

Recent incidents along the Blue Line and in the
region have heightened tensions and highlight the
fragility of the situation. The day after the 5 October
Israeli air strike into Syria, two hostile incidents
occurred along the Blue Line. In the first, on 6 October,
it was reported that sniper fire from the Lebanese side
of the Blue Line killed an Israeli soldier in an area
south of Metulla. Subsequent IDF retaliatory fire
damaged a passing United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL) vehicle, but caused no injuries.

On 7 October, three rockets were fired towards
Israel from the general area of Hula on the Lebanese
side of the Line. Two landed inside Lebanon, one on a
house, killing one child and seriously injuring another.
The third rocket impacted on the Israeli side,
constituting a violation but causing no damage. These
events underscore yet again the need for the
Government of Lebanon to exert control over the use
of force from the whole of its territory.

The spiral of events of the first week of October
illustrates the significant potential for escalation within
the region. With that in mind, on the instructions of the
Secretary-General, the United Nations Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
Mr. Roed-Larsen, travelled to Beirut and Damascus on
8 and 9 October to discuss the regional situation with
leaders in both countries. Mr. Roed-Larsen also
discussed the situation with Israeli officials. In his
meetings in all three countries, he noted that attacks
and counter attacks would lead all concerned down a
steep and precarious path towards more violence. And,
on the Secretary-General's behalf, he advised all
parties not to travel down that disastrous road.

It is of paramount importance that all parties
exercise the utmost restraint and work through
diplomatic channels to resolve their differences. In that
regard, the Secretary-General appreciates the approach
of the Governments of Syria and Lebanon of turning to
the Security Council for redress in response to the
Israeli strike. I would also note the Lebanese Central
Security Council's statement of commitment last week
to preserving calm, security and stability in the
country. The Lebanese authorities should be
encouraged and supported in this effort.

I would note here that Israeli overflights, which
had declined in number in the latter part of September,
have showed a marked increase since early October.
The continued air violations are not helpful.

In conclusion, let me say that we are living
through difficult and dangerous days. The region is
faced with a potential broadening and deepening of
interlinked conflicts. This is a time for restraint, not
incitement. It is a time for statesmanship, not
opportunism. It is a time for the parties to look to the
longer term and to think of what kind of world they
want their children and grandchildren to live in.

The vision of two States, Israel and Palestine,
living side by side in peace and security must remain
our goal. That vision is part of a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East, including the
Syrian and Lebanese tracks. The road map still offers a
viable instrument to get from here to there. But if we
are to achieve that vision, it is essential that there be a
return to the negotiating table and, meanwhile, not only
that restraint be exercised but that there be an end to all
acts that undermine confidence among the parties.

There has to be a better way. We cannot continue
to lurch from crisis to crisis. Israelis and Palestinians
alike feel exhausted by today, and fearful for tomorrow.
We have to break the cycle of violence, revenge and
escalation. We need to work together to find that better
way.

