Mr. Garcia Moritan (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Sandra Honore' for
presenting the report (S/2016/225) of the Secretary-
General on the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH). We acknowledge her work
and the results achieved, which are contributing to
strengthening dialogue and Haiti's institutions. Let
me also acknowledge the presence of the Permanent
Representative of Haiti, Ambassador Denis Regis, and
his active delegation. We also thank the new Force
Commander, Lieutenant General Ajax Porto Pinheiro,
and Commissioner Serge Therriault.

When the Security Council considered the situation
in Haiti in October (see S/PV.7530), the electoral
process was under way and the presidential elections
were still on the horizon. Althogh the October elections
took place in relative calm, allegations of irregularities
and the tensions that were generated with regard to
the process of reviewing the results forced successive
postponements, until the indefinite suspension on
22 January. Despite those incidents, which hindered
the transition process again, fortunately it was possible
to achieve a parliamentary agreement that enabled the
establishment of a provisional Government after the
end of the mandate of President Martelly. Like other
countries in the region worried about the future of Haiti,
Argentina is closely following the process and hopes
that the Haitian people can achieve the normalization
of the political situation by concluding the electoral
process and installing a legitimate Government that can
consolidate greater stability.

With regard to the report of the Secretary-General,
Argentina is concerned about the increasing violence
in the course of the electoral process during the last
months of2015 and early this year. We remain confident
that the work of the transitional Government can help
both to reduce Violence and to successfully conclude
the electoral process.

Argentina deeply regrets that situation, although it
cannot help but recall that, when the extension of the
mandate of MINUSTAH was decided by resolution
2180 (2014), with the consequent downsizing, we,
along with other countries of the region, supported the
need to maintain an increased military presence until
the electoral process could be considered successfully
completed. Nevertheless, we should highlight the
performance of MINUSTAH personnel, who continue
to make great efforts, while prioritizing certain areas in
order to fulfil thir mandate due to a reduction in staff.
With regard to policing, Argentina recognizes
the work done on capacity-building for the Haitian
National Police under the development plan for the
period 2012-2016. We note, however, that, 10 months
from the end of that span, the level of compliance is
60 per cent, as well as the need for greater commitment
from the international community to strengthen both
the police component and to promote the reform of the
security sector. In that regard, Argentina looks forward
to the next report of the Secretary-General in order
to learn more precisely about the levels achieved. At
the same time, we are confident that the report will
make it possible to assess the situation with regard to
the election process and the recommendations to be
made by the Secretariat to the Council with regard to
the future of MINUSTAH. In that connection, I would
like to reiterate the need for the full participation of
the Haitian Government in decisions about the United
Nations presence in the country.

In conclusion, let me reaffirm Argentina's support
for the people and the Government to Haiti in their
efforts to strengthen the democratic process, security
and economic and social development of the country.

