Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome the participation in today's
meeting of the Chairman of the Presidency of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Mr. Radmanovic'. We listened
attentively to his assessment of the situation in that
country. We are grateful to the High Representative for
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Inzko, for presenting the
8
report on developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(see S/2010/575, annex).

As we see it, the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina remains complex, although we do not
wish to overdramatize it. The general elections, a very
important milestone for the country, were held in a
calm and peaceful manner. There are no direct threats
to the Dayton Peace Agreement. The viability of
Bosnia and Herzegovina as a State is reaffirmed by its
election as a non-permanent member of the Security
Council and by the successful work of its delegation in
this principal organ of the United Nations.

In these circumstances, the further continuation
of the Office of the High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, which enjoys extraordinary Bonn powers,
no longer has meaning and has become
counterproductive. Any unilateral step taken by the
High Representative will only exacerbate the situation
and provoke a response from the Bosnian sides.

The Bosnians' successful holding of elections in
accordance with international standards, as confirmed
by international observers, attests to the maturity of
Bosnian statehood and the ability of its citizens to take
decisions about the future of their country without
external guardianship. The international community
should work constructively with those leaders who
were elected by the citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
including the Republika Srpska.

In our view, the main task of the international
community in the post-election period is to transfer full
responsibility for the future of Bosnia and Herzegovina
to the Bosnians themselves. In practical terms, this
means ensuring conditions conducive to transforming
the Office of the High Representative into a mission of
the European Union Special Representative. In the
framework of the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council, we agreed on a road map to
that end - the 5+2 formula. Following the formation
of the structures of power in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and the entities, it is now necessary that we return to
that task.

It is unacceptable to link the 5+2 formula to the
achievement of objectives in the framework of the so-
called Euro-Atlantic agenda for Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The High Representative spoke at great
length - perhaps too great a length - of that today. It
is especially unacceptable to link it to the achievement
of constitutional reform, which would run counter to
10-63264
the programme, collectively agreed upon by the
Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council,
for closing the Office of the High Representative.

The lessons learned from the Butmir initiative
demonstrate that the imposition from the outside of
ready-made blueprints can only complicate dialogue
among Bosnians and lead to an unjustified
encouragement of one side. We believe that, with
respect to an issue so fundamental to the future of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, it will be possible to identify
any corrective adjustment only with the consent of all
three constituent peoples, as stipulated in the Dayton
Peace Agreement.

We agree with the view that it would be advisable
to begin without delay implementing the
recommendations set forth in December 2009 by the
European Court of Human Rights. They can and must
be implemented on the basis of compromise among the
Bosnian sides. We cannot endorse an expansive
interpretation of the opinion of the European Court of
Human Rights or attempts on that pretext to achieve a
fundamental revision of the entire Dayton construction.
Any step towards constitutional reform should be
strictly within the Dayton legal framework.

