Mrs. Yalcln (Turkey): The Middle East faces

a number of challenges, including civil wars,

humanitarian crises, terrorism and sectarianism.

But those problems are not inherent in the history or

culture of the region. We can overcome them, and we

have reasons to be optimistic. The defeat of Da'esh in

Iraq was a promising development. Turkey's operations
against Da'esh and the Kurdish Workers Party, the
Democratic Union Party and the People's Protection
Units were important steps in our common fight against
terrorism. Now the international community must be
united to build upon those achievements on the basis of
international law.

What the Palestinians have been witnessing in the
last few months is total disregard for all the values
we have vowed to uphold since the establishment
of the United Nations system and a clear violation
of international law. On 1 June (see S/PV.8274), the
Security Council once again failed to shoulder its
responsibility to maintain international peace and
security. The Council's draft resolution S/2018/516,
on the protection of Palestinian civilians, could have
been a small step towards overcoming the deep sense of
injustice and resentment in the Middle East. It was a call
to alleviate human suffering and to look for peaceful
means to deter and prevent attacks on civilians.

Upon the Council's failure to act, the General
Assembly had to take action on 13 June (see A/ES-10/ PV.38). With the adoption of resolution ES-10/20, the
Assembly restored the credibility of the United Nations.
It proved that the Palestinian people are not alone in the
face ofgrave violations oftheir fundamental rights. Now,
the international community should closely monitor
the implementation of the resolution, which calls on
the Secretary-General to submit his recommendations,
including on the international protection mechanism.

Last week we saw yet another provocative
development. The Jewish nation-State law, adopted
by the Israeli Parliament, disregards the universal
principles of international law and the fundamental
rights of the Palestinian citizens of Israel. It aims to
disguise the ongoing occupation and discard the vision
of the two-State solution. The international community
should react to that law.

I will not elaborate on the remark the representative
of Israel made about my country. It is an attempt to
cover up Israel's illegal practices and actions, and it
aims to create a distraction.

We should never forget that the historical injustice
against the Palestinian people fuels hatred, alienation
and radicalism in the region and beyond. It is time for
the international community to renew its engagement
in seeking a solution to the problem. Turkey will
continue to support efforts to find a just, comprehensive
and lasting solution to the conflict and to establish a
sovereign and independent Palestinian State within the
pre-1967 borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital.

While we maintain our hopes for a political solution,
we cannot ignore the humanitarian consequences
of the occupation. As of 1 July, Turkey assumed the
chairmanship of the Advisory Commission of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). That vital Agency
is faced with a serious budget shortfall. Turkey's focus,
during its Advisory Commission chairmanship, will be
on placing the Agency on a sufficient, sustainable and
predictable footing. Bringing to life the endowment
fund of the World Bank and the Waqf Fund of the
Islamic Development Bank will create crucial new
avenues for the sustainable financing of the Agency.

I will not go into the details of the references made
by the representative of the United States about my
country. Let me briefly note for the record that we are
not a nation known to publicize or praise ourselves for
our humanitarian or development assistance. What we
do for Palestine and Palestinian refugees is not limited
to our contributions to and through UNRWA. We
would be pleased to share privately the details of our
assistance with those interested, but at this meeting let
me just recall that according to Global Humanitarian
Assistance programme, Development Initiatives,
Turkey is the leading country in that respect, with
$8.7 billion in humanitarian assistance. This represents
a 0.85 per cent ratio between our national income and
humanitarian assistance globally and makes us the
most generous country in the world.

In Syria, the regime continues to seek a military
solution. Needless to say, this approach is doomed
to fail and serves only to exacerbate the plight of the
Syrian people. There has, however, been some progress
towards the establishment of a constitutional committee.
Almost two weeks ago, the opposition submitted
its updated list of candidates for the constitutional
committee to Mr. Staffan de Mistura, Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for Syria.

The Astana guarantors will continue their
discussions on the committee with Mr. De Mistura in
Geneva in the coming weeks and at their next meeting,
to be held at the end of the month. The United Nations-
led Geneva process remains the main venue for finding
a lasting political solution to the Syrian conflict,
in line with resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva
communique (S/2012/522, annex).

I would like to briefly touch upon Law No. 10
enacted by the Syrian regime, which seeks to confiscate
the properties of millions of displaced Syrians. Law
No. 10, if implemented, would threaten to expropriate
millions of displaced Syrians, depriving them of their
homes and land. This clearly runs counter to and grossly
undermines the United Nations-led efforts to find a
political solution, jeopardizes reconciliation prospects
and flagrantly defies the fundamental principles of
international law.

Two weeks ago, in a joint letter addressed to the
President of the Security Council and the Secretary-
General signed by 40 countries, including Turkey and
Germany, we urged the international community to
oppose the implementation of this law.

In the face of the grim developments on the
ground, our determination to address the plight of the
Palestinian and Syrian people and our trust in their
resilience remain strong.

