Mr. Kavakure (Burundi) (Spoke in French): It is a
pleasure for me to convey, on behalf of the Government
of Burundi and myself, the sincere greetings of the
President of the Republic, Mr. Pierre Nkurunziza, to
all members of the Security Council. I have been asked
in particular to convey the President's best wishes to
the Secretary-General and all members of the United
Nations system, and his hope that 2014 will be a
year of good health for the representatives and their
respective families and of success for all the projects
they undertake.

I would be remiss were I not to express my
gratitude to the President of the Security Council
and the Chair of the Burundi configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission for their open cooperation
with our Government and all their efforts in the context
of peacebuilding in Burundi.

We would also like to acknowledge the United
Nations Office in Burundi (BNUB) and in particular
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, for his praiseworthy
contribution to peacebuilding in Burundi.

On the occasion of the presentation of the report of
the Secretary-General on Burundi (S/2014/36), we must
come to a decision on the future of our cooperation with
a view to strengthening the achievements in the areas
of democracy and peace in our country. I would like
to share some considerations on this item with Council
members.

I should like briefly to summarize the mission's
history. The Peacebuilding Commission was created by
resolution 1645 (2005) adopted on 20 December 2005.
Burundi, with other countries emerging from conflict,
such as Liberia and Sierra Leone, has been subject to the

Commission's peacebuilding programme since 23 June
2006. A United Nations office tasked with monitoring
that programme, the Peacebuilding Support Office, and
the Peacebuilding Fund, established to finance related
projects, were also created.

Since then, the Office in charge of the programme
in New York and the United Nations Office in
Burundi - originally the United Nations Integrated
Office in Burundi (BINUB) - have worked with
the Burundian Government and other local and
international partners in many priority areas, including
good governance, the strengthening of the rule of
law, the rebuilding of communities, land issues, the
mobilization and coordination of regional integration,
and the gender dimension. That work has been carried
out through various commitments, informal and formal
meetings, and on-site visits. The follow-up of the
Burundi peacebuilding programme was also undertaken
by the Burundi configuration. The chairmanship of the
configuration was held first by Norway in 2007, then
Sweden in 2008, and by Switzerland since 2009.

The gradual drawdown of the United Nations
Operation in Burundi was the result of a compromise
between the United Nations and Burundi, in light of
the fact that the political, social and security situations
were increasingly improving. It was therefore time
to transform the mission into the United Nations
Integrated Office in Burundi with a mandate to build
peace and strengthen national capacities.

The transformation of BINUB into BNUB, with a
light footprint, for a first reporting period beginning
1 January 2011 was, as we all know, motivated by a
political, social and security situation that was also
becoming increasingly manageable. It therefore
followed that there was a need to continue building
peace and combatting poverty, which are the principal
enemies of Burundian society. The objective of the
Office was to develop, together with the Government,
a series of criteria for the future transformation of the
United Nations Office in Burundi into a United Nations
country team and to report regularly to the Security
Council on the progress achieved in that regard.

On 24 January 2013, the Government of Burundi
called on the international community from this
Chamber (see S/PV.6909) to take into account the
significant progress made by our country in many
areas and to move to a new framework for cooperation
with the United Nations in carrying out the gradual
transformation of BNUB into a new United Nations
country team in Burundi. The Government of Burundi
believed that a period of 12 months was more than
enough to carry out the transformation. However,
despite the fact that the Secretary-General's set of
benchmarks of 10 May 2012 allowed for the beginning
of the gradual transition of BNUB into a country
team, the Security Council decided to extend BNUB's
mandate for a second time until 15 February 2014,
pursuant to resolution 2090 (2013) of 13 February 2013.

The Government of Burundi has cooperated fully
with the United Nations in the thorough implementation
of resolution 2090 (2013), thereby complying with all
the relevant provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations in general and of its Article 25 in particular.

We transmitted a note dated 16 August 2013, to
the Secretary-General reiterating the desire of the
Government of the Republic of Burundi, in the view of
the progress achieved in all areas, as assessed against the
benchmarks for Burundi's peacebuilding programme,
to see BNUB's mandate come to an end on 15 February
2014, with responsibilities transferred to the United
Nations country team in Burundi, in accordance with
resolution 2090 (2013), of 13 February 2013.

The letter of the Secretary-General to the President
of the Republic of Burundi dated 26 December 2013,
referring to the talks held in Paris on the side-lines of
the Elysee Summit for Peace and Security in Africa, on
6 December 2013, brought the following points to his
attention:

"Following consultations, members of the
Security Council said they were reassured by the
dialogue under way between the two parties seeking
a solution that would adequately combine both the
desire for greater national ownership with the need
to provide optimal support to national efforts so as
to ensure together the success of the final stage of
the peacebuilding process and the strengthening of
democratic institutions. Such an approach would
allow for the gradual transition from the BNUB
presence towards activities focused primarily on
development assistance and carried out by the
United Nations country team."

In his letter to the Secretary-General dated
31 December 2013, the President of the Republic
welcomed the open collaboration that exists and will
always exist, as well as the various forms of support
Burundi enjoys and will continue to benefit from
through the United Nations. He nevertheless reaffirmed
the position of Burundi to uphold resolution 2090
(2013), which sets the end-date of BNUB's mandate
as 15 February 2014, and provides for the subsequent
transfer of responsibilities to the United Nations
country team.

I would now like to make some comments on the
report before the Council today, beginning with the
democratic process. As indicated in the Secretary-
General's set of benchmarks of 10 May 2012 and in
paragraph 6 of the report before the Council today,
inclusive political dialogue between the political parties
and the Government continued and will continue in the
framework of the first theme of the new peacebuilding
priority plan, namely, social cohesion and national
dialogue.

The Government endorses the recommendation
in paragraph 17 that electoral assistance be provided
to Burundi until 2015. The envisioned delivery of that
assistance could very well be carried out by a United
Nations country team in collaboration with other
partners mentioned in the report. In our view, the link
between the elections of 2015 and prolonging BNUB's
mandate is not well established, given that there are
other mechanisms, including election observations,
that will involve a team of United Nations observers in
the run-up to, during and after the elections.

With regard to part B of the report, on security
and stability, the Government is of the View that
development aid is precisely what is needed to
respond to the problems of crime and armed robbery
resulting from the poor economic conditions and high
unemployment that affect a large part of the Burundian
population, as the report correctly stipulates.

With respect to paragraphs 19 to 23, the Government
is of the View that the professionalization of the defence
and security services is a long-term task, and thanks
the United Nations and other, bilateral, partners for
the multifaceted support provided to date in this area.
We View this as an area in which cooperation could
continue with the country team and leading bilateral
partners.

In that regard, the greatly appreciated presence of
Burundian troops in peacekeeping operations in Haiti,
the Sudan, Cote d'Ivoire and, in particular, Somalia and
the Central African Republic, is an eloquent illustration
that substantial progress has been made in the context
of the professionalization of our defence and security
forces. We are still, nonetheless, far from perfect.
This is a long-term task that must continue with all
of our development partners involved in this area of
cooperation.

With regard to transitional justice, addressed in
part C of the report, it is noted in paragraphs 24 and
25 that the Government is engaged in the process of
establishing a truth and reconciliation commission.
But for us, this is a matter of such great importance
that we must give it the necessary time to become
operational, once we have prepared the hearts of the
Burundian people. In that regard, we thank BNUB for
the workshops it held on this topic for representatives
of the National Assembly and Senators in April and
September 2013.

With regard to governance and institutional
strengthening, as addressed in part D of the report, the
Government of Burundi expresses its deep appreciation
for the support provided to institutions involved in
fighting corruption, the Office of the Ombudsman
and other local partners involved in the fight against
corruption, on the one hand, as well as for the
workshops held to raise awareness among civil society
organizations, Government officials and police officers
and the army, on the other.

Regarding the developments related to the
Commission nationale des terres et autres biens, the
Government believes that this is a work in progress and
that the outstanding issues can be considered under the
fourth theme of the new peacebuilding priority plan,
that is, the peaceful resolution of land disputes. It
should also be emphasized that the membership of the
Commission is inclusive and balanced along ethic and
regional lines.

With regard to the rule of law, as addressed in part
E of the report, it is clear that this is an ideal, which no
country in the world has ever perfected. In that respect,
the Government has undertaken a great number of
initiatives, including the National Conference on
Justice, the strategic plan of the Conseil superieur de la
magistrature on judicial ethics and the revision of the
prison legal framework and corrections policy, all with
a view to improving the Burundian justice system.

With regard to human rights, and the paragraphs of

part F of the report, here too, the Government recognizes
that much progress has been made in the promotion and
protection of human rights. But challenges certainly
remain, and the Government of Burundi recognizes that.
That is why the third theme of the new peacebuilding
priority plan has been selected to continue to support,
in particular, the Independent National Commission on
Human Rights, whose performance has been praised by
a variety of partners.

As for regional integration, it is for us a political
choice inscribed in letters of gold in our two main
development policy instruments: Vision Burundi 2025,
which is a development planning tool that will guide
policies and strategies until 2025, and the second
version of its Strategic Framework for Growth and
the Fight against Poverty, which is anchored in Vision
Burundi 2025 and represents the federative context of
all sectoral and cross-sectoral policies.

With regard to economic and social development,
Burundi is aware that it cannot achieve the Millennium
Development Goals by the target date. Considerable
progress has been made, however, especially in the
social sectors, such as education and health. In any
event, development aid is essential to accelerating the
achievement of the Millennium Development Goals. To
that end, in July and October 2013 Burundi organized
sectoral conferences with its development partners so
as to ensure that the promises made in Geneva in 2012
are followed up by effective engagement.
With respect to the issue of the resettlement of
returnees and displaced persons, Burundi is striving
with great commitment, alongside its partners, to
make it a success. To that end, we have developed a
national strategy for the socioeconomic reintegration of
conflict-affected populations.

As to issues related to peacebuilding, as addressed
under section C of part III of the report, the United
Nations country team in Burundi will simply apply the
peacebuilding priority plan, which is the outcome of
a highly participatory and inclusive process involving
all key actors, including the Government, civil society
organizations, the international community and the
United Nations system in Burundi.

It is important to note that in 2013, in order to
consolidate peace and security, the Government
launched two very important national programmes: the
national security strategy and a national education and
patriotic training programme. Peace and security are
now a reality in Burundi, and strengthening them will
remain a top priority for our Government because they
are the foundation of and the appropriate framework for
achieving our political, social and economic agenda.

With regard to the observations and recommendations
set out in the report, the Government of Burundi
takes note of the advice, contained from paragraph
66 onwards, concerning the conduct of fair, inclusive
and transparent elections. In this regard and as already
mentioned, the dialogue meetings among politicians,
organized in March 2013, as well as the constructive
atmosphere that prevailed during the consultations of
19 and 20 December 2013, are eloquent expressions of
the manifest intention of the Government to ensure the
success of the 2015 elections. We organized the 2005
and 2010 elections to the full satisfaction of the national
and international communities, and there is no doubt
that we shall do even better in 2015.

Again with respect to observations and
recommendations, paragraph 75 - regarding the
Secretary-General's proposal to end the BNUB
mandate on 15 February 2015 by extending it for an
additional 12 months - has attracted the particular
attention of our Government, which had requested a
transitional period of six months in order to allow for
the dismantling of BNUB and the gradual transfer of
its responsibilities to the United Nations country team
in Burundi.

In the spirit of our harmonious collaboration and
open cooperation with the Secretary-General, and after
extensive consultations with various stakeholders,
the Government of Burundi submits to the Security
Council the following proposals.

First, we request the Council to adopt a resolution
closing the United Nations Office in Burundi pursuant
to resolution 2090 (2013). Secondly, we request
the Secretary-General to determine the practical
arrangements for the closure of BNUB and the gradual
transfer of responsibilities to the United Nations
country team in Burundi, with periodic - perhaps
quarterly - progress reports, before the end of 2014.
Thirdly, we request the Secretary-General to ensure
that the new United Nations country team in Burundi is
up and running by January 2015. Fourthly, we request
the Secretary-General to consider the establishment,
immediately after the closing of BNUB, of a team of
electoral observers to be deployed before, during and
after elections scheduled in Burundi in 2015.

We solemnly call on the Security Council to support
and understand our position concerning the end of the
BNUB mandate, the objective of which is to close, in
harmony and in concert, 3 very successful mission that
will remain a good model for post-conflict situations.

In conclusion, we reiterate our deep appreciation
for all the support that our country has enjoyed and will
continue to enjoy from the United Nations system on
our long road to development.

