I thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo; Ambassador Olof Skoog, Head of the Delegation of the European Union to the United Nations; and Ambassador Philippe Kridelka, Permanent Representative of Belgium to the United Nations, for their briefings. The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA), on the Iranian nuclear issue, is an important achievement of multilateral diplomacy. Endorsed by the Security Council in resolution 2231 (2015), it is legally binding and should be effectively implemented. To preserve the JCPOA is to uphold multilateralism, maintain peace and stability in the Middle East, safeguard the international nuclear non-proliferation regime and the international order underpinned by international law. The unilateral withdrawal from the JCPOA by the United States of America, its continued maximum pressure on Iran and its action to undermine the efforts of parties to uphold the agreement are the root causes of the current predicament on the Iranian nuclear issue. Since the beginning of this year, the United States has openly pushed for the extension of the arms embargo against Iran in the Security Council, demanded the invocation of the snapback mechanism and unilaterally announced the reinstatement of sanctions against Iran. With disregard for the views of the international community, the United States staged several farces. Faced with the unreasonable demands of the United States, the overwhelming majority of Council members adhered to an objective and fair stand, refused to endorse the United States position and did not recognize any legal, political or practical effects of its actions. The President of the Security Council also concluded to be in no position to take any action on the United States request. That represents a resounding rejection of bullying over fairness and justice, and of unilateralism for multilateralism. It reflects vividly the support of the international community for justice and multilateralism. At present, the situation regarding the Iranian nuclear issue is facing significant changes and new opportunities and challenges. All parties should maintain calm and show restraint, resolutely implement the JCPOA, resolve differences through dialogue and consultation under the framework of the Joint Commission and restore the balance of rights and obligations under the JCPOA. A virtual meeting of Foreign Ministers was successfully convened yesterday on the Iranian nuclear issue. The parties reaffirmed their commitment to safeguarding and ensuring the complete and effective implementation of the JCPOA and resolution 2231 (2015), recognizing the prospect of the United States rejoining the JCPOA and agreeing to make joint efforts to push for the swift return of the United States to the agreement. The ministerial meeting sent a strong, positive message to the world. All parties should seize the opportunity to speed up engagement and consultations, strengthen diplomatic efforts and bring the JCPOA back on the right track as soon as possible. The most urgent task at the moment is for the United States to mend its ways, promptly rejoin the agreement unconditionally and return to full compliance. China understands that certain countries have concerns about issues such as regional security. Yet linking them directly to the JCPOA and demanding the reopening of negotiations on the agreement will create new obstacles and add new complications to resolving the dilemma over the Iranian nuclear issue. At the ministerial meeting of the Security Council on the situation in the Gulf region held on October 20 (see S/2020/1037), State Counselor and Foreign Minister Wang Yi proposed building up a multilateral dialogue platform for the region to launch an inclusive dialogue, discuss regional security issues and continuously build consensus by addressing the easier issues first, before moving on to the difficult ones. We are willing to link the Chinese initiative with similar ones from Russia and others, learn from each other and forge synergies. Council members and regional countries can use this as a basis, act in good faith, earnestly engage in dialogue and discussion and gradually build up momentum so as to strive for a consensus that addresses the legitimate concerns of all parties and meets the expectations of the international community. In his report (S/2020/1177), the Secretary-General acknowledges the role of the JCPOA as the best way to comprehensively and completely resolve the Iranian nuclear issue. The Secretary-General calls on all parties to constructively resolve differences through the dispute resolution mechanism, thanks all parties for supporting the operation of the Instrument in Support of Trade Exchanges and states his belief that it is vital for all parties, under the current economic and pandemic circumstances, to carry out economic and trade cooperation with Iran. China appreciates those positive elements. Just now, Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo presented a few facts in her briefing, including Council members' universal rejection of the United States push for the reinstatement of sanctions against Iran in disregard of the call of the international community, and Iran's incomplete compliance with its obligations under the agreement, as well as the concerns of the Secretary-General about the current tension in the Gulf region. China hopes that the Secretary-General and the Secretariat will continue to promote and facilitate the diplomatic efforts of all parties and continue to play an important role in helping resolve the Iranian nuclear issue. China has always been committed to maintaining the authority of the Security Council resolution and the effectiveness of the JCPOA. China will continue to stand on the right side of history, firmly uphold multilateralism and work with all the parties concerned to make unremitting efforts to promote a political and diplomatic settlement to the Iranian nuclear issue and safeguard peace and stability in the Gulf region. Based on the programme of work for the month and barring the unexpected, this is the last Security Council meeting for the year 2020. I would like to take this opportunity to bid farewell to the five departing non-permanent members: Belgium, the Dominican Republic, Germany, Indonesia and South Africa. I thank them for their efforts and contributions in advancing the work of the Security Council over the past two years. I hope that, after their tenure, they will continue, as always, to render support and cooperation. Last but not least, I hope that the upcoming year, 2021, will bring everybody health and tranquillity, peace and security, solidarity and cooperation.
