Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
want first of all to thank Sir Kieran Prendergast for the
valuable information he has given us and for the data
sheet circulated. This is undoubtedly a very useful tool
to keep this Council up-to-date.

On several occasions, we have received first-hand
information from the head of the United Nations
Political Office in Bougainville (UNPOB) on the
progress in the peace process in Bougainville. In
December of last year we received good news about
the Peace Agreement that was signed in Arawa in
August 2001 and the three components of the
Agreement: autonomy, the referendum and the
weapons collection programme. On that occasion, the
members of the Security Council welcomed the signing
of that Agreement.

Adoption by parliament on 27 March in a second
round of the constitutional reforms needed for the
adoption of the peace agreement was an important step
and was highlighted as such by the Security Council. In
this regard, we must recognize the positive role that
UNPOB has played under Ambassador Noel Sinclair.
Members of the Security Council, including our own
delegation, have underscored the importance of the
prompt and effective implementation of the weapons
collection plan. Nonetheless, as has rightly been
mentioned, the weapons disposal plan has been
stagnating, and all indications are that it will be
difficult to complete that process within the new time
frame. The account given by Sir Kieran Prendergast in
his briefing would seem to bear that out, as the
impatience of former combatants and the campaign to
discredit the process seem inauspicious in that respect.

Another matter of concern - this, too, was
mentioned in earlier statements - is the economic
situation in Bougainville, as well as in Papua New
Guinea in general. With regard to the economic
situation in Bougainville, it has been said that what
little there was has been destroyed by the armed
conflict. At present, there is no medium-sized or large-
scale industry, but merely a subsistence economy. In
the past, Ambassador Sinclair has been emphatic in
saying that a failure to improve the economic situation
would have a negative impact on the attitude of the
population towards the Peace Agreement and would
make it more difficult to reintegrate former
combatants.

Since the signing of the Lincoln Agreement in
January 1998, the peace process in Papua New Guinea
has been making slow but steady progress. We hope
that that trend will not be reversed now. The new
Government of Sir Michael Somare is also committed
to implementing the Agreement. The international
community must continue to support this process. In
this regard, we also want to acknowledge the work that
has been done by the members of the Peace Monitoring
Group - Australia, New Zealand, Fiji and Vanuatu.

The weapons disposal plan is of considerable
importance. Some progress has been made, but we
know that a great deal remains to be done. Under the
Arawa Agreement, UNPOB must certify that the
weapons have been collected as a precondition for the
holding of the referendum in Bougainville.

Having said this, we support the extension of the
mandate of UNPOB in terms that will ensure that a
further contribution can be made to the process.

