Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): Let me begin by
thanking you, Madam President, for steering this very
important open debate on the situation in the Middle
East. I also convey our appreciation to Under-
Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for his insightful and
comprehensive briefing this morning.

I also wish to state that the delegation of
Bangladesh aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Egypt on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement. In addition, I wish briefly to
make certain points that Bangladesh believes to be of
importance.

A sustainable resolution of the Arab-Israeli
conflict, including the issue of Palestine, which is the
core of the long-lasting crisis, must be our collective
strategic objective. All Member States should pledge
complete commitment to that objective and throw their
full moral, diplomatic, political and economic support
behind its early realization. In that connection, we
continue to encourage the efforts of Jordan to ensure
peace between Palestine and Israel. Allow me to
highlight some of the recent developments following
our last quarterly debate on the issue (see S/PV.6706).

The Quartet last met on 11 April. However, there
has been little progress towards meeting the timeline
set out by the Quartet on 23 September 2011 for an
agreement by the end of 2012. In particular, the
deadline for parties to engage in direct negotiations and
to exchange proposals for border and security
arrangements by 26 January was missed. Only the
Palestinian Authority submitted the requested
proposals. IN that regard, we stress the need for the
Quartet to adopt a clear position on the 1967 borders,
including East Jerusalem, as one of the parameters for
direct negotiations. Let me urge the Quartet also to
ease the financial burden of the Palestinian Authority.
There should be renewed commitments to increase
financial assistance to Palestine.

It is encouraging to note that United States
President Barack Obama phoned Palestinian President
Mahmoud Abbas on 19 March, reaffirming the United
States commitment to the peace process and the
Quartet objectives.

On 27 March, Special Coordinator Robert Serry
briefed the Council (see S/PV.6742), reporting that
prospects for direct negotiations remained slim, and
that without a political horizon, the State-building
efforts of the Palestinian Authority were at risk.

On 22 March, the Human Rights Council adopted
a resolution establishing an independent international
fact-finding mission to investigate the implications of
Israeli settlements for the rights of Palestinians in the
occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem. We hope that the mission will be granted
due access to the occupied territories.

One of the disturbing elements of the Israel-
Palestine conflict is Israel's utterance that it would not
negotiate with a Palestinian Government that includes
Hamas, although on 6 February Hamas and Fatah
agreed on an interim Government, led by President
Abbas, that would prepare for presidential and
parliamentary elections.

We are afraid that progress on implementing the
agreement will be slow as a result of such declarations.
Instead of a pick-and-choose mentality, respect for
democratically elected representatives should be the
norm across nations.

It is also disheartening to note the dim prospects
for Palestine's application for United Nations
membership. The application was in effect put on the
shelf after the Admissions Committee reported that it
had been unable to reach a unanimous recommendation.

The situation of the approximately 4,400
Palestinian prisoners in Israeli detention centres, 300
of whom are under administrative detention, also
remains a cause of worry for those who believe in
human rights and the fairness of justice, in particular as
some detainees have continued to protest their situation
through hunger strikes. Those detained must either be
charged and face trial with judicial guarantees or
released without delay. The human rights of those
detainees should be honoured.

We believe that the best guides for achieving a
two-State solution are, inter alia, the relevant General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions, including
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 425 (1978), the
principle of land for peace, the Madrid Conference
terms of reference, the road map and the Arab Peace
Initiative.

Achieving a lasting solution in the Middle East,
we believe, will guarantee the State of Israel its
national security and peace. However, achieving that
goal will require Israel's complete and unconditional
withdrawal from the occupied Palestinian territories,
including East Jerusalem.

Finally, let me reiterate Bangladesh's full support
for a lasting peace for all inhabitants of the region,
both Arabs and Israelis, and our strong commitment to
the realization of an independent, sovereign and viable
State of Palestine, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital,
living side by side and in peace and harmony with all
its neighbours.

