Mr. Chen Xu (China): The Chinese delegation
welcomes the report submitted to the Security Council by
the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict and thanks the Secretary-General for his
presentation just now. We would also like to take this
opportunity to express our appreciation to you, Mr.
President, and to the delegation of the Netherlands for
arranging this open debate.

The protection of civilians in armed conflict has
always been of concern to Governments around the world
and to the relevant bodies of the United Nations. In too
many places around the world, armed conflicts are still
raging that not only endanger world peace and security and
undermine regional development and stability, but also
inflict terrible suffering on the civilians caught up in them.
Vulnerable groups, including women and children, suffer
the most in armed conflicts.

We have noted with satisfaction that the report by the
Secretary-General draws a detailed picture of the misery of
civilians in armed conflict, the grave dangers they face and
the potential impact on regional security and stability. The
report also contains an incisive analysis on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict from many different
perspectives - political, legal, humanitarian, disarmament
and peacekeeping - and puts forward a number of bold,
creative and enlightening recommendations. We are of the
View that these recommendations deserve a careful study
and in-depth discussion in the Council. We are in favour of
implementing some of those recommendations, where
feasible.

The fundamental way to protect civilians in armed
conflict is to effectively prevent and do away with conflict.
This bears on the survival and development of civilians in
armed conflict as well as on regional and international
peace and stability. It is an important and pressing task
facing the international community, especially the United
Nations. The Security Council, which bears primary
responsibility for international peace and stability, has an
unshirkable duty in this area. We strongly oppose military
actions in circumvention of the Security Council that may
result in conflict on an even larger scale. We believe that
the Council should continue its active efforts to put an
early end to conflicts and defusing crises, for that is the
contribution it should make to the protection of civilians
in armed conflict.

China believes at the same time that the international
community should take further steps to eradicate the root
cause of armed conflicts by helping countries concerned
in poverty eradication, economic development, national
reconciliation and the maintenance of national stability. In
this sense, the issue of protecting civilians in armed
conflict cuts across the political, humanitarian,
development and assistance fields and would thus be
more appropriately and more thoroughly deliberated in the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council.
We are in favour of strengthening cooperation and
coordination between the Security Council and other
United Nations bodies, but we also believe that the
various bodies of the United Nations system should have
a distinct division of work and operate accordingly. If the
Security Council were to become overly involved in
issues, such as human rights, which fall under the
purview of other United Nations bodies, its attention to
peace and security issues would be diverted and the work
of those other United Nations bodies unduly affected.

While the issue of the protection of civilians in
armed conflicts is under discussion, another issue that
naturally comes to mind is that of humanitarian
assistance. We are of the view that no matter when and
where armed conflict breaks out, the international
community should urge the parties concerned to put an
early end to the conflict through peaceful means; strictly
abide by international law, including international
humanitarian and human rights law; make every possible
effort to protect and assist civilians in armed conflict; and
prevent and prohibit acts of violence against civilians in
armed conflict or the blockage of humanitarian assistance
to civilians.

We call on the international community to discard
double standards in the humanitarian sphere and to give
equal attention to acts of violence against civilians in
armed conflicts around the world, rather than take a
selective approach.

 

In recent years, destabilizing factors have refused to
abate in Africa. Regional conflicts and turbulence
continually emerge. The crises in some countries even show
signs of getting worse. The African people have gone
through unimaginable sufferings. It is high time for the
international community to take the necessary measures to
support the efforts of African countries and regional
organizations to resolve the conflicts and to provide
concrete and meaningful assistance to get African civilians
out of harm's way in armed conflicts.

The Chinese Government has always paid great
attention to the issue of protecting civilians in armed
conflict. China has always been actively involved in the
deliberations of this issue in the General Assembly and
other United Nations bodies concerned. We support the
adoption of a council resolution based on the presidential
statement issued by the Council in February this year and
will vote in favour of the draft resolution before us.

