Mr. Hasan (Iraq) (interpretation from Arabic): I
should like to make several observations with regard to
the two statements made by the representatives of the
United States of America and of the United Kingdom.

 

First, we have often heard the shopworn version of
events to which they referred, and it does not change the
fact that the United States has declared that it will use the
right of veto to prevent any resolution aimed at lifting the
sanctions imposed on Iraq and that it wants the sanctions,
which have so far murdered more than 1.5 million Iraqis
and which are still killing them, to remain in effect. Nor
does it change the fact that in 1991 the forces of the
coalition destroyed Iraqi infrastructures and killed thousands
of Iraqi civilians in pursuit of then Secretary of State James
Baker's intention to take Iraq back to the pre-industrial age.
Was that the aim of the Security Council?

The representative of the United States said that we
tried to erase a State. But that State is independent and has
been under American protection since 1991. What more is
required of Iraq?

As regards the oil-for-food programme, everyone
knows that it is temporary and weighed down with
bureaucracy. It is also time-consuming: the time lapse
between approval of a contract and delivery is more than
one year. If we add to that the role of the United States and
the United Kingdom in obstructing the contracts, we find
that the programme has not been and will not be able to
stop the deterioration in the humanitarian situation in Iraq.

As regards the no-fly zones, in 1992 the official
United Nations spokesman, Joe Sills, emphasized that the
no-fly zones had nothing to do with the United Nations but
represented a unilateral action. A few days ago, the United

 

States representative, Ambassador Burleigh, in an
interview with the newspaper Al Hayat, acknowledged
that there are members of the Council who feel that the
imposition of such zones is illegal. Today, a permanent
member made such a statement.

Is it acceptable for a State that is a permanent
member of the Council to use force against an
independent State, in contravention of Security Council
resolutions and the United Nations Charter? If it does so,
should it not pay the same price that it has caused others
to pay?

The representative of the United Kingdom insulted
the intelligence of those present when he said that their
aircraft launch their smart bombs to kill our children in
self-defence. He insulted our intelligence when he said
that Iraq breached the no-fly zone on 90 occasions. Is it
permissible to say that a State violated its own airspace
90 times? Such logic leads to the law of the jungle; it
should not be repeated. The United States and the United
Kingdom are the last countries that should lecture people
on respect for international law and the United Nations
Charter, and the last that are entitled to shed crocodile
tears over the Iraqi people, whom they massacre every
day. This farce should come to an end.
