Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): Allow me to start by

thanking Ambassador Gary Quinlan of Australia for his
update of the 90-day report and for his able leadership
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006). We encourage the Committee this year to
continue working with Member States seeking guidance
on the implementation of the sanctions regime. With
the continued support of the Panel of Experts, Member
States can be reassured of proper guidance towards
implementation of the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council.
We would like to reiterate our belief in the three
pillars of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation ofNuclear
Weapons: non-proliferation, disarmament and the use
of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. In our view,
every country has the right to develop nuclear energy
for peaceful purposes, and in this context Rwanda
appreciates the current positive momentum in the talks
between the P5+1 and Iran. We take note of the initial
steps taken and commitments undertaken by the Islamic
Republic of Iran towards the implementation of the
joint plan of action adopted in Geneva on 24 November
2013, and we hope that Tehran will continue fulfilling
its obligations in that respect. We welcome the current
spirit in ongoing negotiations aimed at reaching a
comprehensive agreement that could permanently
remove the threat that the Iranian nuclear programme
poses to the countries of the region.

In the meantime, the sanctions regime remains
in place, and the 1737 Committee shall continue to
implement relevant resolutions of the Security Council
with the assistance of the Panel of Experts. However,
we urge all stakeholders - in particular, members of
the P5+l - to avoid any decision that could undermine
the current talks. As stated by the Committee Chair,
last year Iran did not reply to two letters from the
Committee regarding an incident investigated by the
Panel ofExperts - the letter dated 12 April 2013, on the
launched of the Shahab-l and Shahab-3 missiles during
the Great Prophet VII exercises, in contravention of
resolution 1929 (2010), and the letter 21 May, 2013, on
an intercepted arms shipment in Yemen, in probably
violation of resolution 1747 (2007). We hope that
the Iranian Government will have a better approach
towards the Committee in 2014, which could amplify
the current positive momentum.

Similarly, Rwanda is concerned at reported
violations of the sanctions regime by Member States
and other entities. It is important for all actors to
implement the sanctions regime in good faith and to
work towards negotiated solutions. In that regard, we
are concerned over reports on the interception in the
Red Sea by Israeli forces ofa ship transporting ballistic
missiles, reportedly of Iranian origin, to the Gaza
Strip. We hope that the Panel of Experts will carry out
a proper investigation in that regard.

In conclusion, Rwanda looks forward to the final
report of the Panel of Experts to be submitted in May.
We hope that with the implementation of the Geneva
joint plan of action, the progress in the current talks for
the comprehensive agreement and the full collaboration
with the 1737 Committee, the Islamic Republic of Iran
and other international stakeholders could play an
important in ensuring that all sanctions that continue to
harm the Iranian people are permanently lifted.

