Mr. Aman (Malaysia): At the outset, Mr. President,
I would like to congratulate you and the Chinese
delegation on China's assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of February. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for his briefing.

Malaysia is pleased to note that under China's
presidency thus far, the Council has taken some
important decisions and had productive discussions
on a number of issues and situations around the world.
I understand that discussions on a number of very
challenging situations are ongoing, and I wish the
Council success in its deliberations. I also take this
opportunity, Mr. President, to wish you a belated happy
Chinese New Year, and I hope the Year of the Golden
Sheep brings much success, happiness and prosperity
to one and all.

The concept note (S/2015/87, annex) circulated
ahead of our discussion today outlined five broad
thematic areas. In my view, a full discussion of the
themes and issues related to them would certainly not
be possible today, given the time constraints. That being
the case, I intend to focus on just a few key issues, with
a view to contributing to the wider discussions.

First, Malaysia welcomes today's debate and
believes it affords a timely opportunity for the Council
to take stock of its achievements so far and to reflect
on the challenges it faces in its continuing mission of
maintaining international peace and security. Such
reflection, in our view, is both necessary and urgent,
given the increasingly complex and multidimensional
nature of the new and emerging threats and challenges
to international peace and security that we face as a
global community and must address together. Almost
70 years after the Council was established, it seems
clear that the threats and challenges it faces in 2015 are
different from those it faced earlier and perhaps equally
complex, if not more so.

From a historical perspective, Malaysia holds
the view that the Council has a mixed record in
terms of discharging its Charter-mandated roles and
responsibilities. During the Cold War period, the
Council appeared paralysed by numerous conflicts
that were fought around the world, many of which
were ideologically motivated proxy wars. We recall the
frustration and despair felt at the seeming powerlessness
of the Council and the United Nations to act in the face
of atrocities perpetrated by the likes of the Khmer
Rouge and former regimes in Latin America, as well
as the crimes against humanity witnessed in Bosnia
and Rwanda, among others - not to mention the still
desperate situation in Palestine, which has remained
unresolved for almost as long as the Council and the
United Nations have been in existence.

The exuberance and, some say, the triumphal
optimism demonstrated when the Soviet bloc collapsed
in the early 1990s nurtured nascent hopes that a new,
multipolar system would succeed the previous bipolar
order. Fast-forward to the present day, and we see that
the continuing military and economic preponderance
of certain States over others continues to dominate
and shape international discourse and policymaking at
the macro level - although we should note that that
preponderance appears to have been both bolstered
and, to a certain extent, constrained by the advent of
globalization.
Globalization, particularly seen in terms of the
widespread reach and use of communications and
information technology and transportation, has
undoubtedly had a multiplier effect in terms of States'
abilities to reach out and benefit not only their own
people but also others elsewhere. In Malaysia's view,
these positive gains must be preserved and further
built on by all States. In that context, it is worth noting
that later this year the United Nations is expected to
discuss and decide on, among other things, a package
of sustainable development goals aimed at further
improving the well-being of our peoples. While
globalization has undeniably brought about positive
developments and advances in many different areas,
there are those who would pervert, manipulate and
misuse advances such as those in the fields of science,
medicine and communications and information
technology in the service of a darker, more destructive
agenda.

In Malaysia's view, the rise of non-State
actors - terrorists in particular - who seek to harness
the very features that characterize our interconnected,
interrelated and globalized world and use them to sow
terror, hatred and chaos is one of the defining and
urgent challenges that the international community
must address today. Events and developments across
the globe in recent years have illustrated the virulence
of terrorists and terrorism and how quickly they can
become malignant. Whereas in the past terrorism was
employed in pursuit of political or ideological goals,
the new breed of terrorist is no longer content with
such aims. They now seek to control territory and
populations, perhaps with a view to attaining equal
status with other States.

Such ambitions are against the purposes and
principles laid down in the Charter of the United
Nations. Beyond the terrorists' brutal and inhumane
actions, their attempts to establish so-called States
run counter to Charter principles, including those
of friendly relations among States, refraining from
the use of force, and respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms, among others. In view of such
a direct challenge to core United Nations principles,
all States must renew their commitment to acting in a
coordinated and concerted manner to counter it. The
threat of terrorism is not one that any of us can hope
to overcome on our own. In that connection, we note
the success ofthe recent Summit on Countering Violent
Extremism hosted by the United States. Malaysia is
also encouraged to note the pioneering steps taken by
the African Union and the members of the Lake Chad
Basin Commission - Cameroon, Chad, the Niger and
Nigeria - with Benin to operationalize a multinational
joint task force to counter the threat posed by Boko
Haram. The actions of those countries merit the
international community's full support and stand out
as an affirmation of Charter principles, including those
laid out in Chapter VIII.

In focusing on the seemingly disparate issues
of globalization and terrorism and how they could
intersect and, unfortunately, have intersected, I have
sought to highlight the fact that while the nature of
the threats to international peace and security, and our
understanding of them, has clearly evolved over time,
the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations remain relevant and applicable.
As we commemorate the seventieth anniversary of the
founding of the United Nations, Malaysia emphasizes
the need for the Council to meet the increasingly
complex and multidimensional threats to international
peace and security. In Malaysia's view, the Council's
continuing ability to be flexible and adaptable is key
to ensuring its effective and efficient discharge of
its Charter-mandated roles and responsibilities. We
hold the view that certain aspects of the Council's
work - including its transparency and accessibility,
especially for non-members and stakeholders - could
be improved.

I would like to conclude by reaffirming Malaysia's
commitment to continuing to uphold the purposes and
principles enshrined in the Charter and to working
closely and constructively with Council members,
partners and stakeholders to that end.

