The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the members of the Council that I have received
a letter from the representative of Somalia, in which he
requests to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite that representative to participate
in the consideration of the item, without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Dnale
(Somalia) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document 8/2007/501, which contains the text of a
draft resolution prepared in the course of the Council's
prior consultations. Members of the Council also have
before them document S/2007/381, which contains the
report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Somalia.
I should also like to draw the attention of
members to document S/2007/499, which contains the
text of a letter dated 13 August 2007 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of the
Security Council transmitting a letter from the
Chairperson of the Commission of the African Union,
as well as to document S/2007/444, which contains the
text of a letter dated 18 July 2007 from the Permanent
Representative of Ghana addressed to the President of
the Security Council transmitting a communique on the
situation in Somalia issued by the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution
(S/2007/501) before it. Unless I hear any objection, I
shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show ofhana's.

In favour:
Belgium, China, Congo, France, Ghana,
Indonesia, Italy, Panama, Peru, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Slovakia, South Africa, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America


The President (spoke in French): There were 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 1772 (2007).

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda. The Council Will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 11.10 am.
07-48533

