Ms. Rice (United States ofAmerica): Let me join
others in thanking you, Madame President, for
convening this important meeting. We would also like
to convey our gratitude to the Secretary-General,
Mr. Toure' and Mrs. Adenike Ukonga for their very
important briefings.

Today's meeting is both timely and important. In
recent years, the number of reported incidents of piracy
and maritime armed robbery in the Gulf of Guinea has
increased alarmingly. While attacks are under-reported,
we do know that in this year alone at least two dozen
maritime armed robbery and piracy attacks were
reported in the Gulf of Guinea, with a particularly
sharp increase in incidents off the coast of Benin. Such
attacks, whether within territorial waters or on the high
seas, threaten regional and maritime security and the
safety of seafarers, as well as impede economic growth
across West and Central Africa. Maritime attacks have
included assaults on coastal cities, and even an attack
on the presidential palace in Malabo, the coastal capital
of Equatorial Guinea. Illicit maritime trafficking in
goods, drugs and persons also undermines governance
and unravels the fabric of fragile societies.

The impact of maritime crime on local economies
is substantial. It has become a crippling problem in
countries including Benin, Cameroon, Cote d'Ivoire,
Gabon, Ghana and Nigeria. Militants in the Niger delta
have demonstrated the capacity to reach offshore oil
facilities in recent years, threatening the secure supply
of the over 2 million barrels of oil that emanate from
that region every day. The increasing frequency of
attacks against the shipping sector in Benin is a
particular concern.

Beyond its impact on the oil sector, by one
estimate attacks on offshore oil facilities result in an
estimated loss of $2 billion annually to the broader
regional economy, including the fishing industry and
commercial shipping. That is obviously a very high
price for a region with urgent development needs and
fragile economies.

In early August, only 50 ships were at anchor in
Cotonou's port, instead of the usual 150. Benin has
experienced a dramatic drop in the customs fees and
other port revenues on which the Government relies for
55 per cent of its revenue.

There are important differences, thus far, between
piracy and maritime attacks in the Gulf of Guinea and
those along the coast of Somalia. In the Gulf of Guinea
attackers primarily seek to steal valuable commodities,
which are often sold illicitly in West and Central
Africa. Cargo and valuables are what the attackers
typically want, not necessarily the ships themselves or
the crew and passengers. Somali pirates usually strike
on the high seas, and then utilize safe havens on shore
to hold ships and people hostage. In the Gulf of Guinea
criminals often operate closer to shore, usually with the
goal of robbery rather than hostage-taken. They have
mainly left crews and passengers unharmed.

Clearly, the primary responsibility for patrolling
and security territorial waters rests with individual
countries in the region. Each country should make
maritime security a national priority, both as a matter
of law enforcement and to enable continued economic
development. Yet the international community, too,
must do more to support regional and national efforts.
The United States supports the work of the Economic
Community of West African States and the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS) to
strengthen coordination among countries in the region.

Since 2007 the United States has provided
approximately $35 million in coastal radar, equipment,
boats and associated maritime security training to our
West and Central African partners. The United States is
committed to collaborating with our African and other
international friends to build national and regional
maritime capacity through programmes like the Africa
Partnership Station and the African Maritime Law
Enforcement Partnership.

Earlier this year, in exercises hosted by ECCAS,
the United States Navy worked with Belgium,
Cameroon, France, Gabon, Nigeria, Sao Tome and
Principe, the Republic of Congo and Spain to help
local forces improve their capacity to counter illicit
maritime activities. Those and other Africa Partnership
Station activities will strengthen regional maritime
coordination and improve maritime safety and security
in Africa. Those are just a few examples of
international support to the region's maritime security
efforts.

In order to strengthen international assistance in
the region, we would all benefit from additional insight
and information. The United States therefore welcomes
the Secretary-General's decision to send a fact-finding
team to the Gulf of Guinea. We look forward to
receiving his report. We hope it will contain important
insights about how to build national and regional
capacity to counter maritime security threats and
strengthen the maritime sector as a whole.

The scourge of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea has
threatened the economies, Governments and peoples of
the region for far too long. Now it is time for the States
of the region, with the close support of the
international community, to work together to address
the threat effectively.

