Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): This month, the Council's agenda has been
unusually dense. We are grateful to you personally,
Mr. President, and to the entire Chadian delegation for
skilfully and effectively discharging your presidential
functions.

As per custom, Council members have been
addressing the issues of the Middle East and North
Africa. In the context of the situation in Yemen, the
pressing task of the international community remains
working with the Yemeni political forces in the interests
of reaching mutually acceptable solutions on the path to
reform and transformation, founded on the international
basis of the transitional period and abstaining from the
use of force.

We believe that the remaining outstanding issues
on the Syrian chemical dossier, which are technical in
their nature, will be successfully and swiftly resolved
with the participation of the competent experts of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons.
That matter has long ceased being of an emergency
nature and has nothing to do with the Security Council's
mandate. A genuine, as opposed to an imaginary
concern, is the possibility of terrorists and militants
gaining access to chemical weapons. There is growing
proof that they have been using these chemicals. The
main hurdle to the delivery of humanitarian assistance
to the war-ravaged Syrian population is the growing
spread of terrorist groups, above all the Islamic State
and the Al-Nusra Front, and the expansion of the
territory under their control, and as a result, the absence
of humanitarian access to many territories.

Russia supported the adoption of resolution 2191
(2014), extending the mandate of the United Nations
humanitarian mechanism to Syria's external borders.
We call on United Nations humanitarian structures
to cooperate fully with Damascus, including through
timely notification of the size and nature of the
humanitarian cargoes concerned. The main thing is
not to forget that the key to success and work on the
humanitarian track lies in talks between the Syrian
parties on achieving a political settlement to the crisis.

A growing concern is the situation on the
Palestinian-Israeli track. We are ready to work in
the interests of relaunching negotiations, both at the
bilateral level and in the context of the Middle East
Quartet of mediators. The draft resolution submitted by
Jordan could be a launch pad for resuming Palestinian-
Israeli talks. We are ready to support the draft. We
believe that the Quartet needs to be mobilized, not in
its old format but with the involvement of the League
of Arab States as a fully fledged member, since it is
the Arab Peace Initiative that opens the way towards a
sustainable long-term settlement.

In December, the Security Council's attention
shifted to the issue of Africa. While the overall
positions of Council members converge or overlap on
the situations in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the Central African Republic and the Central African
region as a whole, the same cannot be said of a number
of other issues. These include the continuing serious
differences on the Sudan cluster, including issues of
settlement of the armed conflict in South Sudan, the
state of inter-Sudanese relations, the problem of Abyei,
the normalization of the situation in Darfur and the
southern states of the Sudan, and the prospects for the
consideration of the Darfur dossier in the International
Criminal Court. There is still no consensus on the
genesis of the current grave crisis in Libya, which
sowed the seeds for many of the problems in Mali and
the Sahara-Sahel zone overall. With the Council so
overloaded with current problems in Africa and beyond,
we find it anachronistic for the Council to discuss and
adopt a biannual presidential statement on the Lord's
Resistance Army, which has largely been marginalized
and poses no clear or present threat.

We welcome the adoption of counter-terrorist
resolution 2195 (2014), the first to focus the attention
of the international community on the need to
comprehensively combat the financing of terrorism
through various forms of organized crime and illegal
drug trafficking. We have long pointed to the problem
of the nexus of terrorism and organized crime in various
parts of the world, from the Sahel to Afghanistan. We
look forward to the Secretary-General's report on the
efforts of various United Nations offices in response to
that threat on the basis of information from the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Group,
and other United Nations specialized agencies.

In relation to Ukraine, I call once again for the
full implementation of the Minsk agreement. As to
the signing of a strategic partnership agreement with
Abkhazia, that treaty is part of the framework of
numerous other bilateral agreements that we have
signed with these two independent States. Therefore,
that issue should not be considered within the Security
Council.

The United States delegation's initiative, supported
by a number of delegations, on holding a yearly outcome
meeting of the Security Council to review the actions of
the past 12 months seems a good idea.

In conclusion, we should also like to express our
thanks for the constructive work in the Council for the
past two years of the delegations of Argentina, Australia,
Luxembourg, the Republic of Korea and Rwanda. We
welcome the delegations of Angola, Malaysia, New
Zealand, Spain and Venezuela, which I am sure will fit
seamlessly into our ranks. We also wish every success
to the Chilean delegation, which will preside over the
Council in January.

