Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): We welcome the
opportunity of this debate, during which the representative
of Finland will speak later on behalf of the European
Union, and whose intervention my delegation fully
supports.

As Assistant Secretary-General Fall told us earlier,
the situation in Burundi is becoming increasingly complex
and precarious. The recent outbreaks of violence,
including against humanitarian workers; the sad death of
Mwalimu Nyerere; and the continuing slow pace of
progress in the Arusha process all cause serious concern.

The most immediate priority is to alleviate the
suffering of the people of Burundi. As the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees told members of the
Council yesterday, the humanitarian situation is becoming
increasingly serious. Aid organizations have had to scale
down their activities and are now unable to deliver even
emergency relief outside Bujumbura. Access and security
for aid workers must be ensured, and quickly, if a
massive humanitarian crisis is to be avoided. The
Government of Burundi must make every effort to create

 

conditions to allow the people in the regroupment camps to
return to their homes as soon as possible. We listened
extremely carefully to Assistant Secretary-General Fall's
expression of concern about the situation in the
regroupment camps.

The persistent violence against civilians in Burundi is
unacceptable. I cannot underline this too strongly. We
utterly condemn the deliberate killing of United Nations
workers and Burundi nationals in Rutana in October. The
Government of Burundi must bring those responsible for
this massacre to justice and cooperate with other
investigations into this incident. The establishment of the
strengthened ad hoc commission, announced to us today by
the representative of Burundi, is welcome, but it must
produce results. We call on all parties to the conflict to
respect the human rights of all people in Burundi and to
abide by international humanitarian law.

The leaders of Burundi know the way forward. Only
a negotiated settlement can bring lasting peace, stability and
prosperity to their country. There is no military solution.
All parties, including those previously excluded from the
Arusha process, must reject political violence and
extremism. They must dedicate themselves to a negotiated
settlement. There is a lot to be gained. The risks of
failure - for Burundi, for its people and for the region -
are immense.

We commend and support the role being played by the
regional States in the search for a negotiated solution. It is,
to say the least, unfortunate that the regional meeting to
agree on a new facilitator has been postponed to late
November. This timetable must not slip any further. We
urge all concerned to show flexibility and to engage
constructively as a new facilitator is found. Nor should the
continuation of the talks and the selection of a new
facilitator be held up by groups in Arusha unrepresentative
of the parties in the conflict. The new facilitator must have
the flexibility to adapt and improve the Arusha process if
he deems it necessary to ensure success, including by
changing the representation at the talks and by altering their
administrative procedures.

Finally, we welcome the fact that Under-Secretary-
General Prendergast is consulting the regional States as
they appoint a new facilitator. At this critical juncture the
United Nations should be more actively engaged at the
political and humanitarian levels. There must be a concerted
push by the United Nations, by the regional States, and,
most importantly, by Burundi's own political leaders. Only
that will succeed in translating the modest gains made by
the Arusha process into a real victory for the people of
Burundi. We stand ready to support them in whatever
way we can.

