Ms. Thompson (Barbados): Barbados congratulates the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam on its assumption of the presidency of the Security Council. We welcome the convening of this debate on such an important and almost prescient choice of topic. We acknowledge the presence in the Council last week of the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Viet Nam, His Excellency Mr. Pham Binh Minh (see S/PV.8699). The raison d'etre of the United Nations is to promote dialogue and development, act as a reminder of the devastation of war and serve as a restraint on its pursuit. The decision to promote global peace some 75 years ago came not from a lack of understanding of the shame or sting of turning the other cheek, but from the broader understanding that there is a far greater cost when war robs thousands of young people of hope and a future, when citizens lose their limbs and lives, when the development trajectories of countries are interrupted and their natural environment, built landscapes and cultural treasures are decimated, and when the sights and sounds of ordinary daily life are replaced by the miasma and horror of the sights and sounds of war. Suffering is the bread of all those who experience war, and none of its horrific, far-reaching consequences can be diminished by the new technologies of modern warfare. It is therefore the responsibility of every State Member of the United Nations to uphold the Charter's purposes and principles of and maintain international peace and security, even in the settlement of disputes. The United Nations, including the Security Council, must therefore act as the conscience of humankind. But the Council cannot properly do so unless it better reflects the security challenges faced by the family of humankind, as represented by the membership of the United Nations itself. In that regard, Barbados calls for Security Council reform that includes a rotating seat for small island developing States, among other substantive changes, and an encompassing of the security concerns of the entire United Nations membership. That is the very point that the Prime Minister of Barbados, Her Excellency Ms. Mia Amor Mottley, made in her statement during the general debate of the General Assembly at its seventy-fourth session, in which she said: "As a small nation, [Barbados is] not only committed to multilateralism[;] we also understand that it is the one thing that protects our sovereignty and our ability to navigate in this world. It is our buffer against the display of might and it is our shield against tyranny. We continue to view the United Nations as an important mechanism for achieving international peace and security and sustainable development for all countries..." (4/74/ PV.9, p. 36). Our delegation wishes to thank Cete d'Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, Kuwait, Peru and Poland for their invaluable contributions to the work of the Council during their tenure, and to congratulate the new members of Estonia, the Niger, Tunisia, Viet Nam and, of course, our sister country of the Caribbean Community, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. Barbados' foreign policy is anchored in the principles of non-intervention, non-interference, respect for sovereignty, human rights and democracy, and adherence to the rule of law. In that regard, it parallels the Charter of the United Nations. Barbados will therefore always advocate multilateral approaches over unilateral ones, and dialogue and diplomacy over weapons and war. If we forget the horrors that the United Nations was birthed to avoid or if we choose to breach or ignore its Charter, knowing well the possible consequences, then we are again placing humankind on a path to relive some of its darkest days, and history would have taught us nothing.
