Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We are
thankful to you, Mr. Minister, and to your delegation
for taking the initiative of holding a thematic debate on
a subject that is of great importance on the
international peace and security agenda. We are
likewise grateful for the statements by Deputy
Secretary-General Migiro and Ms. Cliffe, Special
representative and Director for the World Development
Report on Conflict, Security and Development of the
World Bank.

The high human cost and material losses caused
by internal and international armed conflict oblige us
to strengthen the link between peace, security and
development, particularly as regards prevention. The
international community should make use of all means
at its disposal to prevent or limit the ravages of
violence. To try to prevent the devastating
consequences of armed conflict, especially for the
civilian population, is a humanitarian, political and
economic imperative. Traditionally, and perhaps
unfortunately, the Organization has adopted a mainly
reactive role in crisis situations after they have broken
out. We consider it of the highest priority to advance
strategies that would help to strengthen capacities and
improve the effectiveness of the United Nations in
preventing conflicts through dialogue, consultation and
peaceful settlement of disputes, in order to facilitate
timely answers to emerging disputes and crises.

In this regard, we reaffirm the vital importance of
implementing resolution 1625 (2005), one of the
greatest advances in including the prevention of
conflicts in the work of the Security Council,
particularly in the context of crises and conflict
situations in Africa.

In my delegation's view, it is important to
improve the focus and effectiveness of the
Organization and the Security Council in the
prevention of conflicts, first, by promoting more
effective partnerships among the various actors,
particularly regional and subregional organizations,
non-governmental organizations and financial
institutions; secondly, by improving information and
early warning and preventive diplomacy mechanisms,
particularly by promoting the application of the tools
for the peaceful settlement of disputes set out in
Chapter VI of the Charter, including regional and
international mediation; and thirdly, by promoting
measures aimed at tackling the structural causes of
conflict, measures which include promotion of
development, disarmament and strengthening the rule
of law.

We support the establishment of strategic
partnerships between the Security Council and
subregional and regional organizations and the
fostering of local capacities for conflict prevention and
resolution. Strengthening this strategic relationship
between the United Nations and the organizations that
have been mentioned in Africa in the framework of the
United Nations should be fuelled by greater technical
cooperation in the sphere of conflict prevention and
management, peacekeeping and peacebuilding, security
sector reform, promotion and protection of human
rights, strengthening of the rule of law and building the
mechanisms necessary for early warning by linking
national, regional and international networks to
encourage the exchange of timely and objective
information about potential crises and to anticipate
situations before and during emergencies.

An illustration of the preventive work that we
need in the Organization is the work that is being done
by the Secretary-General's Special Adviser on the
Prevention of Genocide in his efforts to reach the
international community and generate early warning
mechanisms to prevent the irreversible deterioration of
especially delicate situations internationally and
especially on the African continent.

We recognize that a fundamental element in
prevention is the promotion of observance of and
respect for international law and the benefits and
opportunities offered by Chapter VI of the Charter. On
that basis, during its presidency of the Council in April
2009 and in June of this year, Mexico convened two
thematic debates on mediation and peaceful settlement
of disputes, and on the promotion and strengthening of
the rule of law in the maintenance of international
peace and security. Here, our aim was to seek to
strengthen the Council's capacity to play a key role in
promoting a major purpose of the Organization - the
peaceful settlement of disputes - in keeping with the
principles of justice and international law.

My delegation has reaffirmed that the Security
Council has the twofold challenge of urging States to
settle their disputes by peaceful means, and of
providing all necessary support to strengthening and
facilitating ongoing mediation exercises, including the
preventive diplomacy efforts of the Secretary-General
in his role as a mediator and by offering his good
offices to parties to conflict, as well as through his
special representatives and special envoys. It is also
important to make use of the advisory functions of the
International Court of Justice in the settlement of
disputes.

Prevention also plays an important role in the
post-conflict phase. Here, we encourage the Council to
work with the Peacebuilding Commission in
strengthening conflict prevention and peacebuilding
strategies and to improve coherence and integration
between peacemaking, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding on the one hand and development on the
other in order to ensure timely responses and to avoid
the recurrence of conflict.
Finally, and just as important, my delegation
views peace and justice as inseparable components of
any effort to resolve any armed conflict. Therefore,
giving precedence to one over the other only hampers
action by the institutions that have been established to
guarantee those objectives. We also consider that
combating impunity is often indispensable to avoid
tension and the resurgence of violence of violence and
confrontation. We are convinced that no lasting peace
or true national reconciliation cannot be achieved
unless those responsible for the most serious crimes are
brought to justice, irrespective of their status, position
or rank.

