Mr. Sen (India): We thank you, Mr. President, for
scheduling this meeting. As this is the first time I take
the floor during your presidency, allow me to
congratulate you on your skilful and capable handling
of your presidency. I also wish to take this opportunity
to congratulate the Ambassador of Denmark for her
presidency of the Council last month.
India is seriously concerned about the escalating
tension in West Asia as a result of the developments in
the Gaza Strip and on the Israel-Lebanese border and
in Lebanon, which have the potential to inflame the
region further and widen the conflict.

India condemned the abduction of two Israeli
soldiers on 12 July 2006 and has called for their
immediate release. We have equally strongly
condemned the excessive and disproportionate military
retaliation by Israel, which has targeted civilian
infrastructure, including the Beirut airport, and resulted
in the killing and suffering of innocent civilians,
including women and children. The responsibility to
protect women and children in conflict has to be real,
and not theoretical.

At least one Indian national has been killed and
several injured in the bombings in Lebanon. There can
be no justification for the targeting of civilians and
civilian infrastructure, which merits condemnation and
is contrary to international law.

In his briefing to the Security Council yesterday,
the Secretary-General called for a ceasefire to prevent
further loss of life, provide humanitarian access and
give diplomacy a chance to work. In addition, the
Secretary-General elaborated the elements of a plan,
suggested by the United Nations mission to the region,
which he said must form the basis of any lasting
ceasefire. We believe that the international community
can no longer remain silent in the face of the severe
escalation of the conflict, in which civilian populations
have been affected and a humanitarian crisis is
looming. A spillover of the conflict beyond the region
is a distinct possibility.

The Secretary-General's plan offers a firm basis
for discussions in the Security Council on how the
issue has to be addressed. An immediate and
comprehensive ceasefire would be predicated on the
return of the captured Israeli soldiers, the extension of
the authority of the Government of Lebanon over all of
its territory, and immediate measures to provide relief
and rehabilitation to the people of Lebanon, and
therefore a withdrawal of Israeli forces.

As a major troop contributor to both the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) and the
United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
(UNDOF), India is concerned about the conditions
under which United Nations peacekeepers in the
conflict zone are required to perform their duties. The

Secretary-General, in his update yesterday on UNIFIL,
stated that UNIFIL had no freedom of movement,
which precluded it from even providing humanitarian
escorts for displaced people; that it was experiencing
difficulties in receiving essential supplies; and that it
was exposed to considerable risk from the ongoing
exchange of fire. These are cause for serious concern.
Unilateral restrictions on UNIFIL have to be removed,
and the mandate of the United Nations and the sanctity
of its personnel have to be respected.

There is equal concern about the situation in the
Gaza Strip. On 12 June, India condemned the killing of
innocent civilians, including women and children, by
the Israel Defence Force in an unprovoked attack on 9
June. India also condemned the incident at the Kerem
Shalom crossing near Gaza on 25 June, which
provoked the threat of massive retaliatory measures by
Israel.

India is seriously concerned at the hardships and
suffering of the Palestinian people as a result of the
evolving situation in Gaza and the West Bank - a
situation that, I may add, has been exacerbated by
Israel's destruction of Palestinian infrastructure,
including roads, bridges and power plants. The Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs has
determined that nearly half the population in the Gaza
Strip is currently without electricity and that this
situation could persist for up to nine months. This
reduced capacity is affecting the provision of water,
with daily access for families being cut by up to 50 per
cent in some parts of the Gaza Strip. India condemns
the wholly unjustified arrest and continuing
incarceration of Ministers of the Palestinian National
Authority and members of the Palestinian Legislative
Council. There can be no justification whatsoever for
taking such action against duly elected representatives
of the Palestinian people. We call upon Israel to release
them immediately and unconditionally.

The international community needs to call for an
immediate halt to hostilities on all sides, counsel
utmost restraint, especially in the excessive use of
force, and urge a return to dialogue. We also reiterate
our call on all parties to renounce violence and to
resolve their differences through peaceful means. Israel
must halt its offensive, withdraw its forces from their
positions inside Gaza and release all political figures
and other Palestinians. At the same time, the
Palestinian leadership should make every effort to
facilitate the release of the Israeli soldier and prevent
any escalation of the conflict through rocket attacks
against Israel or other extremist actions by militants.

In response to a request from the Palestinian
authorities, and in keeping with India's traditional and
consistent policy of extending sympathy and support to
the people of Palestine, the Government of India has
decided to give immediate humanitarian assistance in
the amount of 100 million rupees to the Palestinian
people in order to alleviate the difficult situation in
which the Palestinian people find themselves. This is in
addition to the approximately 700 million rupees of
assistance pledged last year during the visit of
President Abbas to India. The assistance will be
primarily in the form of life-saving drugs and medical
supplies requested by the Palestinian authorities.

We support the Secretary-General's call for an
immediate cessation of indiscriminate and
disproportionate violence in the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict and a reopening of the closed crossing points.
It is unfortunate that President Abbas was held
incommunicado in Gaza for the last three weeks and
not allowed to meet anyone. The international
community needs to support a peace track for Gaza and
President's Abbas's call for a proper dialogue with the
Government of Israel.

It is our firm belief that a negotiated outcome of
this longstanding conflict is the only way to ensure
long-term peace, security and stability in the region,
leading to the establishment of a viable, united and
sovereign State of Palestine, living in peaceful
coexistence and harmony with the State of Israel.

In conclusion, it is vital that the international
community act to put an immediate end to the
hostilities and to ensure that the conflict does not
widen and engulf the entire region. We support the role
of the regional powers in finding a solution to the
crisis, as solutions imposed through unilateral
measures may not prove enduring. A comprehensive
solution to the situation in West Asia, based on the
relevant Security Council resolutions, offers the best
way forward. Our commitment to the Palestinian cause
was articulated by Mahatma Gandhi, J awaharlal Nehru,
Indira Gandhi and other leaders. What Jawaharlal
Nehru, one of the great founders of the Non-Aligned
Movement, wrote in a letter dated 11 July 1947 to
Albert Einstein remains relevant:

"I do not myself see how this problem can
be resolved by violence and conflict on one side

or the other. Even if such violence and conflict
achieve certain ends for the moment, they must
necessarily be temporary. I do earnestly hope that
some kind of agreement might be arrived at
between the Arabs and the Jews. I do not think
even an outside power can impose its will for
long or enforce some new arrangements against
the will of the parties concerned."

