Mr. Petrella (Argentina) (interpretation from Spanish): Allow me to thank you, Sir, for the efforts you
have made to ensure that today's item be taken up during
your term of office and for your manifest commitment to
participation and transparency in the work of this Council.

I should also like to thank the Secretary-General,
Mr. Kofi Annan, for having placed this item high on the
Organization's political agenda, thus helping to make us
more aware of this problem. Finally, I wish to thank
Mr. Olara Otunnu, Special Representative for Children
and Armed Conflict, who has been present here today, for
his active and effective work.

The very fact that the Security Council - the
principal organ of this Organization and the only one

 

competent to create and impose obligations - is taking up
this matter implies a commitment to the new issues
affecting the international community and will help to deter
those who violate the basic norms of conscience. This
approach has already borne fruit in the debates on demining
and on the protection of refugees, thus imparting credibility
and positive visibility to the United Nations.

Mr. Otunnu has told us that, today, over 90 per cent
of the victims of armed conflict are civilians, whereas, early
in this century, the figure was below 10 per cent. This is
because today, unlike in the past, the civilian population is
being specifically targeted in attacks and war strategies.

This deplorable reality shows that children today are
completely exposed to the impact of conflict. As was
recently mentioned by Mrs. Clare Short, United Kingdom
Secretary of State for International Development, in the past
decade 2 million children have died in war and another 6
million have been seriously wounded.

We would highlight the work being done to remedy
this situation by the United Nations Children's Fund, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, the International Committee of the Red Cross and
various non-governmental organizations.

Children should not be tolerated to participate in
armed conflict, either as victims or as victimizers. The
international instruments on this matter are quite clear in
this respect. But since it is us, the adults, who allow the
children to suffer the consequences of conflict, one
appropriate institutional framework to end this phenomenon
could be, for example, the future international criminal
court. Many representatives believe in a role for the court
and we trust that what has been said in this Council
Chamber is being heard in Rome and that the appropriate
provisions will be included in the statute, as the
representatives of Canada, Italy, Sweden, the United
Kingdom and various others have called for here.

We wish to stress the importance of improving the
training of troops involved in peacekeeping missions so that
they can help actively to improve the conditions in which
children live in armed conflict. Those of us who contribute
peacekeeping troops should strengthen our laws and instruct
our personnel to protect children in peacekeeping
operations.

Children remain threatened, however, in post-conflict
situations, where sanctions deprive populations of essential
resources. We must improve the design of sanctions, as has
been mentioned here today, so that they have no impact
on innocent civilians, particularly children. Until solutions
are found, sanctions should be redirected so as to insulate
children from their impact.

Lastly, I would note that the participation of children
in armed conflict is an intolerable practice that ranks
among the most atrocious forms of abuse of the weakest.
It is therefore paramount to stress the importance of
education and the strict implementation of international
instruments in force today.

Before concluding, on behalf of the Government of
Argentina I wish to pay a tribute to Maitre Blondin Beye
of Mali, who died, along with other personnel, in the
service of the United Nations.

