Mr. Konare (Commission of the African Union) (spoke in French): I particularly thank you,
Mr. President, for your country's leadership and your
personal leadership on all African issues. Thank you
for having convened this meeting and for dedicating
your two presidencies to Africa, in March 2007 and
now, by listening to African peoples and African
leaders. The problem of financing was raised during
our most recent summit and is not a new issue; it was
already on the agenda in 1992, when we were
establishing the crisis management mechanism.

I should like to attest to the great amount of time
that Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon has devoted to
Africa, and to the great interest that he has shown and
the listening that he has done in order to be able to
assist us. The Secretary-General has demonstrated that
through the report that he has submitted to the United
Nations and through his proposal that a committee of
eminent persons be established so that we can move
from discussion to practice. The Secretary-General will
also permit me to commend his predecessor, Kofi
Annan, who did his utmost for Africa. I should like to
thank all our partners present here, from across the
spectrum, without whose support the difficulties might
have been greater.

You yourself, Mr. President, made an excellent
plea to President Kikwete. I cannot add anything to it,
because your voice is the most authoritative and
legitimate, by virtue not only of your duties, but also of
your experience. But I have taken the floor regarding
the issue of financing, to say that it does not involve a
policy on our part of holding out our hand. We are
aware - because I speak on behalf of a responsible
Africa - of the efforts that we ourselves must make
and of the resources that we ourselves must mobilize.
But we are asking this question to clearly indicate
Africa's will to make its contribution to peace
throughout the world. We are also asking this question
to indicate that it is important to have confidence in
Africa and in African men and women. We have
achieved results in cote d'Ivoire and in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and we see what is being done
in the Sudan and in Somalia. We must support the
interested parties so that they can have more
confidence in themselves and in each other, and must
not act in their place.

Today, it is certain that resources must be swiftly
mobilized to help us put out the fires in Somalia and in
Darfur. Of course, there are political problems. Efforts
are required from the parties. But we cannot
sufficiently stress the fact that, in Somalia and in
Darfur, significant resources have been lacking and
that, if they had been there in time, we would have
been able to do more in the political context.

It is important to build African capacities,
because the responsibility is, first and foremost, our
own. Building African capacities means consolidating
the continental peace and security architecture,
strengthening our planning capacities, helping us to
swiftly build an early warning system and deploying
standby forces. And I would go even further: the
standby forces should be able to quickly deploy a
standing rapid intervention force. Strengthening the
continental peace and security architecture also means
refusing to allow lawless zones to exist in Africa. It is
not normal that the Somali coasts, despite the presence
of significant military bases, are still under the control
of pirates today.

I hope that the appeal by the President of Somalia
will be heard. To strengthen the continental
architecture is to strengthen African capacities. It also
means reviewing our relations with all foreign military
bases in Africa. I mentioned that last September.

I am pleased that the statement of the President of
the French Republic offered perspectives that we
should explore together. I am pleased that the
authorities of the United States of America came to
listen to us regarding the AFRICOM. problem and hope
that our concerns will be heard, because there is no
other policy than to be in harmony with Africa in its
will to assume its responsibility for defence and
security.

Certainly we should embrace the recommendations
of the Secretary-General and establish this panel.
Certainly we need to speed up the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission, but we must take care that
we do not have a thousand restrictive clauses. In order
to assist C6te d'Ivoire today, we need considerable
means; to help the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
we need considerable means. I am not saying to write a
blank check. However, if there are a thousand
conditions delaying the implementation of
programmes, the countries emerging from conflict or
countries that have fragile democratization processes
could suffer as a result. Public opinion needs to be
informed of what is going to be done and what it has
been agreed.

It is important for us to explore and make proper
use of everything that Chapter VIII of the Charter of
the United Nations offers. Apparently, however, it is
insufficient. President Gbagbo mentioned that. In fact,
today we need to look at the entire philosophy and
culture of the United Nations, which has done what it
could. But today the nature of conflicts has changed.
Today, nation-States that were the foundations of the
United Nations are experiencing much upheaval.
Today, beyond intergovernmental cooperation, there
are countries that wish to proceed towards shared
sovereignty - co-managed sovereignty. It is important
that these organizations be able to integrate the United
Nations architecture.

It is vital for our roles with the United Nations to
be clearly defined. We are not talking about being
present and giving to the United Nations and then
stepping aside. We need to reflect on a system of co-
management, in which, depending on the cases, the
roles are defined. We cannot all be parallel; footbridges
are needed. We need more coherence among the
different representations of the United Nations and
even of the United Nations system. It is important, and
I wish to commend the Secretary-General, who
acknowledged that the leadership of the AU is
recognized and significant.

I have spoken at some length about this. I spoke
with the Secretary-General yesterday about it; the
Minister of Burkina Faso spoke about it; the Secretary
of State of France mentioned it as well: the United
Nations must act in the case of the current food crisis.
The United Nations must act on the current financial
crisis. This is a problem of human security. The
President of the World Bank, the Executive Director of
the International Monetary Fund and the Director
General of the Food and Agriculture Organization have
made appeals to Governments, but what Government
could affirm collective legitimacy more than the
Secretary-General of the United Nations, more than the
Security Council?
In relation with the Group of 8, in relation with
all financial and economic institutions and in relation
with regional organizations, we ourselves have
launched an appeal to African regional organizations to
quickly hold summit meetings, because this crisis is
not cyclical, it is structural. It is not a matter of
questions and answers for tomorrow. Even for
countries that find answers for today, those would be
only solitary solutions that could not last.

The four months to come, April to July, is the
period of making ends meet in many countries. Prices
will go up. If we are unlucky and the rainy season is
not good, we could be looking at a most serious
catastrophe. This morning we call on the Security
Council. The Secretary-General must have all political
means. Less than one month ago we held a high-level
meeting to talk about the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs). But there will be no MDGs if we do
not manage over this difficult period.

This is an urgent appeal requiring an urgent
response. It cannot await the G8 summit in July.
Legitimacy is in this House and must grapple with the
problems of security, which include more than simply
conflicts. Poverty and hunger kill as well. They will
bring unexpected instability if we are not careful.

I would like assure the Secretary-General of the
support of the new Chairman of the Commission, Jean
Ping, of his determination to continue this work. He
has been to this House; he knows it well. There is no
doubt that he will be at the side of the Secretary-
General in the name of Africa.

For my part, I can give you, Sir, the pledge that in
my new functions, this commitment will be an ongoing
one. These functions and responsibilities, new for me,
are also my responsibilities as the former President of
Mali and today as the former Chairman of the
Commission of the African Union, because on 30 April
at the latest the new President will take on those
functions.

