Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
appreciates Senegal's initiative in holding today's
ministerial meeting. We welcome Foreign Minister
Ndiaye as he presides over this meeting. I wish to
thank Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson, Executive
Director Fedotov, Secretary-General Jean, Executive
Director Laborde and Director Boutellis for their
respective briefings.

At present, the international situation is undergoing
profound changes, and the environment and the tasks
that United Nations peacekeeping operations are facing
are getting increasingly complex. The formulation and
execution of the mandates of peacekeeping operations
are encountering serious challenges. The system of
peacekeeping operations needs to keep up with the
times and be better able to adapt to the changing
situation and actual needs.

Today's open meeting is most timely. It is hoped that
all parties will take full advantage ofit so as to engage in
an in-depth reflection on the situations, tasks and future
developments facing United Nations peacekeeping

operations with ideas for further improvement. China
wishes to elaborate on the following points.
First, the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations as well as the three principles
governing peacekeeping operations, namely, the
consent of the parties, impartiality and non-use of force
except for self-defence and defence of mandates, are
the cornerstones of peacekeeping operations to which
we must commit ourselves. The purpose of deploying
peacekeeping operations is to help host countries
establish and maintain a sustainable environment
of peace so as to create conditions for the political
settlement of disputes. Adequate cooperation on the
part of host country Governments is an important
prerequisite in ensuring that peacekeeping operations
achieve their goals. Conditions vary from one host
country to another and circumstances change constantly.
It is therefore essential to adequately respect the host
country's sovereignty and, in keeping with changing
circumstances, strengthen communication with the
host country regarding the peacekeeping operation's
deployment timeline and adjustment of the mandate,
while fully heeding the opinion of the host country.

Once the situation changes and the host country
requests the withdrawal of the peacekeeping operation,
the Secretariat should establish, under the Council's
political guidance, a specific withdrawal timetable and
avoid an open-ended stay in the host country.

Secondly, the mandates ofpeacekeeping operations
should be explicit and operable, with a clear focus.
Mandates are the basis and guide for peacekeeping
operations in conducting operations, as well as an
important factor with an impact on the efficacy of an
operation.

In changing circumstances, peacekeeping
missions face a wide array of factors that affect their
performance. When formulating or renewing the
mandates of peacekeeping operations, it is essential to
comprehensively take into account the priority needs
and prevailing circumstances in host countries and the
ability of troop-contributing countries (TCCs), while
focusing on the central task ofthe maintenance ofpeace.
It is essential to ensure that mandates are explicit, clear
and operable, and, in keeping with dynamic demands,
that they continually adjust to the priority tasks and
focus of the work of the various stages.

Missions are there to assist in rebuilding the host
country, and therefore adequate attention should be
afforded to the host country's ownership, while focusing
on the host country's "blood-generating function and
avoiding attempts to be all-encompassing, which will
result only in diverting peacekeeping resources from the
central goal of the maintenance ofpeace, thus affecting
the overall effects of the peacekeeping operation.

Terrorism is a common threat faced by the
international community. China understands the
desire on the part of some countries that hope that
peacekeeping operations play a greater role in counter-
terrorism efforts. Peacekeeping missions can indeed
act in accordance with Council mandates and, where
necessary, help host countries strengthen capacity-
building on counter-terrorism.

Thirdly, the Secretariat should proceed from the
overall long-term interests of peacekeeping operations
and comprehensively examine new situations and
new challenges in peacekeeping operations. It should
seriously summarize experiences and lessons learned
and grasp crucial links with a View to systematically
improving peacekeeping operations and strengthening
their efficacy and capacity to deal with complex
situations.

First, it is essential to improve the entire
command system. The Headquarters is charged with the
strategic planning and designing of the peacekeeping
operations system, with a focus on situation analysis
and providing policy guidance to various missions. It
is necessary to avoid replacing macro-management
with micro-interventions. It is essential to focus on
strengthening the contingent command capability of
the various missions and the coordinated action among
the military, police and civilian components of missions
with the aim of forming synergies. That is particularly
important for the overall efficacy and performance of
missions in emergency situations.

Secondly, it is also important to strengthen the
security, early-warning and protection capabilities
of peacekeepers. According to statistics provided by
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations in the
year 2015 alone, a total of 129 peacekeepers paid the
ultimate price. In the first eight months of this year,
that number had already reached 69. The safety and
security of peacekeepers must be afforded greater
attention. The Secretariat and special missions should
formulate detailed security and safety guidelines
and, in coordination with TCCs and host countries,
strengthen follow-up and assessment of local security
situations, enhance pre-warning capabilities against
security threats and internal information sharing and
ensure that security protection, adequate equipment
and resources are put in place, as well as strengthen
medical rescue and evacuation capabilities in high-risk
emergency environments.

Thirdly, it is important to strengthen logistical
support. The peacekeeping budget for the year 2016-
2017, approved by the General Assembly in June,
amounted to $7.87 billion. As the user and manager of
such a large amount of resources, the Secretariat must
improve its management level and efficiency, optimize
the logistics support mechanism and demonstrate its
responsible attitude towards the entire membership
by ensuring that peacekeeping resources are used
optimally, while eliminating waste.

In areas such as procurement and outsourcing of
services and the formulation of budgets, the related
regulations and systems must be strictly abided by. It is
essential that precious peacekeeping resources be used
with maximum efficiency. Adequate and responsive
predeployment training, as well as necessary equipment
and other resources, will guarantee the implementation
of peacekeeping operation mandates. It is essential to
ensure that peacekeeping operations are afforded the
required training and resources to ensure that they
have the capabilities necessary for the implementation
of their mandates. It is essential to pay attention to
the actual difficulties faced by TCCs from developing
countries and encourage strengthened capacity-
building on the part of those countries through bilateral
and multilateral cooperation.

Fourthly, it is important to recognize the role of
TCCs. Peacekeeping forces represent the fundamental
guarantee of United Nations peacekeeping operations.
TCCs and police-contributing countries (PCCs) are the
main actors in carrying out peacekeeping operations.
Peacekeepers perform tasks on the front lines, despite
all difficulties and dangers, to assist the United Nations
in discharging its Charter-based responsibilities, while
making important contributions and sacrifices.

The long-term development of United Nations
peacekeeping operations also depends on the efforts
of TCCs and PCCs. TCCs must be accorded the
respect and recognition they deserve, or the long-
term development of United Nations peacekeeping
operations will be negatively affected. It is essential
to strengthen communications among the Security
Council, the Secretariat and the TCCs, give full play to
the role of the General Assembly's Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations as the deliberative organ
on peacekeeping policies, and amplify the voice of the
TCCs in peacekeeping affairs.

China has always firmly supported and actively
participated in United Nations peacekeeping
operations. We have dispatched a total of more than
30,000 peacekeepers. As we speak, more than 2,600 of
them are serving in 11 peacekeeping missions. China
is the largest TCC among the Council's permanent
members, and the second-largest financial contributor
to the peacekeeping budget. China is comprehensively
implementing the commitments declared by Chinese
leaders to further support United Nations peacekeeping
operations. We have achieved importantprogress in areas
including the generation of standby forces, dispatching
helicopter squadrons and the training of peacekeepers
from various countries and helping African countries
strengthen peacekeeping capacity-building. China
stands ready to work with the vast United Nations
membership in the concerted common effort to further
improve the United Nations peacekeeping system in the
maintenance of international peace and security.

