Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): Allow me to
begin by joining my colleagues in saying how much we
will miss Ambassador Mladineo at the Council. We
very much enjoyed her presence and wish her the very
best of luck in her next position.
I would also like to join others in thanking
Mr. Eliasson, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
and Under-Secretary-General Guehenno for their
briefings this morning.

The Council was closely engaged on Darfur
throughout 2007. The scale of the crisis and the impact
it has on the lives of millions of people and the
stability of the region fully justified that engagement. I
wish I could say that our efforts in 2007 have made the
task in 2008 less formidable. But as both briefings we
heard this morning indicate, that is not the case. In
particular, what has come through is the
interdependence of progress on the security track and
progress on the political track. We have to persist with
both in parallel.

I am just receiving some worrying reports of a
further downturn in security in western Darfur. There
are reports of attacks on villages by Sudanese
Government forces, including aerial bombings, and
extensive loss of life. That is further destruction to the
process in the region. It is of great regret that that is
happening. We call on all parties to bring an immediate
end to this fighting. It will be helpful if, at the end of
this discussion, Mr. Guehenno could give us any
further information that he may have on events today.

I think this continued fighting only serves to
underline the need to make progress on all four tracks
facing us in the Sudan, in Darfur.

First, on the peacekeeping side, as others have
said, the transfer of authority from the African Union
Mission in the Sudan (AMIS) to the African Union-
United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) is a welcome step. We in the British
Government are committed to doing all we can to make
UNAMID and effective mission. But it still faces
significant challenges. Those include, first, the
sourcing of enough troops and equipment, including
helicopters. In that connection, my delegation will
continue our efforts in support of the Secretariat. The
second challenge pertains to enhancing the support
infrastructure required to maintain a large mission in a
difficult environment. And the third challenge has to do
with inconsistent cooperation from the Sudanese
Government and bureaucratic obstacles to making
things happen on the ground.

The steps reported by Mr. Guehenno, and by the
Secretary-General earlier this week, on the status-of-
forces agreement and the deployment of non-African
contingents are welcome. I am sure that I am not alone
among Council members in expecting those
commitments to be translated into facts on the ground
without further delay.
Other issues critical to the effectiveness of the
mission remain outstanding, notably movement at
night. The protection of civilians cannot cease when
the sun sets. We look to the Government of the Sudan
to resolve those issues promptly. I would welcome
confirmation from Mr. Guehenno that the revised
status-of-forces agreement will provide an adequate
basis for UNAMID's effective operation.

The second track is the political process, which in
the long term is the only reliable path to peace. We are
very grateful to Jan Eliasson and his fellow Envoy
Salim Salim for their efforts. We see some signs of
movement in Mr. Eliasson's report on the positions of
the respective rebel organizations. Despite the
difficulties and frustrations, we need to keep up the
momentum. But it is clear that - as some of us have
said for some time - a longer-term perspective is
needed and must be pursued on multiple tracks in
parallel. We welcome Mr. Eliasson's intention to do
precisely that. The deployment of peacekeeping forces
will no doubt help to strengthen security, but cannot
guarantee the comprehensive settlement of the
situation. The key role in the political process, under
the aegis of the United Nations and the African Union,
rests of course with the parties involved, acting with
the active support of the regional players.

We highly appreciate the effective efforts of
Special Envoys Eliasson and Salim Ahmed Salim in
holding consultations with the Government of the
Sudan and the Darfur opposition with a view to
preparing the parties for negotiations on items of
substance. We are pleased to hear that there has been
significant progress in uniting the various Darfur rebel
groups but there is a great deal of arduous work to be
done to persuade the opposition to agree to their
negotiation platform and the membership of their
delegation.

In that connection, we welcome the extension by
the Secretary-General of the mandate of the mediator,
Mr. Jan Eliasson. Of note is the idea to enhance the
activities of the negotiation team of the Special Envoys
through the appointment of a single negotiator. We
believe that would lead not to weakening the Joint
Mediation Support Team, but to strengthened
coordination and effectiveness of its activities.

We are seriously concerned by the intransigent
stand taken by the Justice and Equality Movement. The
question arises of the possible use of restrictive

measures with regard to those rebel leaders who not
only openly obstruct progress in the Darfur political
process, but are also threatening the security of
peacekeeping and humanitarian personnel. In any case,
the Security Council must send them a very clear and
firm signal on the immediate need to reconsider their
destructive position.

The transfer of authority from the African Union
Mission in Sudan to UNAMID was an important
milestone in the peacekeeping process in Darfur. The
Secretariat and the African Union have done an
impressive amount of work to ensure that UNAMID
can undertake its mandate in the time frame established
by Security Council resolution 1769 (2007). We must
work consistently to strengthen UNAMID's
effectiveness, as was mentioned today by
Mr. Guehenno.

The problem remains of how to integrate the
necessary helicopters into UNAMID. Russia is
prepared to cooperate with its partners and the
Secretariat to develop new potential options to solve
that urgent problem. Of continued relevance is the
Secretary-General's thesis that the effective
functioning of UNAMID will depend to a great extent
on the ability of the United Nations and the African
Union to solve, in cooperation with the Government of
the Sudan, comprehensive technical questions
pertaining to the deployment of the Operation. That
will require cooperation on the part of both parties.

As experience has shown, and in particular the
Visit of Mr. Guehenno to Addis Ababa, the current
problems require constructive dialogue with the
Sudanese leadership. We are pleased that, during the
course of the meeting of the Secretary-General and the
President of the Sudan at the margins of the African
Union summit in Addis Ababa, the need to hasten the
deployment of the Operation and to immediately
conclude the status-of-forces agreement for UNAMID
was reaffirmed. Of course, a comprehensive settlement
in Darfur is impossible without a normalization of the
regional security situation and relations between Chad
and the Sudan on the basis of unconditional
compliance by the States of the region with the existing
agreements, in particular the agreement ensuring
security in the border area.

For its part, Russia is determined in future to
constructively promote progress in the Darfur peace
process on the basis of respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Sudan.

