Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by warmly thanking Mr., Djinnit, not
only for his very informative briefing but also for his
outstanding work and unwavering commitment to
peace in the Great Lakes region. I also wish to thank
Ambassador Bale, Permanent Representative of the
Congo, in his dual capacity as the representative of the
chairmanship of the Joint Follow-up Mechanism of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework agreement
and the chairmanship of the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR). Five years after
the signing of the Framework agreement, it was
important for the Security Council to take stock of its
implementation and to consider ways to move forward
with its implementation. The regional dimension of the
Great Lakes crisis must not be overlooked.

As a close partner of the countries of the region and
a permanent member of the Security Council, our most
cherished wish is to see them build on the trajectory
towards lasting peace and stability, which will finally
allow them to benefit from the wealth of their natural
resources in order to ensure the well-being of their
people and to focus on their development.

That trajectory involves strengthening political
stability, the democratic legitimacy of institutions and
the fight against impunity. In that context, the political
and security situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo is of particular importance. The elections
scheduled for 23 December should allow, for the first
time, a peaceful transition of power. Without credible
elections that are accepted by all, the stability of the
country and of the entire region is at stake. To achieve
that, it is essential to ensure respect for the electoral
calendar and trust in the process of organizing the
elections through their openness and transparency.
There must also be a peaceful environment, in which
all candidates can declare themselves and campaign
freely without fear of reprisals.

Respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms is crucial to holding free, credible, transparent
and peaceful elections. In that context, we welcome
the commitment of countries in the region to follow-
up and support for the Congolese people on the path
towards the open, free and peaceful organization of
the elections.

That trajectory also requires better regional
integration to ensure good cooperation among the States
of the region. By establishing such interdependence,
thanks to the comparative advantages of each for the
benefit of all, the region will experience real economic
change and development. It is a priority objective of
the African Union and France, which has adapted its
support policies and mechanisms to make its action
part of a regional perspective.

The French institute of Goma, the Hall of Volcanoes,
which was inaugurated six months ago and brings
together French-speaking countries, multilingualism,
training and new technologies, therefore seeks to be
accessible to the young people of the entire region.
That tool is aimed at not only the young people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo but also, beyond its
near borders, those of Uganda, Rwanda and Burundi, to
create projects and common aspirations for an effective
regional partnership.
To achieve that, the full and complete implementation
of the Addis Ababa Framework agreement is essential.
France welcomes the renewed commitment of the
countries of the region to that end. The meeting of the
Follow-up Mechanism on 19 October set ambitious
goals, in particular for the repatriation of disarmed
combatants. France encourages the countries of the
region to do their utmost to ensure that those objectives
are fully implemented.

Such commitment is all the more essential given
that negative forces continue to operate in the region.
A lasting resolution of that problem requires decisive
action in three areas, and regional organizations,
the ICGLR and the Southern African Development
Community (SADC), have a key role to play.

First, with regard to military engagement against
armed groups, a key role will be played by the Force
Intervention Brigade of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO), provided by SADC. The renewed
mandate of MONUSCO should enable it to rebuild
its capacity for mobility in order for it to engage in
decisive offensive actions, as it did with respect to the
Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23).

Secondly, political action must be taken in order to
demobilize, repatriate and reintegrate those combatants
in their countries of origin. I am thinking in particular
of the Forces democratiques de liberation du Rwanda
and former members of the M-23, as well as those of
the Sudan People's Liberation Movement/Army in
Opposition (SPLM/A-IO), WHO will soon have been
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo for nearly
two years. There has been progress with regard to the
SPLM/A-IO and commitments have been made with
respect to other groups. I am pleased about that.

Lastly, I turn to the issue of tackling the illicit
trafficking in natural resources, which sustains those
armed groups, contributes to their survival and fuels
an economy of war and predation. As long as such
trafficking continues, no lasting stabilization can be
envisaged. There is a need for strong consistent action
by the countries of the region, as well as the ongoing
commitment of international partners to transparency
in the mining industry and a better traceability of
minerals. In that context, the resolve of the ICGLR
and its consultation with the United Nations Group
of Experts on the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
demonstrated by the annual meeting in Paris of the
ICGLR-Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development-United Nations Group of Experts Forum
on Responsible Mineral Supply Chains, deserves to
be welcomed.

Five years after the signing of the Framework
agreement, visible and notable progress in its
implementation would be an extremely positive sign
of the commitment of all signatory countries to the
stability and development of the Great Lakes region.
Rest assured that France will continue to fully support
the countries of the region in that undertaking.

