Mr. Quinlan (Australia): Human progress is
evolutionary. It is built on failure and the strength of a
positive response to it. Failure always contains lessons.
The United Nations inaction in the face of the events
of 1994 in Rwanda remains one of the Organization's
darkest failures. Despite credible forewarning and the
frustrated efforts of countries such as New Zealand and
some other elected members of the Council that tried
to persuade the Council to deploy additional United
Nations forces to Rwanda, we all failed. Now, 20 years
after we said never again, we witness unspeakable
crimes being committed in places such as Syria and
the Central African Republic. We should need no other
reminders that we still have so much more work to do.
The Council's authorization last week of a new
peacekeeping mission for the Central African Republic,
with the protection of civilians at its core, sent a clear
message that the savage abuses and atrocities must end.
The Council has acted and done the right thing, as have
French and African forces. But the situation could so
easily have got away from us and descended into even
more chaos. Many of the Visible precursors to potential
genocide and other atrocities were present. Prevention
will always probably be our hardest task. Our diligence
must be not only constant but also intrumentalized and
quick. We still have lessons to learn.

The Council must now act to respond to the mass
atrocities being committed in Syria, including the
systematic and widespread torture and deliberate
targeting of civilians by the regime as part of its
military strategy. The referral of the situation to the
International Criminal Court is long overdue. In that
context, France's proposal for permanent members to
voluntarily renounce their veto powers in cases of mass
atrocity crimes is very welcome. It should be supported
and we should give it serious consideration.

The unanimous endorsement by Heads of State
and Governement of the responsibility to protect
(R2P) in 2005 was a resounding ackowledgement that,
while States have the primary responsibility to protect
their own populations from mass atrocities, we, the
international community, and the Council must provide
protection where national Governments have manifestly
failed. On behalf of the Group Of Friends of R2P,
comprising 45 States in total, including 10 members
of the Council, we welcome the references to R2P in
resolution 2150 (2014), which we have just adopted.
While that is an essential normative response to our past
failures, the challenge, as always, is implementation.
We must do all that we can to operationalize R2P.

As we now understand, the genocide in Rwanda
started not with massacres in churches but with hate
speech, discrimination and marginalization. That
underlines the fact that it is possible to identify and
to implement a policy for atrocity prevention so that
risk factors are addressed before a situation becomes
a crisis that results in mass atrocities. As the Deputy
Secretary-General reminded us this morning, just as
genocide is systematic and planned, so the work to
prevent it must be deliberate and systematic. Prevention
requires strengthening the rule of law and respect for
human rights, building institutions, ensuring good
governance, combating discrimination and ensuring
the participation of women and, in particular, young
people. Youth unemployment and alienation will be, I
believe, the most challenging for us all over the next
decades.

Prevention also requires a robust civil society
and non-governmental organizations, parliaments and
media. National legislation can be instrumental and
education decisive. The designation of a national R2P
focal point within countries can help to integrate an
atrocity prevention perspective in national policies.
Focal points can form instrumental networks, especially
across combustible regions, for helping to prevent
atrocity crimes. Australia, together with Ghana, Costa
Rica and Denmark, co-facilitate the R2P focal points
initiative. We encourage Member States that have not
already done so to appoint a national R2P focal point.

As others have said and as we all know, effective
early warning mechanisms are of course essential. The
Secretary-General's Special Advisers on the Prevention
of Genocide and on R2P have a dedicated function to
look for signs of precursors to mass atrocity crimes,
sounding the alarm, when necessary, and working
with States and regional organizations to enhance their
prevention efforts. The Council should receive more
frequent briefings from both Special Advisers. We
should schedule regular and serious horizon-scanning
sessions that are uncensored by the Council's own
political dynamics. The Secretary-General's leadership
on that is crucial.

The Council should support the vital Rights Up
Front initiative, as we now know that human rights
Violations are often the canary in the mineshaft. We
see that in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
and will be briefed by the commission of inquiry on
human rights in the Arria format tomorrow. We should
also support the provision of peacekeeping operations
with robust mandates. The protection of civilians must
always be at the core ofUnited Nations efforts to secure
peace.

The recent use of peacekeeping bases in South
Sudan to shelter people fleeing Violence shows the type
of concrete steps that can make a real difference and
save lives on the ground. It also shows what desperate
people fleeing atrocity not just need, but rightfully
expect from the United Nations. As Dag Hammarskjold
said, the United Nations is not here to take people
to heaven, but we are here to save people from hell.
Humanitarian access itself is a vital component in how
we must approach peacekeeping.
Finally, the Council must continue constantly to
support efforts to end impunity, including the efforts
made by the ad hoc international criminal courts and
tribunals and the International Criminal Court. We
are seeing evidence that international criminal justice
mechanisms can be a powerful deterrent, but to do that
they require strong international support. It should
be axiomatic that the Council provides support to the
International Criminal Court where the Council has
itself referred a situation to the Court.

In concluding, I recall that in his book about the
Rwandan genocide, entitled Shake Hands with the Devil,
United Nations Force Commander General Romeo
Dallaire, a hero, chillingly describes the mechanics of
genocide - the actual killings every day - as hard
work. It takes a lot of effort to murder 1 million people
in 100 days. Equally, today it takes a lot of effort from
us, hard work in the Council, to prevent genocide and
mass atrocities. Renewed common resolve, through
occasions like this debate, is necessary, but is too easy
to give and it is never enough.

As Ambassador Colin Keating concluded in his
remarks this morning - and Colin's words deserve
repeating - if we truly want prevention to work, then
we need better political, operational and financial
mechanisms for the Council and the wider United
Nations system, new mechanisms for improved early
warning, better systems for briefing and presenting
options to the Council at the early stages of potential
crises, enhanced preventive diplomacy, more effective
use of Chapter VI tools, quick preventive deployment
and, if all else fails, robust deterrence.

That is simply a linear challenge to all of us in the
Council and there is no rocket science in understanding
that challenge. We have the conceptual frameworks and
the toolkits and we see what is happening every day
across the world. That is why we are sitting here. What
we need to do is work harder, much harder, to match our
response and the leadership mandated of us by all the
peoples of the world to meet a simple linear challenge.

