Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): My delegation commends
the Egyptian presidency for its outstanding leadership
with wide coverage of issues on the Council agenda. At
today's wrap-up session, we would like to comment on
some important items.

First of all, on the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea, we express our solidarity with Japan.
Ballistic missiles flew over its territory two days
ago, endangering all air and sea vessels, as well as
the neighbouring territories. Japan and Kazakhstan
have been among the countries most affected by the
devastating consequences of nuclear tests and weapons.
We therefore understand the insight and experience of
the Government and the people of Japan.

It is worrisome to see today, when we are celebrating
together the International Day against Nuclear Tests
at United Nations Headquarters, the increasing threat
of nuclear weapons. The position of Kazakhstan on
non-proliferation and the situation in the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea is well known and remains
consistent. I will just summarize it in a few words: first,
condemnation; second, halting of all tests and launches;
third, full implementation of United Nations sanctions
and directives; fourth, pressure; fifth, no military
option, and exercise of restraint; sixth, dialogue and
confidence-building measures; seventh, resumption
of the six-party talks without delay; eighth, "double
freeze" as a possible beginning; and ninth, unity and
credibility of the Council.

I shall now turn to the Middle East.

First of all, on Iraq, we in the international
community need to be concerned about the proposed
referendum on the independence of the Kurdistan
region and the Kurd areas outside the administration
of the region. We believe it would have negative
consequences that could cause further instability.

As regards Syria, the fifth meeting of the Astana
process met in our capital on 4 and 5 July. We saw all the
stakeholders gathered, including Jordan and the United
States, together with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. De Mistura. Representatives
of the United States and Jordan also participated as
observers. We are deeply grateful to all sides for
their important contributions. Hopefully, the pending
August meeting will be conducted in mid-September.
We did hold a technical expert meeting at end of August
to finalize the September meeting.

The tireless work of participants in the Astana
Process is resulting in gradual but significant progress.
Each round of talks yields complete results, which have
a positive impact on the lives of hundreds of thousands
of Syrians. The scale and intensity of the conflict have
reduced noticeably, and efforts are continuing to create
conditions conducive to the delivery of humanitarian
aid to the Syrian people in need. We express our deep
appreciation and gratitude to the Under-Secretary-
General, Mr. O'Brien, for his noble, tireless and most
effective work in the United Nations, inter alia on the
Syrian file for the good ofall Syrians, and cordially wish
him success and all the very best in his future career
and life. We also support the practice ofjoint Council

meetings on political and humanitarian developments
in Syria and look forward to their continuation.

On Yemen, we are thankful to the Swedish mission
for initiating consultations on the situation in Yemen on
18 August (S/PV.8027) and to the Senegalese mission
for organizing an Arria Formula meeting on the vital
role of the United Nations humanitarian assistance
partners in the crisis in Yemen, held on 21 August.
Due to the devastating humanitarian situation and the
world's worst cholera outbreak we are of the view that
the situation in Yemen should remain on the agenda of
the Security Council.

On Libya, we were pleased to hear the first briefing
in the Security Council of the new Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Libya and Head of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya, Mr. Ghassan
Salame, on the situation in Libya (S/PV.8032). We
express our full support for the activities of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General aimed at
bringing lasting peace to Libya, and welcome his
energetic engagement with different actors of Libyan
society as well as the international community.

On counter-terrorism, my Permanent Representative,
in his capacity as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaida
and the Taliban and associated individuals and entities
and the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1988 (2011), along with the experts of the Monitoring
Team, is currently on a mission to Singapore and
Malaysia to gather data on the activities of terrorist
groups in the countries where they are now shifting
their focus - mainly in South-East Asia, as they have
been almost completely driven out of Syria. We intend
to cover more countries in the latter part of the year.

Throughout this month, the Council has held two
remarkable meetings. The first was the briefing by the
Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Amina Mohammed, on
her mission to Nigeria and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo (S/PV.8022), which highlighted the
importance of focusing on women in all aspects of the
work of the Security Council and the United Nations.
The significant value of the deliberations demonstrated
the importance of having gender as an overarching
aspect of all phases of peace and security.

Yesterday, we held another exceptional open
debate on sustaining peace as a fundamental element
of all peacekeeping work (S/PV.8033). Greater focus on
that would certainly make our efforts more efficient,
relevant, timely and more cost-effective, as more is spent
on peacekeeping than on early efforts and prevention.
Finally, we also covered several peacekeeping
operations mandates. We thank you, Sir, for your vision
in streamlining operations and highlighting critical
factors for strengthening the Council and enabling it to
better fulfil and enhance its mandate.

In conclusion, we thank Japan for its exemplary
work on the revised presidential note (S/2010/507),
which was adopted in order to improve our working
methods. We also express our full support to Ethiopia,
the next President of the Council, and wish that
delegation all success in that important position.

