First, we would like to express our strong condemnation of the 25 March attack on a Sikh-Hindu temple in Kabul. We extend our deepest condolences to the families of the victims. We also take this opportunity to welcome the new Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Ambassador Deborah Lyons, and wish her success in her new role. In addition, we convey our appreciation to Ms. Ingrid Hayden, Deputy Special Representative for the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), for her briefing. The situation in Afghanistan continues to be at acritical juncture. The country's peace process, political dialogue, security situation and economic development face great challenges. We therefore urge all stakeholders and the international community to continue to work together to help all parties in Afghanistan meet those challenges. We continue to be concerned about the volatile security situation, especially in the south, and condemn in the strongest terms all terrorist attacks perpetrated during the reporting period, which have targeted innocent civilians. The drug crisis continues to be a serious problem for Afghanistan and the entire region, which is why we believe it is highly important to intensify efforts to combat this scourge. Regarding the dire humanitarian situation, we share the concerns in the Secretary-General's report (S/2020/210) about the increase - from 6.3 million to 9.4 million - in the number of people in need of humanitarian assistance and protection due to the conflict. We therefore ask the parties to strictly observe international humanitarian law as it relates to the protection of civilians. We hope that the humanitarian situation does not worsen during this time of pandemic. Like the rest of the world, we are deeply concerned about the spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), particularly in areas of conflict, and how it could significantly worsen the already critical humanitarian situation in Afghanistan. The Dominican Republic encourages the Government of Afghanistan to continue to include women in the peace processes and to ensure that they assume a leadership role in the negotiations. We believe that there must be full and effective participation, not only of women but also of young people, in all areas of Afghan society. Finally, we wish to acknowledge the important role played by UNAMA in promoting peace in the country through outstanding contributions in areas such as human rights, particularly for women. That progress must be sustained.
