Mr. Bahah (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me,
at the outset, to congratulate the United States on its
accession to the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. I also thank the members of the Council
and Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Zerrougui.

My delegation aligns itself with the statements
made by the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran, on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, and by the representative of Indonesia, on
behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.

Yemen is working to build a sound foundation for
a democratic civil society based on comprehensive
national dialogue among actors in the economic, social
and political fields. That process seeks to prevent
the recruitment, criminal exploitation and use of
children and minors. There is a national consensus that
recognizes that children associated with armed forces
are victims rather than culprits and that they must not
be subject to criminal sanctions, in accordance with the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,
the Convention on the Rights of the Child and legal
norms with respect to juvenile offenses.

Yemen has made great progress in the dialogue
among the parties concerned. In April 2012, the
Minister of the Interior ordered the implementation of
legislation requiring that recruits into the armed forces
be a minimum of 18 years of age. In her visit to Yemen
in November 2012, Special Representative Zerrougui
met with members of the Government, the President
and representatives of non-State armed groups. The
Government committed to developing a plan to end
the recruitment and use of children. Following her
visit, we established a joint coordination committee to
implement the action plan. The Council of Ministers
endorsed the draft action plan drawn up by the United
Nations and my Government in order to prevent the
recruitment and mobilization of children in the security
and military forces.

In spite of its modest resources and complex
situation, Yemen is cooperating with its international
partners to prevent the recruitment of children and to
ensure the demobilization of all others from within
the ranks of the army. My Government reiterates
its commitment to strengthening the promotion of
the rights of children and highlights the need to step
up efforts to end their recruitment. We thank all the
organizations and partners working with us, including
UNICEF.

