Miss Hassan (Djibouti) (spoke in French): Allow
me to offer my delegation's congratulations to your
country on its outstanding leadership in the presidency
of the Security Council. I also take this opportunity to
thank Mr. Pascoe for his briefing, as well as the
members of the Security Council who have given my
delegation the opportunity to take part in this
discussion on peace and security in Africa.

The facts described in the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2010/327) show that the efforts of Council
members and the measures they have taken, in
particular through the adoption of resolutions 1862
(2009) in January 2009 and 1907 (2009) in December
2009, have contributed very clearly to the changes that
have taken place on the ground within only a few
months. My Government is convinced that, without the
resolve of Council members, it is not certain that the
report before the Council would have had the same
tenor. In fact, since 2008 - when Eritrea launched a
surprise war against my country - Council members
have borne witness to the unfolding of events and will
recall Eritrea's ongoing denial of the very existence of
the conflict.
10-45706
It is undeniable that the adoption of resolution
1907 (2009) was decisive to the protracted process that
has led to the situation under discussion here today. My
Government welcomes the fact that its repeated
appeals to Council members have finally been heeded.

My Government welcomes the developments on
the ground described in the report and would like to
reach a final and lasting solution to the border dispute
generated by Eritrea two years ago. My Government
also appreciates and welcomes the mediation of the
authorities of Qatar and is ready to work closely with
them to peacefully resolve the dispute with Eritrea.

My Government has faith in the leadership of the
brotherly country of Qatar and is convinced that it will
lead us to a good solution. While the beginnings are
encouraging, the road before us is long and will require
a tireless and serious commitment on the part of us all
in the months to come, because the matters to be
discussed are sensitive. As noted by Mr. Pascoe, these
issues include prisoners of war, missing persons and
border demarcation and delimitation.

Before concluding, I welcome the efforts of the
Secretary-General, who has spared no effort and has
always offered his good offices. We hope that future
developments will allow his next report to have the
same positive tone. My country, as always, is ready to
work for peace in the region and in the world.

I would like to conclude by extending the most
sincere condolences of my Government to the sister
Republic of Uganda for the attacks that took place on
its soil by Somali extremists.

