Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): My
country supported and voted in favour of the draft
resolution we have just adopted, essentially because
the priority in this conflict was and remains to declare
an immediate cessation of hostilities and an end to
violent confrontation. That has been my country's
position ever since the outbreak of this crisis between
Israel and Lebanon on 12 July, and we have
unequivocally stated that at all relevant meetings of the
Security Council and in other international forums.

We regret that the Council took a full month to
react in the face of this conflict and to shoulder its
responsibilities under the Charter. As I have said, our
chief concern throughout the conflict has been and
remains the fate of the civilian population. The figures
reveal eloquently that it is innocent civilians, both
Lebanese and Israeli, who have most suffered the
consequences of the violence. International
humanitarian law establishes clear obligations for the
parties with respect to the protection of civilians. The
principles of proportionality and differentiation must
be respected in all circumstances. For that reason,
Argentina has vigorously denounced all violations of
international humanitarian law and of human rights
that have taken place in the course of the conflict. We
call once again for an immediate end to all attacks on
civilian populations.

We now hope that the parties to the conflict will
take immediate steps to facilitate access by
humanitarian aid agencies to southern Lebanon and to
guarantee the safety and freedom of movement of
humanitarian aid workers. In the light of the particular
social and cultural characteristics of Lebanon, we
consider that among the top priorities should be to
provide assistance enabling internally displaced
persons to return to their homes as soon as possible.

It must be stated that the adoption of this
resolution should not be seen as the end of the road,
but rather as the beginning of a process that must take
us to a solution of the underlying problems that led to
this crisis. Here, we are convinced that additional
efforts must be made to fully implement all of the

Council's decisions, in particular resolutions 425
(1978), 426 (1978), 1559 (2004) and 1680 (2006).

With regard to the implementation of today's
resolution, we believe that it is a priority to accelerate
preparations for the deployment of additional troops to
strengthen the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon so that Israel's withdrawal from Lebanese
territory can take place as soon as possible. We are
confident that there will be significant contributions of
troops over the next few days.

With respect to the proposals to be developed by
the Secretary-General in pursuance of paragraph 10 of
the resolution, we would ask him to take into account
the seven-point plan adopted by the Lebanese Cabinet,
in particular with regard to the Sheba'a farms, as also
set out in the resolution we have adopted.

The crisis between Israel and Lebanon should not
make us lose sight of the serious situation in the
occupied Palestinian territories, in particular in the
Gaza Strip. To the contrary: the two matters are very
closely linked and, unfortunately, feed off each other.
The humanitarian situation in Gaza is extremely grave
and continues to deteriorate daily. We hope that, over
the next few days, the Security Council will begin to
look at this issue with a view to putting an immediate
end to hostilities there as well.

Finally, let me stress once again the importance
that Argentina attaches to the achievement of a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle
East on the basis of Security Council resolutions, the
Madrid terms of reference, prior agreements among the
parties, the road map and the principle of land for
peace.

