Mr. Cunningham (United States): Thank you,
Mr. President, for providing the opportunity to discuss
the centrality of justice and the rule of law in
international affairs.

The United States of America is a nation founded,
not upon ethnicity or cultural custom or territory, but
upon law enshrined in our Constitution. As a
consequence, establishing and maintaining the rule of
law has been an enduring theme of American foreign
policy for over two centuries.

Notably, the United States Constitution
specifically provides that treaties shall be the supreme
law of the land. We therefore do not enter into treaties
lightly because we believe that the importance of the
rule of law to a successful system of peace cannot be
overstated. Democracy, justice, economic prosperity,
human rights, combating terrorism and lasting peace all
depend on the rule of law. The rule of law is essential
to fulfil the ideas behind the United Nations Charter
that we are all pledged to support. Since the creation of
the United Nations, however, there have been more
than 200 armed conflicts, involving more than 100
different countries and resulting in some 30 million
deaths. Those statistics tell us we have not yet
succeeded in fulfilling the call of the Charter to rid the
world of the scourge of war and to heal its wounds.

To be sure, our collective experience has shown
that there is no one-size-fits-all approach to conflict
resolution and post-conflict development. Nonetheless,
we have learned a few lessons that must be firmly
applied if we are to improve our performance. We
know that United Nations mandates must be clear and
realistic from the outset, backed by adequate resources.
We know that helping societies emerge from conflict
requires order, within which reform can take place.
And we know that order is not an end in its own right.
Rather, it must be part of a larger plan for establishing
or re-establishing the rule of law so that social and
economic development can take place and justice can
be served.

Inevitably, the process of securing the rule of law
is multifaceted. Order requires well-trained police
forces. Those police forces must then be integrated into
an effective, fair and credible legal system and a
functioning judiciary staffed by qualified judges,
prosecutors, lawyers, and other officials. In some
cases, courtrooms may need to be rebuilt, law school
curricula may need to be revamped, legal codes may
need to be revised and prison systems may need to be
restructured. The burden of the rule of law is great, but
so are its rewards. A reliable legal infrastructure is
crucially important to the economic prosperity
necessary to reintegrate formerly warring factions into
society. Every experience with demobilization provides
abundant evidence in support of that point.

However, none of those measures will succeed
without informed public support. Often, profound
social and cultural change is needed for the rule of law
to take root. In the last 10 years, the international
community has become increasingly active in helping
countries in that difficult work. To be most effective,
there is a need for cadres of experts in the many areas
related to the re-establishment of the rule of law:
administrators, civilian police, lawyers, judges,
prosecutors, teachers, media experts and others. To the
extent that those people are not already on the payroll
of the United Nations, we must be able to recruit them
on short notice to help rebuild a society emerging from
conflict. Obviously, those experts should know the
language and culture of the country they may be asked
to help in order to be most effective. But even with the
help of uniquely qualified specialists, the international
community cannot wave a magic wand to bring a
society out of conflict to a better future. That task can
only be completed if there is the necessary long-term
commitment from the local Government and
population.

That commitment will be severely tested. All our
impulses and cravings for justice urge us to prosecute
where horrific crimes have occurred. But launching
prosecutions in the midst of negotiations may not be
the best route to post-conflict development. Flexibility
in approach is needed. That said, good judicial models
can greatly help countries build strong judiciaries. As
the Nuremberg legacy teaches us, no one should be
above the law. Indeed, the United States has been at the
forefront of international efforts to ensure that those
responsible for wartime atrocities are prosecuted, from
the establishment of the Nuremberg and Tokyo
tribunals to leading the effort to set up the International
Criminal Tribunals for the former Yugoslavia and
Rwanda, to the most recent case of the Sierra Leone
Special Court. The United States has been the single
largest donor to those international institutions.

At home and abroad, we have vigorously pursued
the highest standards in accountability for war crimes
and crimes against humanity. No nation devotes more
resources to training in, and compliance with, the law
of armed conflict than the United States. In fact, a
Department of Defense directive formally provides that
all reportable incidents involving violations of the law
of war committed by or against United States or enemy
persons be reported promptly, thoroughly investigated
and, when appropriate, remedied by corrective action.
The Department of Defense has formal procedures and
responsibilities in place to ensure that all such
violations of the law of war are prosecuted in
appropriate cases. Commanding officers who receive
an initial report of a possible war crime are required to
request that a formal investigation be conducted. In
addition, senior Department of Defense officials are
required to provide for disposition of war crimes cases
under the Uniform Code of Military Justice in
appropriate cases. We hope that other countries will
follow our example in that area by training all their
men and women in uniform in their legal obligations
and by holding their soldiers accountable for violations
of the laws of war.

Let me conclude where I began. The rule of law
is indispensable to justice, freedom and economic
development. Moreover, the rule of law is
indispensable to international peace and security
abroad. As a nation founded by law, the United States
is the unflagging champion of the rule of law. By
working together in support of the rule of law, we
believe the international community can strengthen
peace and help conflict-ridden societies build a better
future. For 200 years that has been our firm conviction
and practice. And it will remain our first article of
faith.

