Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
should like to begin by thanking you, Mr. President, for
convening this wrap-up meeting to discuss Security
Council missions to Africa and United Nations
promotion of peace and security in Africa. We also
wish to thank Ambassador Gambari, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
statement.

Recently, the situation in Central Africa -
particularly in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo - has become extremely worrisome; the peace
process there faces a number of challenges. In West
Africa, the peace in Sierra Leone must still be
consolidated, the conflict in Liberia has yet to be
resolved and the situation in Cote d'Ivoire is still beset
with destabilizing factors. The Security Council
missions to those two regions in June are both
necessary and timely. We hope that they will play an
effective role in promoting the peace processes in both
regions.

In recent years, the Security Council has been
actively engaged in the prevention and resolution of
conflicts and in the consolidation of peace. It has made
some headway, but it has also faced difficulties and
problems. Today I wish to dwell on one question,
namely, the importance of putting the maintenance of
peace and security on a sound economic and financial
footing.

The African continent is richly endowed with
natural resources. This is true of both the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Sierra Leone. However, due
to various factors, economic and financial security
often becomes a sticking point in the process of ending
conflicts and rebuilding peace.

Indeed, the inability to procure adequate
economic and financial resources has a negative effect
on the promotion of peace processes. In this respect, it
should be noted that, in recent years, cooperation
between the United Nations and international financial
institutions, including the World Bank, has been
stepped up, and that coordination among various
organs of the United Nations system - for instance,
between the Security Council and the Economic and
Social Council - has also been enhanced.

Insufficient funding during peace processes
remains a difficult problem. For example, the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), through its peacekeeping operation in
Cote d'Ivoire, has played an instrumental role in
stabilizing the situation in the country. However, the
peacekeeping operation is strapped for cash. In Sierra
Leone, the process of demobilization, disarmament and
reintegration of ex-combatants has been stalled by the
lack of funding.

Following the end of conflicts and the
achievement of peace, countries still face serious
difficulties, which may become new triggers for a
further round of turmoil. For example, in Guinea-
Bissau the relevant peace agreements are being
implemented, but the grave economic difficulties it
faces threaten to plunge it into another war.

Economic and financial guarantees therefore
represent a serious issue for the Security Council in its
task of preventing and managing and forestalling the
recurrence of conflicts in Africa.

The United Nations, including the Security
Council, should strive for effective solutions to enable
the Organization to enhance its capacity for the
maintenance of international peace and security.

