Ms. Minagano: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
invitation to brief the Security Council on the situation
of women and girls in South Sudan. Today marks more
than nine months since the signing of the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan, yet the fighting has yet
to fully cease. While women and girls are affected
disproportionately by the years of conflict and the
current humanitarian crisis, I want to speak not only
of their despair, but also of their resilience and of what
they need to rebuild their country.

My name is Lydia Minagano, and I speak
in my capacity as Project Manager of the Peace
Implementation Monitoring Initiative, a network of
civil society organizations working to monitor progress
and challenges in implementing South Sudan's peace
agreement. I am a member of the Strategic Defence and
Security Review Board, one of the mechanisms of the
Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of Conflict in
the Republic of South Sudan, and a member of the South
Sudan Women's Coalition for Peace, which participated
in the peace talks in 2018.

My statement will focus on four key areas. The
first is the gendered nature of the conflict, especially
its impact on women and girls. The second is the need
to strengthen women's meaningful participation in the
implementation of the peace agreement, as well as all
decision-making processes that will impact the future of
South Sudan. The third is the critical need for security
sector reform. The last is the importance of consulting
with civil society in South Sudan, particularly women-
led organizations.

The conflict of the past five years is deeply rooted
in gender inequality. That has resulted in widespread
violations of the rights of women and girls, including
sexual and gender-based violence, forced displacement
and the denial ofbasic access to livelihoods. As Council
members know, South Sudan has one of the highest
rates of violence against women and girls in the world.
Entrenched discrimination and harmful practices, such
as early and forced marriages, have contributed to an
environment where gender-based Violence against
women and girls is widespread.

As I address the Security Council today, more than
50 civilian areas are still occupied by the military,
according to the June 2019 report of the Ceasefire and
Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring and
Verification Mechanism. Although the military has
vacated some civilian areas, its continued presence
in other areas still puts women and girls at risk of
sexual and other forms of gender-based violence.
Without accountability for gender-based violence and
challenging those in our communities who permit such
actions we cannot move forward.

The majority of those displaced by the conflict in
South Sudan are women and children. I have listened
to too many stories of women and girls who have fled
as refugees to Uganda, or spent years stuck in the
protection of civilian sites, where they are exposed
to diseases and lack access to basic services, such as
education for their children. One 14-year-old girl in
Uganda told me how she lost her mother in a refugee
camp owing to a simple fever. The pain and agony in
that little girl's face still haunt me today. Nobody should
die from easily treatable or preventable diseases.

For women, peace is more than just a signed
agreement. Its dividends must be felt in the daily lives
of every man, woman and child in South Sudan. In the
ongoing political processes, priority should be given
to enabling women and women-led organizations to
heal themselves and their communities. That means
ensuring equal access to livelihoods, reproductive
health services, psychosocial support and legal services.

South Sudanese women advocated tirelessly for a
place at the table during the High-level Revitalization
Forum, which led to the signing ofthe peace agreement.
We also fought to secure a 35 per cent quota for
women's inclusion. However, that quota was not fully
implemented during the nomination process to the
pre-transitional arrangement bodies. Resolution 2459
(2019), which was adopted in March and calls on all
parties to ensure the full and meaningful participation
of women in the peace process, is an important step
forward. However, that call must be backed by regular
follow-up and specific monitoring measures to ensure
it is adhered to and that there is accountability for the
lack of its implementation.

Security sector reform (SSR) is essential for long-
term peace and stability in my country. SSR must
ensure that all security-sector actors are competent,
professional and responsive. Anti-corruption and human
and women's rights training on an ongoing basis is
essential, as are accountability standards for leadership.
Furthermore, diversity and inclusion must be central to
reform efforts. The security sector must represent all
the people of South Sudan. That means ensuring not
only regional diversity, but the representation of men
and women. The needs of women in the armed forces
and in the cantonment areas must be addressed.

The slow progress in the cantonment of all forces is
an urgent outstanding issue and an important aspect of
transforming the security sector, as it will allow for the
professionalization of the army. I urge the parties to the
agreement to ensure that major milestones for security
sector reforms are achieved. Delays in professionalizing
the army mean delays in ensuring the proper protection
of women and girls.
Comprehensive security sector reform backed by
economic recovery programmes is necessary in order
to win the trust of displaced women and girls so that
they can return home safely and voluntarily and start
rebuilding their communities. That can be achieved
only by ensuring that their rights are protected and
that they have adequate support for reintegration when
they return.

As my colleague Angelina Nyajima Simon Jial
pointed out to the Security Council in March (see S/PV.8480), civil society in South Sudan plays a crucial
role in building and maintaining peace and security.
They are not only instrumental in the delivery of
life-saving humanitarian services, but are also key
to implementing the peace agreement. In March, the
Security Council responded to our call for the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) to work
more closely with us by giving it a mandate to engage
with women-led non-governmental organizations and
with civil society more generally. We now expect the
Council to fulfil that mandate. Civil society must enjoy
a safe and enabling environment in order to carry out
its work.

I would like to conclude by calling on the Security
Council to ensure that the Government of South Sudan
supports the implementation of the agreement with
reliable and adequate financial resources; continue to
call on parties to realize the 35 per cent quota for women's
representation, especially in the upcoming transitional
Government; encourage donors to support programmes
for local and national civil society organizations;
encourage UNMISS to continue to engage with diverse
women's groups, particularly those working to end

sexual and gender-based violence in our communities,
as a fundamental part of implementing its protection of
civilians mandate, which should include the creation of
safe spaces, which are critical for survivors and victims
of sexual and gender-based violence; urge parties
to the conflict to vacate all civilian areas; ensure
the adequate protection of women and girls from all
forms of sexual and gender-based violence, including
psychosocial support; support the security sector in
developing expertise and require professional training,
including in the prevention of sexual and gender-based
violence and a response that is tailored to the specific
context of South Sudan; and ensure that the process of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
engages youth and young women in their programming.
The majority of those who carry guns are young people,
and it is much easier for young people to communicate
with each another.

Lastly, the DDR process should also address
the specific needs of female ex-combatants. Women
make up the majority of my country's population, and
South Sudan cannot afford to ignore us. Giving us the
resources that we need to participate in the future of
our country will directly contribute to South Sudan's
peace, stability and development. For the generations of
South Sudanese women and girls like myself, who have
never known anything other than conflict, we hope the
agreement will deliver the peace we yearn to see.

