Mr. Ragaglini (Italy): I too wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important debate and
providing a very useful concept note (S/2011/627). I
would also like to express my deep appreciation to
Under-Secretary-General Herve Ladsous for his
briefing, which gives us a broad picture of the
challenges we face in security sector reform (SSR).

This debate could not come at a better time, for
we need to take stock of the progress made by the
United Nations in its approach to security sector
reform, and to assess the international and regional
support available to countries, which have to uphold
the rule of law and the State institutions that protect
their citizens and borders.

In the past 20 years, our understanding of
security has evolved from a militaristic, State-centric
perspective to a broader view of the various critical
institutions and actors, State and non-State, that are
security providers when they function properly and a
possible source of instability when they are inefficient
or corrupt. Shifting away from an exclusive focus on
State security, the international community has
developed an approach that emphasizes human security
and the institutions that provide security and justice.

The current security sector reform concept took
shape four years ago during the 2007 debate (see S/PV.5632). Today we continue to build on lessons
learned and on a new, consistent and comprehensive
approach to SSR that includes the improvement of
security institutions, the rule of law, good governance,
respect for human rights, and international cooperation.
We all agree that the key to the security sector reform
process is country ownership and donor support of
every aspect of reform activities in partner countries.

Today, we all realize that to foster and grow
national ownership, we have to work with
Governments and local security institutions from the
assessment phase to planning, and from joint
implementation of programmes to policy reviews and
assessment of lessons learned. No country should buy
into donor methods or ideas. It is the reality of people's
immediate needs, and their capacity and commitment,
that should influence the pace and trajectory of change
and inject security institutions with equal doses of
accountability and effectiveness. The United Nations
and the Security Council have a leading role to play in
defining security sector reform policy. That policy's
goal is nationally led coordination that includes all
stakeholders, ranging from regional organizations to
donors and local authorities.

NATO has traditionally been a prime mover in
defence and security sector reform in Europe and in
assisting partner countries. Since the Helsinki Final
Act, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe has accumulated extensive experience in
activities as varied as the democratic control of armed
forces, border security and management, counter-
terrorism, anti-trafficking, police training and reform,
anti-corruption, electoral legislation and judicial
reform. The European Union has an indisputable
security sector reform record, having provided
assistance to more than 70 countries in the past five
years. It has built on the experience of its member
States in lending unprecedented levels of support to
partner countries in Africa and elsewhere. Italian
women and men have long been involved in a broad
international programme supporting SSR processes in
south-eastern Europe, Asia and Africa in building and
restoring the rule of law and security institutions. In
the past two years, Italy has launched several
programmes aimed at assisting the federal and regional
Governments of Somalia.

Security sector reform does indeed matter,
particularly in peacetime. Sometimes it is too late and
too expensive, politically and financially, to effectively
support the security sector in a country or territory
where violence has already erupted and a full-scale
crisis is under way. SSR is always preferable as a
preventive measure for helping to ensure full
ownership by the recipient country.

Many of the security challenges faced by African
countries are also the result of the intersection of
economic, social and political factors. This same
interconnection of needs in many regions of Africa is
clear in a number of fields: preventing and combating
terrorism and transnational organized crime;
anti-narcotics operations; combating illegal trafficking
in weapons and human beings; and preventing money
laundering and other illegal financial activities.

The common security challenges faced by all
African actors indicate the need for an innovative and
holistic approach based on international cooperation.
The first step is to strengthen regional cooperation,
including by involving regional and subregional
organizations, especially the African Union and
regional economic communities such as the Economic
Community of West African States, and enhancing
their ownership. We must also broaden our perspective
and fully involve the main international actors in
cooperating in a comprehensive way on the African
continent.

Both the United Nations and the Counterterrorism
Action Group of the Group of Eight are trying to
address these threats comprehensively and ensure
coordination with all the relevant actors. The time has
come to introduce cooperation mechanisms that will
help us identify and prioritize initiatives, while fully
respecting the principle of co-ownership. The starting
point is to identify clear-cut consultation methods,
which could be directed to gather input from countries
in the various regions, assess and match that input and
outline initiatives that would be eligible for funding by
relevant financial instruments. Areas for possible
action could include the fight against terrorism and
transnational organized crime; the fight against illegal
immigration, cross-border co-development initiatives;
training; the environment; civil protection; the
sustainable development of natural resources; and the
management of natural disasters.

Many other potential areas of intervention require
broad-based strategies that take into account the shared
needs of countries from different regions in order to
better integrate such initiatives as the development of
border areas, both economically and socially; training
and investing in human resources; and protecting the
environment. These, we believe, are just a few
examples of areas in which a cross-regional approach
is inevitable.

