Mr. Buffin (Belgium) (spoke in French): Belgium
thanks Uruguay, President of the Security Council, for
organizing today's open debate today as well as the
various speakers for their contributions. Current events
have unfortunately shown the relevance of and need for
this debate.

Belgium fully supports the statement made by the
representative of Switzerland on behalf of the Group
of Friends of the Protection of Civilians in Armed
Conflict, as well as the statement to be made later by
the observer of the European Union.

I would like to raise two points in my national
capacity. First, Belgium welcomes the recommendations
of the High-level Independent Panel on Peace
Operations. As part of the open debate today, I wish to
express my country's full and complete support for the
work of the Secretary-General in implementing these
recommendations, in particular those in relation to the
protection of civilians. In this context, I think it useful
to quote the following passage of the report of the High-
level Independent Panel:

"The United Nations must not stand by as civilians
are threatened or killed: missions must demonstrate
the determination to use every tool available
to protect civilians under imminent threat."
(S/2015/446, para. 92)

Secondly, Belgium fully supports the
recommendations of the Secretary-General in each
of the areas dealt with in his report of 18 June 2015
(S/2015/453), namely, strengthening respect for
international law; humanitarian access; the use of
explosive devices in populated areas; the identification
and registration of civilian casualties; displaced
persons; and the role of the Security Council on the
protection of civilians.

I now wish to address three specific aspects of
these recommendations.

First, concerning humanitarian access, the
appalling images and testimony coming out of Madaya,
where hundreds of people are literally starving, are a
reminder to us of just how tragic the situation of the
civilian population in Syria is. In the meantime, the
Syrian authorities have decided to grant humanitarian
access to the city, and initial deliveries of humanitarian
aid are beginning to reach the endangered populations.

We call on the parties to the conflict to ensure
humanitarian access to the entire civilian population
and under no circumstances to use the practice of siege,
in accordance with their obligations under international
law.

Humanitarian access, as well as the protection
of medical infrastructure, must remain a priority of
the Security Council. This message was conveyed by
Belgium during its presidency of the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) Donor Support
Group in 2015, through support for the Health Care in
Danger initiative, and by its sending, in January 2014,
a letter from the Minister for Foreign Affairs, endorsed
by 28 ministers, reminding all parties to the conflict
in Syria of their obligations to respect international
humanitarian law concerning access to health care and
thereby facilitate the work of humanitarian actors.

Secondly, concerning prevention, Blue Helmets
have a duty to intervene when civilians are at risk,
using force if necessary. Alongside this obligation,
a great deal of prevention work must be done within
United Nations operations in terms of the training
of peacekeepers prior to deployment, and through
exchanges with host countries. The United Nations
and its Member States must ensure that the necessary
means are also made available for these essential tasks.

The preventive dimension is multifaceted and
calls for the strengthening of many links in the chain
of operations of peacekeeping missions so that they
can give due attention to the protection of civilians.
The joint action plan developed by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) and the Department
of Field Support provides a solid basis in this regard.
We urge the Secretary-General to report regularly on
the progress made and the difficulties encountered in
the implementation thereof.

Thirdly, concerning the fight against impunity,
we must ensure that the perpetrators of the most
serious crimes against civilians are held accountable
for their actions. I wish to recall the need for the
Security Council to refer the situation in Syria to the
International Criminal Court. Like the Secretary-
General, Belgium calls on all States Members of the
United Nations to ratify the Rome Statute. We also call
on them to support the Agreement on the Privileges and
Immunities of the International Criminal Court, which
is an indispensable tool for the proper functioning of
the Court.

On the other hand, I believe it necessary to
acknowledge the efforts of the Government of the
Central African Republic in setting up a Special
Criminal Court, supported by the United Nations
Development Programme and DPKO. The fact that
the Security Council has mandated the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) to
facilitate the operations of the Special Criminal Court,
especially in its operational activities, is a very positive
development. I call on the Security Council and
Member States to continue supporting this instrument
and ensuring support by MINUSCA for the day-to-day
work of the Special Criminal Court.

Finally, we have the issue of the criminal liability
of peacekeepers and of United Nations officials and
experts on mission. On 6 January, new cases of sexual
abuse in the Central African Republic were reported;
this time it appears that they were committed by
MINUSCA soldiers. The United Nations must lead by
example and do its utmost so that this kind of event
does not recur. We welcome the efforts made by the
Secretary-General in this respect, encourage him to
continue in this vein, and call on Member States to
provide all necessary assistance.
