Mr. De Ruyt (Belgium) (spoke in French): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union.
The Central and Eastern European countries associated
with the European Union - Bulgaria, the Czech
Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland,
Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia - and the associated
countries Cyprus, Malta and Turkey align themselves
with this statement.

First of all, let me thank you, Sir, for having
convened today's debate on West Africa. We believe
that a regional approach is not only useful but
necessary when dealing with the situation in West
Africa, in addition to the meetings that the Council
holds on specific national situations. Such a regional
approach is vital if we are to respond to the challenges
facing the region, which include the disarmament of
irregular forces, small arms proliferation, and the
return and resettlement of refugees and displaced
persons.

The European Union, moreover, attaches great
importance to this region. For more than 20 years the
Union has been implementing a regional approach to
West Africa under the Lome' Conventions, an approach
which has been considerably strengthened since the
signing of the Cotonou Agreement.

The need for a comprehensive, integrated
approach to West Africa was one of the findings of the
United Nations inter-agency mission led by Assistant
Secretary-General Ibrahima Fall. The Union welcomes
the fact that work is continuing in that direction and
that the United Nations has decided to set up a regional
office in Dakar. We hope that this plan will now rapidly
take shape and that the office will become operational
as soon as possible.

We are convinced that, with a skilled and
dynamic Special Representative of the Secretary-
General at the helm, this project will very soon bear
fruit. We consider it particularly important that the
office should have close and sustained working
relations with the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) and the Mano River Union.
Indeed, a regional approach by the United Nations
requires close cooperation with regional organizations.

West Africa has been ravaged by years of
conflict, population displacement and economic
depression. The region has suffered, and is still
suffering, some of the worst atrocities and human
rights violations that the contemporary world has
witnessed. There have nevertheless been a number of
promising recent developments, one of which is the
positive role played by ECOWAS.

The United Nations has succeeded in gradually
deploying in Sierra Leone. The disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme is making
steady progress, and elections are scheduled for May
2002. In comparison with the situation only a few
months ago, these are encouraging and hopeful
developments. However, substantial challenges remain.
The Revolutionary United Front (RUF) still controls
parts of the territory, and there are, unfortunately, some
difficulties with disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration in the eastern part of the country.

In Liberia, the European Union continues to be
concerned by the security situation and considers the
resumption of fighting in the north of the country to be
a very worrisome development. In Guinea, the
European Union is watching the domestic situation
closely, particularly the highly controversial
referendum held in November 2001 and the
forthcoming elections. The Secretary-General's Special
Representative should, as a matter of priority,
undertake efforts involving all heads of State of the
Mano River Union countries in order to ensure that the
dialogue launched in August can continue.

The United Nations is playing a leading role in
the region. The most important United Nations
peacekeeping operation is being conducted in Sierra
Leone. Sanctions have been put in place against the
RUF in Sierra Leone and against Liberia. The
European Union fully supports those sanctions regimes
and has taken the necessary steps to ensure that they
are strictly applied.

On a quite different front from the application of
sanctions, the European Union - as I mentioned at the
beginning of my statement - provides substantial
assistance to West Africa. If the Council will bear with
me briefly, I should like to expand on this aspect.
The European Union's assistance strategy with
respect to the region has focused mainly on the general
objective of supporting the process of regional
economic integration and the competitive integration of
the region into the world economy. The following areas
have been identified as priorities: institutional support
for regional organizations; the strengthening of
integration mechanisms; management of common
resources; development of regional transport and
communications networks; research; consolidation of
the rule of law; and conflict management. These last
two priorities, in particular, reinforce the efforts of the
United Nations itself.

A specific dialogue with the region has been
undertaken through the regional organizations, in
particular ECOWAS, the West African Economic and
Monetary Union (UEMOA) and the Permanent Inter-
State Committee for Drought Control in the Sahel
(CILSS). The Union maintains special relationships
with those three bodies. Altogether, since the
conclusion of the Lome I Convention, a total of 905
million euros has been allocated to the region. These
efforts are reinforced by those of the European Union
presidency's Special Representative for West Africa,
Mr. Hans Dahlgren, whose efforts and whose periodic
Visits to the region enable us to follow up, reinforce
and, where needed, recalibrate our activities. In
carrying out his mandate, the Special Representative
places special emphasis on close dialogue with the
United Nations and with other regional organizations.

Mr. President, your decision to hold a briefing
meeting with the Executive Board of the United
Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) last week, dealing
in particular with the subject of children and armed
conflict in the framework of regional peace and
security in West Africa, was an excellent initiative.
UNICEF plays a significant role in peace-building,
particularly through its work in disarming,
demobilizing and reintegrating children and in caring
for children traumatized by war.

Sir, the European Union notes with interest your
proposal for a joint mechanism, inasmuch as this would
allow for greater consistency in the activities of the
Security Council and of the United Nations operational
agencies. There is indeed a clear need for closer

cooperation between the Security Council - which
often takes the initial peacemaking measures,
specifically involving peacekeeping missions - and

United Nations aid, reconstruction and development
agencies, including the Economic and Social Council.
We unreservedly support the Security Council's
regional approach to West Africa and encourage the
Council to develop that approach in parallel with
dealing with the specific situations that are referred to
it.

