Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I should like to thank Bolivia for its
initiative in convening a key discussion as we seek
to strengthen international efforts to prevent the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (WMDs)
and to ensure that they do not fall into the hands of
non-State actors, particularly terrorist organizations.
We also congratulate you, Sir, on your wise and able
chairship of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004). We welcomed the adoption of
resolution 2325 (2016) under the Spanish presidency
of the Security Council in December last year. I also
thank Ms. Nakamitsu and the representative of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) for their briefings to the Council.

The year 2004 was marked by effective efforts
on the part of the international community to prevent
non-State actors and entities from developing,
acquiring, manufacturing, transporting or using WMDs
in all their forms - whether that be nuclear, chemical,
radiological or biological weapons. Consequently, in
2004 the Security Council adopted resolution 1540
(2004) in response to the clamour of the international
community for steps to be taken.

Nevertheless, we need to acknowledge that the
world has become more complicated since 2004.
International security threats have evolved very rapidly
and it is difficult to keep up with them. The arsenal of
armed groups and terrorists has expanded to include
the use of chemical weapons - to which they have
recourse as a standard weapon - and other WMDs.
That is borne out by the current state of affairs in the
Middle East and the actions undertaken by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant/Da'esh - actions proven
by the investigations of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint
Investigative Mechanism. Other terrorist groups, such
as Jabhat Al-Nusra and other militias, have also used
WMDs to sow destruction and suffering among the
population of that region.

The challenges that the international community
must overcome in that regard will require us to pay
more attention to the way we prevent those entities
and groups from obtaining WMDs and using them. We
would like to share some observations and proposals
on how the international community could step up its
efforts.

First of all, we need to develop an integrated and
effective United Nations model in order to open the
door to a world free of the threat of WMDs falling into
the hands of terrorists. We will need to coordinate and
harmonize United Nations counter-terrorism strategies.
We also must avoid any meddling or interference in the
affairs of sovereign States as the United Nations seeks
to play a coordinating role. States bear the primary
responsibility for setting up national preventive
mechanisms under resolution 1540 (2004). That is a key
responsibility and obligation and a crucial step towards
ensuring the full and effective implementation of the
resolution. States must remember that responsibility.

Secondly, we must take steps to provide timely and
relevant technical assistance to States that request it. We
must plug the current gaps in financing that assistance
by, inter alia, fully funding the voluntary trust fund
of the United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs
(UNODA).

Thirdly, we must enhance our cooperation with
international and regional organizations, as well as
the relevant subregional organizations. The Egyptian
delegation is responsible for coordinating those efforts
within the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) and, through its role in the Committee,
spearheads action to improve collaboration with all the
relevant stakeholders.

Fourthly, we must raise awareness and ensure more
comprehensive and integrated international efforts on
issues pertaining to transportation and transparency.
We must work more closely with the Department of
Political Affairs and UNODA, as well as the Office of
the Secretary-General, so as to coordinate our efforts
and approaches. All of those bodies must collaborate
more closely with the Group of Experts of the 1540
(2004) Committee, particularly with regard to chemical
and biological threats, as needed, as well as nuclear
threats.

Fifthly, Egypt suggests that we review the ways
in which we legally deal with new technologies like
e-commerce and other emerging technologies, such
as in the field of biology, to make sure that there is a
proper legal framework that covers new developments.

Egypt will work tirelessly to support efforts in
that regard, whether nationally or internationally. It
submitted four reports - in 2004, 2006, 2008 and
2016 - commensurate with its responsibilities under
resolution 1540 (2004). Those reports detail the steps
taken by the relevant Egyptian authorities towards the
resolution's implementation at the national. We also
adopted the voluntary national matrix following its
review and endorsement by the specialized authorities
in Cairo. Similarly, in 2007 Egypt set up out a national
commission on this issue.

We are firmly convinced that the only way to
prevent non-State actors and terrorists from acquiring
WMDs is by ensuring that we live in a world free of
such weapons in all their forms. Any such effort must
first seek to establish nuclear-weapon-free zones
throughout the world, including a zone free ofWMDs in
the Middle East, in line with the resolution of the 1995
Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and in response
to the calls of the relevant international bodies.

Finally, I would like to convey my gratitude to
Bolivia for all its efforts on this matter.

