The President (Spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Chile.

It was an honour for my delegation to co-chair the
Council's mission to Haiti. The visit was an expression
of the Security Council's commitment to Haiti and, at
the national level, a demonstration of Chile's bilateral
and multilateral support for that country.

With that in mind, it is important to underscore that
one of the Council's primary goals of the trip was to
highlight the importance of achieving an inclusive and
constructive climate for political stability, democratic
governance and development in order to promote
conflict prevention. During the visit, Security Council
members reaffirmed their support to Haiti and urged all
political actors to urgently work together to hold partial
legislative elections for the Senate, as well as partial
municipal and local elections, that are free, clean,
inclusive and transparent, in accordance with Haiti's
Constitution. I will not speak at length on this aspect,
which was described in detail by the representative of
the United States in her statement.

During the visit, Council members also had an
opportunity to assess the initiatives undertaken to
strengthen the Haitian National Police with the aim
of promoting a greater exercise of responsibility by
the national authorities of the Haitian State in the
maintenance of the country's stability and security.
There was recognition of the progress achieved, as well
as agreement that this is one of the main areas in which
challenges remained, in particular in the lead-up to the
elections.

Moreover, during our visit to the women's prison of
Petionville, it was clear that there was a need to make
progress towards ensuring the rule of law and security
in Haiti, including access to justice.

One of the aspects that most interested Council
members concerned the activities related to the
evaluation of the implementation of the relevant
resolutions of the Council, in particular resolution 2180
(2014), given the importance of maintaining an safe
and stable environment, especially during the elections
to be held in 2015, and the effects of the political and
social situation on Haiti's stability and security. The
activities in Cap-Haitien can be seen in that framework,
since we were able to see up close the quick impact
of projects and programmes to reduce community
violence developed by the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), which remain key to
maintaining a stable and secure environment.

With regard to the process of reconfiguring the
Mission, members had an opportunity to express their
different views on the process at a meeting with the
Force Commander.

During the specific meetings carried out with
representatives of the international community, in
particular with the leadership of MINUSTAH, the
United Nations country team and various bilateral
representations of the various countries committed to
Haiti, we observed that international support continued
to be fundamental. In that regard, I want to express
my gratitude for the tireless work carried out by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Haiti, Ms. Sandra Honore, and her team. We would like
to reiterate our support for them.

Finally, I want to associate myself with the tribute
paid by the representative of the United States to the
resilience of the Haitian people demonstrated over the
five years since the devastating earthquake, which was
manifested during the visit to the memorial erected
in their memory. We commend the efforts made by
the various Haitian Governments and by the Haitian
people to overcome the tragedy and move towards
reconstruction. We reiterate our solidarity with the
families of the victims and with the survivors.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

On behalf of the Council, I would like to express
my appreciation to all of the members of the Security
Council and the Secretariat who participated in the The Security Council has thus concluded the
mission for the manner in which they discharged their present stage of its consideration of the item on its
important responsibilities. agenda.

The meeting rose at 10.30 am.
