Mrs. Juul (Norway): Let me start by thanking
the Secretary-General and his staff for their report
(S/2009/l89), and Mexico for convening today's
meeting. I would also like to thank the President of
Burkina Faso, who initiated the process by calling for a
high-level meeting on mediation and the settlement of
disputes last year - a timely reminder of the
importance of this subject.

The very first paragraph of the United Nations
Charter states that a key purpose of the Organization is
to "take effective collective measures for the
prevention and removal of threats to the peace".
Mediation is a key instrument in this process, and
consequently must rank among the core activities of
the United Nations. The old adage that "an ounce of
prevention is worth a pound of cure" holds true in
international relations as well, and the United Nations
is more often than not what the world looks to for the
ounce of prevention, in the form of mediation and
conflict prevention.

It is no coincidence that two Secretaries-
General - Kofi Annan and Dag Hammarskjold - the
United Nations Children's Fund, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
the United Nations itself have received the Nobel
Peace Prize, all of them honoured for their work in
pursuit of peace. We must never forget that preventing
conflict was the main reason for establishing the
United Nations, and we must make sure that the
Organization is well equipped and ready to take on this
responsibility whenever crises threaten to erupt.

We have to admit that this is not always the case
today. Time and time again, we see the United Nations
being forced to pass the hat among Member States to
ask for voluntary contributions in order to do the job
mandated in the Charter. It is our collective
responsibility to ensure that the size of the
Organization's regular budget matches the size of the
job we are asking it to do, and it is the United Nations
responsibility to be proactive and put this budget to
good use in trouble spots around the world.

Mediators grapple with widely varying situations,
yet some aspects - dialogue and access, early
engagement and a flexible and coherent approach -
are crucial to all international mediation efforts. The
mediator must talk to and have access to all parties
involved. He or she must be impartial to the parties
themselves, but not to the actions of the parties. The
mediator must be brought into the process as early as
possible. A non-threatening, quiet diplomatic channel
has the advantage of eliminating many of the political
risks carried by a more public process. It also makes it
more difficult for spoilers to undermine the work. The
mediator's approach must be flexible, bringing all
relevant actors, such as the United Nations, regional
organizations, civil society and individual States
together, complementing each other's efforts.

The challenge is to make everybody coordinate
their efforts. Last year in Kenya, we saw that the
Security Council, the African Union, a former
Secretary-General of the United Nations and other
international actors, together with the Mediation
Support Unit (MSU) and other parts of the Secretariat,
were able to reach a successful outcome during the
challenging post-election period. This is exactly what
we want and what we would like future mediators to
learn from.

Like many others before me, I would like to draw
our collective attention to the fact that today, almost
10 years after resolution 1325 (2000) strongly urged
the United Nations and Member States to take action to
bring more women into peace processes, very little
progress has been made. Among the peace negotiators
deployed by the United Nations, the African Union, the
European Union and Member States over the past
decade, women have been few and far between. We
know that women bring different issues to the table,
and that they contribute to a more durable and
inclusive peace. We know that we only recruit from
50 per cent of the talent pool as long as we do not
include women in sufficient numbers. And we know
that half of the population can feel excluded from the
process and less committed to the outcome when they
have not been part of the decision-making. We
commend the work that has been done on trying to
recruit more women as mediators, but call for renewed
and strengthened efforts from the United Nations and
Member States to translate the words of resolution
1325 (2000) into concrete action - action that will
bring women into the highest levels of mediation.

In closing, I would like to welcome the
improvement of the United Nations mediation
apparatus, particularly the Mediation Support Unit.
Last year's strengthening of the Department of
Political Affairs meant that an increased number of
mediation posts were covered by the regular budget, a
development we strongly support. As stated earlier,
mediation is a core activity of the United Nations and
must also be at the core of the regular budget.

Norway will continue to support the MSU
financially, in particular the standby team of experts.
We encourage the entire United Nations system to take
advantage of the unique expertise this team offers. The
first team will complete its work in June this year, and
we look forward to learning more about its
experiences.

