Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): Georgia aligns itself with
the statement just made by the observer of the European
Union delegation. In my national capacity, I would like
to add the following.

First, let me express my gratitude to the French
presidency, in particular to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and International Development, for convening
this debate and presiding over it at the beginning. I
also thank the Secretary-General and the President of
the International Committee of the Red Cross for their
valuable contributions. I would like to extend our special
thanks to the President of the Central African Republic
for his insightful comments and to congratulate him
and the people of the Central African Republic on their
remarkable progress towards achieving sustaining
peace and functioning State institutions.
Unfortunately, the most flagrant Violations of
human rights occur in the circumstances surrounding
armed conflict, wherein innocent civilian populations,
especially women and children, constitute the
overwhelming majority of victims. Today the urgency
of the situation is further exacerbated by unabated
international terrorism and violent extremism, tragic
developments in the Middle East and unresolved
conflicts in many other regions throughout the globe,
including my own. We believe in the centrality of
the protection of civilians in all United Nations
peacekeeping mandates. The safety of the population
must be viewed as a critical component for stability,
security and sustainable peace.

Throughout the decades, the Security Council has
been addressing the issue of the protection of civilians
through its statements, resolutions and various
peacekeeping operations. As peacekeeping missions
have grown in numbers, size and scope, the United
Nations has made increasingly concerted efforts to
put civilian protection at the heart of those operations.
Nevertheless, with rapidly changing circumstances
throughout the world, renewed efforts are urgently
needed for peacekeeping to become more efficient in
terms of its humanitarian and human rights dimensions,
which means protecting civilians first.

While the Security Council has the primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace
and security, including through the establishment
of peacekeeping operations, in recent years we have
experienced several unfortunate cases when the Council
has failed to exercise its mandate to ensure the effective
and efficient protection of the civilian population. In
that regard, we once again welcome and fully support
the French proposal on the suspension of the veto power
in cases of mass atrocities. In 2014 Georgia also joined
the supporters of the code of conduct regarding Security
Council action against genocide, crimes against
humanity or war crimes, initiated by Liechtenstein.

Georgia experienced the unfortunate termination of
the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia, which
played a crucial role in maintaining peace and stability
in Abkhazia, Georgia by the single-handed veto of a
Security Council member in the spring of 2009. That
irresponsible action created a dangerous precedent in
United Nations peacekeeping. Since then, no adequate
replacement for the dismantled international presence
has been created in Georgia. While the European Union
Monitoring Mission continues its duties, the tireless
efforts to seek an independent, neutral and effective
international presence on the ground for the purpose
of peacekeeping has proved to be unsuccessful so far.

Against that background, the civilian population
residing in the occupied Georgian territories are
deprived of minimal safeguards for their safety and are
stripped of their fundamental rights and freedom. The
recent brutal murder of Giga Otkhozoria, a Georgian
internally displaced person from the occupied Abkhazia
region, who was shot dead while crossing the occupation
line, is a sobering reminder of the seriousness of the
situation. It also underlines the necessity of establishing
international security and human rights monitoring
mechanisms on the ground. A permanent fear for one's
life, the installation ofbarbed-wire fences in the middle
of yards and farmland, illegal detentions, restrictions
on the freedom of movement and the prohibition
of education in one's native language - all of those
illegal, illegitimate and arbitrary actions constitute the
dire reality of life in the occupied Georgian territories.

Based on our own experience, we believe that
peacekeeping operations should not be staffed
predominantly by representatives of any one single
State, and never by the military ofa State that is a party
to the conflict, or is heavily involved in the particular
conflict. The Commonwealth of Independent States
(CIS) Peacekeeping Force, which served as the security
component for the United Nations Observer Mission
in Georgia on the ground, clearly lacked the trust and
confidence of Georgians in the area, as it was staffed
exclusively by Russian military personnel. On many
occasions, they triggered, or were directly involved in,
grave violations of the peace arrangements, including
severe human rights abuses against the local Georgian
population and other incidents. Eventually, the CIS
Peacekeeping Force was turned into an occupation
force by the Russian Federation in violation of Georgia's
sovereignty and territorial integrity.

Georgia is fully committed to a zero-tolerance
policy against sexual exploitation and abuse by
peacekeeping personnel. On 5 June, an inter-agency
investigative team, set up at the initiative of the Defence
Minister of Georgia, left for the Central African
Republic to carry out investigative activities on the
ground. Also, in response to a Secretariat request, the
Government of Georgia presented the candidature of an
officer, on a gratis basis, to serve with the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations, whose focus would be on
the legal issues surrounding the sexual exploitation and
abuse perpetrated by international peacekeeping forces.

In conclusion, let me reiterate Georgia's full support
for efforts to make peacekeeping more effective and
more human-centred, with its primary focus on the
responsibility to protect the civilian population.

