Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank you, Madam
President, for scheduling this important briefing today.
I thank Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock.
To pick up on one of his points, I also want to thank
him for everything that his workers are doing on the
ground, as well as all the other relevant United Nations
agencies. I was very struck by what he said with regard
to the large-scale nature of the relief effort, as well as
by the fact that Yemenis are helping Yemenis. I believe
that is important.

It was a very sobering briefing, following the others
that we have heard before. I was struck by his phrases
concerning lives on the line, how close we are to famine
and that we might even be losing the fight. That is
obviously extremely serious news. It is grave distress
inflicted upon the people of Yemen. We are following
the escalation of military fighting around Al-Hudaydah
very closely. I wanted to pick up on Mr. Lowcock's
statement and highlight just four areas.

First, to reiterate once again - I think that
everyone on the Security Council has done this, but it
bears repeating - all parties to the conflict must do
everything possible to protect civilians and civilian
infrastructure and demonstrate in practical terms their
commitment to upholding international humanitarian
law. I was extremely concerned to hear about armed
groups' presence in humanitarian facilities. I believe
that the Council should demand that they leave. Those
facilities need to be maintained for the protection
of civilians. All parties have responsibilities under
international humanitarian law, and the Council looks
to them to discharge those responsibilities fully.

The second point concerns the flow of food, fuel
and medical supplies into and throughout Yemen. It is
critical that all parties facilitate that and that they work
with the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA) and Mr. Lowcock's partners on the
ground. It is also important that civilians can move
freely and safely so that those who can travel can get
out of harm's way as necessary. We have been deeply
concerned about reports that military action is making
the Al-Hudaydah-Al-Hajjarah road unsafe. That
will hamper the flow of supplies from Al-Hudaydah
to northern Yemen. It is Vital that onward supply
routes remain operational. I should like to echo what
Mr. Lowcock said: that cannot be done through
humanitarian assistance alone. We absolutely need the
commercial routes and supplies to be open and flowing.
That therefore means that the Al-Hudaydah and Saleef
ports need to remain open and that the mills and the
food storage facilities need to be protected so that the
food supply is safe.

I also wanted to join the Under-Secretary-General
in his remarks about urgent action on stabilizing the
economy. Since as recently as late July, the Yemeni
rial has depreciated more than 20 per cent. That has
halved the buying power of the people for food and
other staples in comparison with one year ago. That is
obviously increasing the vulnerability of families even
to meet basic needs. Humanitarian Aid, as we heard,
is overstretched, and even that is not enough because
there are 29 million Yemenis liable to need our help. We
therefore need to collectively think further about how
best the Council can help stabilize the humanitarian
situation by helping stabilize the economic situation, or
by dealing with the relevant United Nations and other
agencies and countries that can help in order to do that.
I would like to call on all sides to cooperate even more
intensely with OCHA and the United Nations agencies
on the ground to try and help steady the situation.

I should like to conclude on the same point on
which Mr. Lowcock ended by just reiterating the vital
and overriding importance of the political situation. I
will not recall the reasons for which the Geneva talks
did not take the steps that we wanted them to take. I
do not want to go into detail because I do not want to
complicate the work of Special Envoy Martin Griffiths,
who is now trying to reconvene political talks. I am
sure that our ministers who will be here next week
for the General Assembly will want to have many
discussions about Yemen on the margins of the high-
level week. I believe that that will be important. Lastly,
I call on all sides once again to get behind the process
that the Special Envoy is leading and urge them all to
find the flexibility that it will require for the sake of the
Yemeni people.

