Mr. Fedotov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): The Russian delegation wishes to reiterate
its full support for United Nations actions directed at
rendering practical assistance to a peace settlement in
Liberia. The resolution the Security Council has just
unanimously adopted on the new mandate and concept of
operations for the United Nations Observer Mission in
Liberia (UN OMIL) is undoubtedly a clear confirmation of
the international community's readiness to support, not
only in words but in deeds, the efforts of the Liberian
parties and the States members of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) to put an end to the
six-year fratricidal war and restore peace to that country
and stability to the entire region. We view the positive
outcome of the international Conference on Assistance to
Liberia, held at New York on 27 October, in the same
light.

We commend the tireless efforts of the international
community, and especially the African States, to put an
end to the chaos and Violence in Liberia. However, we
should like to underline once again - and this is made
crystal clear in the Security Council resolution - that in
the final analysis the success of a peaceful settlement in
that country will hinge on the commitment to peace of the
Liberian parties themselves and on their compliance with
the relevant Security Council resolutions and the
agreements among themselves entered into with the
assistance of ECOWAS including the Abuja Agreement.

Of particular importance at the present crucial stage
of settlement is the factor of confidence-building among
the participants in the peace process. In this connection it
is disturbing that reports continue to come in concerning
violations of the cease-fire and hitches in the process of

 

force disengagement. Such incidents are fraught with the
risk of a resumption of conflict, and we find it timely that
the resolution contains an appeal to the Liberian parties to
avoid the recurrence of such incidents in the future and
maintain the momentum of the peace process.

In view of the special nature of the United Nations
operation in Liberia, where the United Nations is acting in
support of the regional organization, ECOWAS, we deem
exceptionally important the provision of the resolution that
stresses the need for close contacts and enhanced
coordination between UNOMIL and ECOMOG in their
operational activities at all levels. We take the view that
such action will foster the success of the peace process in
Liberia and that the positive experience gained in that
country through practical cooperation between the United
Nations and the regional organization in the maintenance of
international peace and security will prove useful for other
peacemaking operations as well.

