Mr. Adechi (Benin) (spoke in French): We would
like to thank you, Mr. President, and to congratulate
you for your timely initiative to hold a debate on the
situation in Haiti. I am also pleased to welcome the
presence of Ambassador Valdes, to whom I am
particularly grateful for having briefed us on the
situation in Haiti. I also wish to take this opportunity to
tell Ambassador Valdes how much we appreciate his
work on the ground.

The briefing made by Ambassador Valdes clearly
illustrated that Haiti is facing several major challenges:
achieving success in the political transition process that
has been taking place for a year now, improving the
security situation, re-launching the Haitian economy in
the short- and medium-term and promoting sustainable
development.

The political crisis that has rocked Haiti has deep
roots in Haitian society. It is important that Haitians
and the international community face the obvious,
namely, that peace in Haiti will only be sustainable if it
is based on a national consensus forged through the
participation of all of the country's inhabitants.

From this perspective, it is important that, as they
adopt positions and take action, the Transitional
Government and the various institutions that are in
place work, on a daily basis to promote the creation of
an environment that inspires unity and restores the
confidence of all those who fear for their future
because of their political sympathies or affiliations.
They will need to work tirelessly to bring about
national reconciliation and inclusiveness wherever
possible.

In several months' time, the country will hold
legislative and presidential elections - the final
milestone on its journey towards a definitive return to
the great family of the world's democracies. Given the
recent history of the country, we again urge the Haitian
political class to make the political concessions
necessary to facilitate the establishment of institutions
that will promote the return of peace and stability in
the country after the elections. The Transitional
Government should spare no effort to integrate within
the political arena all Haitian parties, as long as they
reject violence.

The second major challenge is to improve the
security situation, which continues to be of great
concern because of the abuses being carried out by the
armed groups that hold sway in poor areas and
markets. The international community must work to
ensure the better protection of human rights and
citizens' rights in Haiti.

Now that MINUSTAH has sufficient strength to
be fully operational, it needs to address the problem of
the lack of security with due resolve. We welcome its
recent success in this area. We believe that, in
accordance with its mandate, MINUSTAH can play an
active role in assisting the Transitional Government to
pursue the necessary major reforms being undertaken
in the area of security. From this perspective, the
rebuilding of the Haitian police and the army of the
republic are of paramount importance.

MINUSTAH now needs to increase its efforts,
working in an energetic and vigorous fashion with the
Haitian National Police, with a view to discouraging,
once and for all, the illegal armed gangs that continue
to prefer the language of arms to that of dialogue in
pursuing their demands.

In analysing sources of violence in Haiti, it is
clear to us that political violence and criminal violence
fuel each other. In order to eliminate such violence, we
must urgently establish an integrated, comprehensive
programme of disarmament, demobilization and social
reintegration, which must take into account the
problems of the country.

In this context, we must link paid disarmament
and the rejection of violence with the integration of the
people involved in a programme that brings together
vocational reintegration with rehabilitation, through
activities to promote a culture of non-violence and
peace, as advocated by United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO).
However, such an approach can provide specific results
only if Haitians themselves believe in peace and work
to establish it within the culture, focusing on the goals
of economic recovery and social development.

The Transitional Government of Haiti must
urgently step up the process of establishing a national
disarmament commission and work to mobilize the
resources pledged to the country during the donors
conference held in Washington in July 2004, so as to
fund the implementation of the programme to create
30,000 jobs in the public sector and in the area of
environmental protection. In this context, the key to
success lies in support for small and medium-sized
companies.

A strategic approach that is well thought out
could help to ensure an effective interface between
assistance for stabilization and peacekeeping on the
one hand, and peacebuilding and the promotion of
sustainable development on the other, by permitting
immediate social change and necessary reform. That is
the second major challenge facing Haiti.

In this regard, we believe that MINUSTAH must
fully carry out its complex mandate so as to achieve
tangible results that are consonant with the many
human, financial and material investments that have
been agreed to in recent months by the Transitional
Government and the international community with a
view to ensuring collective responsibility for the future
of the country.

Prospects for the future of the country must be
restored by making use of the unprecedented wave of
solidarity that has been demonstrated by all the
countries in the region to help in Haiti's recovery. It is
also essential for Haiti to regain its place within its
natural family - the Caribbean Community. We urge
the States members of that body to overcome their
internal differences, which are hindering unity of
action with respect to that brotherly country, whose
people have, for decades, been suffering as a result of
poverty and political violence.

In conclusion, we welcome the establishment and
the beginning of the work of the Ad Hoc Advisory
Group on Haiti of the Economic and Social Council.
The establishment of the Advisory Group is further
proof of the international community's mobilization in
favour of Haiti. We also welcome initiatives to
promote a better contribution by the Haitian diaspora
to the rebuilding of the country.

