Mr. Schulz (Germany): First of all, I thank
Mr. Vladimir Voronkov and Ms. Michele Coninsx for
their briefings. I also thank the various United Nations
entities and the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team for preparing an excellent report of
the Secretary-General (S/2019/6l2).

As the report states, the threat posed by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL/Da'esh) remains
imminent and substantial, albeit in a different manner.
It is crucial that we continue our efforts to prevent
the continuation of ISIL as an underground network.
Terrorist groups like ISIL and Al-Qaida have proven that
they are quick at adapting to changing circumstances.
In that context, I want to commend the Ombudsperson
of the ISIL/Da'esh and Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee,
Mr. Daniel Kipfer Fasciati, for his work, which is vital
for the credibility, fairness and effectiveness of the
sanctions regime. The fight against terrorism is not
a sprint but, obviously, a marathon. Let me focus on
four, although by no means exhaustive, key elements
in fighting terrorism and conducting counter-terrorism
operations from the point of view of Germany.
First, measures must also include countering the
financing of terrorism. As the current holder of the
vice-presidency of the Financial Action Task Force,
Germany is particularly committed to supporting its
work as the international standard-setter in that regard.

Secondly, we must also ensure that human rights,
international humanitarian law and the rule of law in
general are always adequately considered in the fight
against terrorism and that trust in State institutions is
strengthened. Disrespecting these values is a factor that
can lead marginalized persons to violent extremism
and into the hands of terrorist networks.

Thirdly, we also need to address concerns about the
adverse and unintended consequences that sanctions and
counter-terrorism measures can have on the delivery of
humanitarian aid. The measures taken must not impair or
hinder humanitarian activities carried out by impartial
humanitarian actors, in keeping with international
humanitarian law and humanitarian principles.

F ourthly, andlastly, Germanyhasrepeatedly stressed
the importance of including a gender perspective in the
work of the Council. As the Secretary-General's report
shows, the gender dimension plays an important role in
countering the terrorist threat on a number of different
levels. For instance, women find themselves under
horrific conditions in violent conflict situations and are
particularly affected by violence. However, women are
not only victims of terrorism: female radicalization and
women linked to, and operating for, terrorist groups
should also become a priority in our agenda. By way of
example, Germany supports the reintegration of female
Al-Shabaab defectors in Somalia through psychosocial
counselling and gender-appropriate vocational training.
Female Al-Shabaab members are rarely active as armed
fighters but play a vital role in supporting the structure
and organization of Al-Shabaab.

Looking ahead a little more strategically, we
have, of course, to vigourously fight terrorism, but at
the same time, we need to do much more on conflict
prevention. Respect for human dignity is vital in that
regard. Creating jobs, developing an environment in
which young people in particular can earn a living
and support a family and providing opportunities
for social, economic and political participation are
crucial. For example, the Sahel Alliance was created
precisely to achieve those aims, and the nexus between
development and security has been on the agenda of the
Group of Seven Summit taking place in Biarritz, where
recent developments in, and international support for,
the Sahel region have also been discussed.
Before I conclude, I would like to stress a truism that
seems to be so true as to almost not need to be mentioned
but is often lacking in practice - international
corporation across the board. Such cooperation is key
to our success, and going it alone means playing into
the terrorists' hands. That is why we are convinced
that we must keep prevention, foreign terrorist fighters,
terrorist financing, information-sharing, terrorist use
of the Internet, aviation security and cooperation on
border protection on the international agenda.

