Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic ofIran): Speaking
on behalf ofthe Non-Aligned Movement (NAM), let me
begin by thanking you, Sir, for convening this debate.
I also convey my thanks to the Secretary-General for
his briefing.

At the outset, I would like to express my deepest
condolences to the people and Government of France,
Iraq, Russia and Lebanon for the tragic loss of life of a
number of their fellow citizens, as a result of the recent
heinous terrorist acts.

NAM. acknowledges the interconnectedness
of economic development, social development,
environmental protection, peace and security, human
rights and the rule of law. Efforts to transform the
United Nations into a more effective instrument for
preventing conflict should take into account the need
for a balanced, coherent and comprehensive approach,
in accordance with its Charter and international law.
In this context, it is critical that all principal organs
of the United Nations play an active role in devloping
and implementing a more effective collective security
system, in accordance with their respective functions
and powers.

NAM. believes that it is indispensable for United
Nations Member States to develop common perceptions
and agreed approaches to address existing, new and
emerging threats and challenges to international peace
and security, as well as the root causes of conflict. Such
approaches to collective security would be legitimate
only if they were developed in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the Charter and by all
Member States acting together. The active participation
of each and every principal organ of the United Nations
is crucial, acting in the exercise of its respective
functions and powers without upsetting the balance
established by the Charter.

NAM. underlines the collective desire to establish
a peaceful and prosperous world as well as a just and
equitable world order that remains encumbered by
fundamental impediments. These impediments are,
inter alia, the severe adverse impact of the reoccurring
global financial and economic crisis on the economic
growth and development of developing countries,
which could lead to increasing poverty and deprivation
in these countries; the continuing lack of resources and
underdevelopment of the majority of the developing
world; the continuing unequal terms of trade and the
lack of cooperation by developed countries; and the
coercive and unilateral measures imposed by some of
them and the use of force or the threat of the use of
force.

The rich and powerful countries continue to
exercise an inordinate influence in determining
the nature and direction of international relations,
including economic and trade relations as well as the
rules governing those relations, many of which are
at the expense of developing countries.While NAM
supports United Nations peacekeeping operations, we
stress that United Nations peacekeeping operations
should not be used as a substitute for addressing the
root causes of conflicts. Rather, the root causes should
be addressed in a coherent, well-planned, coordinated
and comprehensive manner with other political, social,
economic and development instruments.

In the framework of this open debate, NAM
also welcomes the establishment of and supports the
Peacebuilding Commission as a coordinated, coherent
and integrated institutional mechanism to address the
special needs of countries emerging from conflict
towards recovery, reintegration and reconstruction,
upon their request and in accordance with the principle
of national ownership. We underline the need for the
Peacebuilding Commission to establish a dynamic
partnership with regional and subregional organizations
and to ensure that regional efforts receive the requisite
attention and support. Integrated peacebuilding
strategies and programmes, ifconsistent and in line with
host-country strategies and programmes, could sustain
peace and prevent the re-emergence of hostilities and
conflicts.

Finally, even though we welcome today's debate as
a contribution to enhancing the understanding of the
interlinkages between security and development, it is
important to stress that this issue goes beyond the core
competencies of the Security Council.

