Mr. Fathalla (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, Iwould
like to express my gratitude to the Security Council for
giving me the floor on behalf of the League of Arab
States at the first meeting and briefing on the situation
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question,
since the summit meeting of the League of Arab States
held at the end of March. The importance of today's
meeting lies in the fact that it represents a further link
in the communication and contact between the Security
Council and the League of Arab States following the
Council meeting attended by the Secretary General
of the League of Arab States on 26 September 2012
(see S/PV.6841). That meeting led to the adoption of
a presidential statement (S/PRST/2012/20) reaffirming
the cooperation between the League of Arab States and
the United Nations in the area of international peace
and security.

I will therefore focus my statement on the contents
of the decisions of the recent Arab summit and the
statement of the Secretary General of the League
of Arab States on the question of Palestine and the
developing situation in Syria.

The summit meeting of the League of Arab States
adopted resolution 7595, which reaffirms that a just
and comprehensive peace is our strategic option. The
resolution underscores the fact that the peace process
is a comprehensive and indivisible course of action and
that a just and comprehensive peace in the region can
be achieved only through a complete Israeli withdrawal
from the occupied Arab and Palestinian territories,
including the occupied Syrian Golan, to the lines
of 24 June 1967, and the territories still occupied in
southern Lebanon.

The resolution reaffirms the need to achieve a
just solution to the problem of Palestinian refugees
on the basis of the Arab Peace Initiative, General
Assembly resolution 194 (III), the establishment of
an independent and sovereign Palestinian State, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, and the condemnation
of all forms of settlement, in line with the Arab Peace
Initiative adopted by the 2002 Beirut summit and the
subsequent summit meetings of the League of Arab
States, as well as international law and the relevant
terms of reference. The resolution reaffirms that
Palestine is a full partner in the peace process. It calls
for continued support for Palestine in its just demand
that Israel cease all settlement activities. It further calls
for negotiations to be based on the terms of reference
of the peace process, namely, the relevant resolutions of
international legitimacy, the Arab Peace Initiative and
the principle of land for peace, and within a specific
time frame. It urges that the borders be discussed on
the basis of an end to the occupation since 1967 and that
the final status issues of the Arab-Israeli conflict, in
particular the settlement of the questions of Jerusalem,
refugees, borders, land, water rights and Israel's full
withdrawal from all occupied Arab territories, start to
be addressed.

The resolution underscores the fact that the Gaza
Strip and the occupied West Bank, including East
Jerusalem, are a single and indivisible geographic
entity, on which, together with all territories occupied
since 1967, the independent State of Palestine is to be
established, with East Jerusalem as its capital. It also
condemns all Israeli efforts to divide the unity of the
Palestinian territories, as well as all unilateral measures
by Israel.

Since the historic adoption by the General
Assembly of resolution 67/19 granting observer
status at the United Nations to the State of Palestine,
the peace process has been in a stalemate as a result
of Israeli settlement activities. The stalemate has led
regional and international partners to express concern
about the threat it poses to the peace process. Israel's
intransigent and continued expansion of settlements in
the face of the clear international consensus on their
illegality and illegitimacy, their violation of the norms
and rules of international law and humanitarian law,
and the grave harm they do to the peace process and the
achievement of the two-State solution also led the Arab
summit to hold Israel wholly responsible for the delays
in negotiations.

In that context, the Arab summit called upon the
international community to launch serious discussions
whose terms of reference should be the implementation
of United Nations resolutions, in particular relevant
Security Council resolutions - primarily resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973) - calling for an end to
the occupation and an Israeli withdrawal to the 1967
borders, an end to the occupation of the territories
of the State of Palestine, and the release of Arab and
Palestinian prisoners. The summit also called upon the
Security Council to shoulder its responsibilities and
adopt the necessary mechanisms to achieve those ends.

In that context, I note the conclusions adopted by
the Foreign Affairs Council of the European Union on
10 December 2012, which emphasized the urgency of
renewed, structured and substantial peace efforts in
2013, as well as the report of the Secretary-General of
8 March 2013, which states that "[t]he year 2013 will
be decisive in the peace process" (A/67/738, para. 25).
The Secretary-General's report also reiterates the five
priorities he set forth in that regard in his address to
the General Assembly on 22 January 2013, primary
among which was the importance of renewing a
collective international engagement, which was further
emphasized in the Caracas Declaration in Solidarity
with the Palestinian People and the State of Palestine
of 18 April 2013.

Of course, the commitment of the Security Council,
as the United Nations body responsible for maintaining
international peace and security, should be in the
forefront of that collective international engagement.
Further, on 23 January, the Permanent Representative
of the United States of America to the United Nations
stated that the United States is still fully committed to
direct negotiations, which lends further significance
to the forthcoming visit to Washington , D.C., next
week by the Arab ministerial delegation following this
week's consultations with the Secretary General of
the League of Arab States and visits to a number of
European States that have taken place since the Arab
summit in March.

Moving on to the situation in Syria, the most
important development in the context of the Arab
League was the adoption of resolution 580 by the
Arab summit on 26 March. I will describe some of
the resolution's content without getting into too much
detail.

First, the resolution welcomes the fact that the
National Coalition for Syrian Revolutionary and
Opposition Forces would now be occupying the seat
formerly held by the Syrian Arab Republic in the League
of Arab States, its bodies, councils and organizations,
until the holding of elections leading to the formation
of a Government that can assume authority in Syria.

Secondly, the resolution emphasizes the importance
of efforts to reach a political solution in the Syrian
crisis as a priority, and the right of States to their own
self-defence.

Thirdly, the resolution commends the efforts of
neighbouring States and other Arab States in providing

for the urgent needs of refugees and calls for support to
help those States shoulder the burden of hosting refugees
in terms of housing and other assistance, particularly in
Lebanon, Jordan and Iraq, in accordance with the relief
plans put forth by their respective Governments.

Fourthly, the resolution calls for an international
conference at the United Nations for the reconstruction
of Syria and the rehabilitation of infrastructure in
all affected sectors as a result of the widespread
destruction. In that regard, I also note the deteriorating
humanitarian situation in Syria. The Secretary-General
of the League of Arab States held a meeting a Geneva
last week with the High Commissioner for Refugees
to address all aspects of the crisis, including renewed
cooperation between the League of Arab States and
Office of the High Commissioner.

In order to reaffirm the importance of cooperation
between the United Nations and the League of Arab
States to achieve stability, security and good governance
in Syria under a democratic system, the Secretary-
General of the League of Arab States held a number
of meetings at the Headquarters of the United Nations
in New York on 22 April, the first of which was with
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon. Also in attendance
was Sheikh Hamad bin Jassim bin Jabr Al-Thani, Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Qatar, who
chairs the committee formed by the Ministerial Council
of the League of Arab States on the crisis in Syria,
where a consensus was reached on expressing greater
concern about the deteriorating situation in Syria than
it has at any other time in the past, taking note of the
effects of the crisis on the region, and stating that there
is no viable solution to the crisis other than a political
solution.

The tripartite talks between the Secretary General
of the League of Arab States, the Secretary-General
of the United Nations and Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi were
held the same day, 22 April, in the course of which
they considered ways and means to assist the various
Syrian parties in launching a transitional political
process aimed at creating a new Syria where the entire
population and all factions would enjoy protection. In
that meeting, Mr. Ban called upon the Security Council
to come together and exert all its efforts to achieve a
political solution. He also expressed his support for the
efforts of Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi for that purpose, a call
which was seconded by the Secretary General of the
League of Arab States. We make the same appeal to
the Security Council today. Undoubtedly, in the end,
all those efforts will lead to the implementation of the
Geneva Communique which can be modified to take
into account developments that have taken place since
its adoption.

In conclusion, I would like to express my deep
gratitude for the contacts between the Security Council
and the League of Arab States in conformity with the
agreement reached last September.

