Mr. Olhaye (Djibouti): I take the floor on behalf of
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC).
While a period of extraordinary challenges is still
evolving in the Middle East, a credible peace process
towards a two-State solution remains a core priority of
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation. We reaffirm
the permanent responsibility of the United Nations
towards the question of Palestine until all of its aspects
are justly and fully resolved, and we further reiterate
our call for the international community's sustained
engagement and full support, at this critical period,
in seizing the current diplomatic opportunity to bring
about tangible results that enforce United Nations
resolutions and put an end to the Israeli occupation of
the Palestinian and Arab lands occupied since 1967.

The latest United States initiative to reignite the
peace process, spearheaded by Secretary of State John
Kerry, deserves our commendation, and we hope that
this time around it will produce realistic progress.

The agony, hardship and hopelessness of the Syrian
people continue unabated. The brutality experienced
by the civilian population is unparalleled, with millions
in makeshift refugee camps in the neighbouring
countries. There is no end in sight to that humanitarian
catastrophe. All hopes are pinned on the renewed push
for the long-delayed "Geneva II" conference and a
negotiated settlement to end the mayhem and bloodshed.

The OIC expresses grave concern over the continued
Israeli aggression against the Palestinian people and
their land. Israel, the occupying Power, persists with
its construction of illegal settlements and the apartheid
annexation wall, which constitute grave breaches of
international law, undermine the contiguity, unity
and viability of the State of Palestine, and jeopardize
the prospects for achieving the two-State solution on
the basis of the pre-l967 borders. In that regard, the
OIC urgently calls upon the international community,
particularly the Security Council, to uphold its
responsibilities and further consider practical measures
to bring an end to Israel's settlement policy.

The fragile situation on the ground due to the
repeated provocative acts of violence and terror
perpetrated by fanatical Israeli settlers is alarming.
Such daily aggressions against Palestinian life,
property and rights, which include blocking roads,
vandalizing cars and houses, burning mosques and
fields, and uprooting trees, along with other damage
to property, have regrettably become commonplace.
Such acts threaten to further destabilize the extremely
fragile situation on the ground, and to sabotage resumed
bilateral negotiations. The continued failure to enforce
international law has emboldened the occupying Power
and the fanatical Israeli settlers to continue committing
violations and crimes against the Palestinian people
with impunity.

By the same token, illegal, unilateral Israeli actions
in occupied East Jerusalem continue to endanger the
precious significance ofthe holy city ofJerusalem for the
entire Islamic world. All acts aimed at altering the Arab
character and demographic composition of occupied
East Jerusalem - including building settlements,
excavating underneath Al-Aqsa Mosque, desecrating
Islamic and Christian sites, distorting the authentic
history ofthe city, changing its landmarks, demolishing
Palestinian homes and closing Palestinian institutions
with a view to isolating occupied East Jerusalem from
its Palestinian surroundings - are illegal, null and
void and must be brought to an immediate halt. The
continuation of such illegal acts threatens to further
destabilize the entire region.

The continued, intensified provocations of Israel, the
occupying Power, and its extremist settlers, particularly
at Al-Haram al-Sharif and the Al-Aqsa Mosque, have
the potential to inflame already simmering religious
tensions and violence and must receive immediate
attention from the international community, with due
regard for measures to de-escalate tensions, to preserve
the sanctity of Muslim and Christian holy sites in the
city and to protect them from any acts of aggression and
provocation.

In that regard, we recall that such illegal Israeli
acts have always contravened international law and
resolutions of international legitimacy, including those
that affirm that East Jerusalem remains an integral part
of the Palestinian territory occupied by Israel since
1967, and that its illegal annexation by Israel continues
to be rejected and unrecognized by the international
community.

United Nations statistics show that the rate
of demolition of residential and other structures
rose last year and this in the West Bank and East
Jerusalem. The number of small communities being
continuously leveled amounts to the forcible transfer
of their population, which can no longer live there
without shelter. That is a clear violation of the Geneva
Convention and a war crime.

The OIC stresses that the Israeli blockade of the
Gaza Strip constitutes a collective punishment of the
Palestinian population, with serious and catastrophic
social, economic and humanitarian consequences on
the lives of that entire population. The OIC reiterates
its firm demand for an immediate end to that illegal and
inhumane Israeli blockade.
Furthermore, the OIC is very concerned over human
rights violations against Palestinian political prisoners
in Israeli prisons and detention centres. The inhumane
policies and systematic violations perpetrated by
Israel against Palestinian prisoners require the urgent
intervention of the international community in order to
defend the human rights of Palestinian prisoners, save
their lives and pressure Israel to respect its obligations
towards them, in accordance with international
humanitarian law, including the Geneva Conventions.
Israel has administratively detained thousands of
Palestinians for prolonged periods without informing
them of the charges against them and without the right
to due process.

The OIC believes that international consensus
to bring about a just and comprehensive solution in
the Middle East conflict requires the enforcement
of international law and the implementation of
international resolutions. The Security Council cannot
remain silent while a volatile and dangerous situation
continues to escalate on the ground due to Israeli
persistence in defying the will of the international
community through its forced occupation of Palestinian
and Arab territories and by denying the restoration of
the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people. The
OIC calls upon the Council to play its role vis-a-vis
the Middle East peace process by implementing the
resolutions in has adopted, in an effort to move the
process forward towards the realization of peace.

To conclude, I wish to reaffirm the full support and
solidarity of the OIC with the Palestinian people in their
endeavour to regain their legitimate and inalienable
national rights, including their rights to return, self-
determination, sovereignty and independence in the
State of Palestine on the Palestinian territory occupied
since 1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital.

