Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
The seriousness of the item under consideration
notwithstanding, I would like to express my delegation's
congratulations to you, Mr. President, upon your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council,
as well as to thank Egypt for carrying out its duties as
President of the Council during the month of August.
We also thank the delegations of the United States,
France, Japan, the United Kingdom and the Republic
of Korea for having convened this meeting. I would
also like in particular to thank the Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs, Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, for
his briefing - which my delegation fully supports.
Uruguay is gratified that an issue of this nature should
be addressed today in an open meeting of the Security
Council. We believe that goes a long way towards
lending transparency to the Council's working methods
and helps optimize its operation.

Uruguay expresses its most emphatic condemnation
of the detonation of a nuclear weapon yesterday by
North Korea - the sixth such test it has carried out
since 2006. The paradox is that the world is moving in
a different direction when it comes to weapons of mass
destruction and denuclearization. No one carries out
such nuclear tests anymore - only North Korea - in
flagrant violation of Security Council resolutions, with
a clear confrontational stance and, what is worse,
in utter contempt of the adverse effects those tests
could have on its own territory, its own people and its
neighbouring countries.

Last week, on the International Day against Nuclear
Tests, my delegation echoed the call of the international
community for the swift entry into force of the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty. Promoting the
universality and entry into force of the Treaty must be
a priority in addressing the danger that the carrying out
of nuclear tests poses to the international community.
We regret the obstinate behaviour of North Korea. As
has been pointed out several times here in the Chamber,
it is the only country that has carried out nuclear tests
in the twenty-first century. Its actions are a serious
threat to international peace and security and a flagrant
violation of the resolutions of the Council. Those
nuclear tests and the launching of ballistic missiles are a
continuous provocation of the international community,
and they exacerbate instability in the Korean peninsula
and tension in the zone.

As such, Uruguay once again urges North Korea
to completely abandon its nuclear programme, in a
verifiable and irreversible manner, and immediately
halt all related activities, including the launching of
ballistic missiles using proscribed technology and other
provocative actions. We also urge it to return to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and
the International Atomic Energy Agency's safeguards
regime. We reiterate our call for strict compliance with
the resolutions adopted by this organ.

We must continue to develop actions and measures
that are in accordance with the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations. Our delegation is
ready to consider the adoption of new and more robust
sanctions in the Council. However, as has been pointed
out here in the Chamber as well, it is necessary to
ensure the effective implementation of sanctions by all
Member States, while avoiding adverse humanitarian
consequences for the people of North Korea.

Uruguay is ofthe view that a solution to this delicate
situation can come about only in the form of diplomacy,
in the context of an international strategy to which
all countries are firmly committed - in particular
those with influence in the Korean peninsula. As part
of that process, it is crucial to safeguard the unity of
the Security Council and to act with a single voice in
search of a peaceful, diplomatic and political solution
to the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.

