The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Angola, in which he requests to be invited to participate in
the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Carneiro
(Angola) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: I welcome the Vice-Minister for
Territorial Administration of Angola, General Higino
Carneiro.

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda. The Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Observer
Mission in Angola, which is contained in document
S/1998/931. Members of the Council also have before them
document S/1998/952, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by Portugal, the Russian Federation
and the United States of America.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following documents: S/1998/915, which
contains the text of a letter dated 5 October 1998 from the
Permanent Representative of South Africa to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council,
transmitting, inter alia, the Statement of the Summit on
Angola; S/1998/916, which contains the text of a letter
dated 5 October 1998 from the Representatives of Portugal,
the Russian Federation and the United States of America to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General,
transmitting a statement issued on 24 September 1998 by
the Troika Foreign Ministers of the Observer States to the
Lusaka Protocol and a letter dated 24 September 1998
from the Troika Foreign Ministers addressed to Mr. Jonas
Savimbi; S/1998/919, which contains the text of a letter
dated 1 October 1998 from the Permanent Representative
of Austria to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a statement on Angola
issued on 29 September 1998 by the Presidency of the
European Union; and S/1998/944, which contains the text
of a letter dated 12 October 1998 from the Permanent
Representative of Angola to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council, transmitting a
letter dated 7 October 1998 from the President of the
Republic of Angola.

I give the floor to the Vice-Minister for Territorial
Administration of Angola, General Higino Carneiro.


