Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): At the outset, allow me
to express my Government's sincere condolences to
those affected by yet another earthquake, the one that
struck northern Afghanistan last night. We are
receiving disturbing information - that thousands may
have died and many thousands more have lost their
homes. Urgent assistance is needed to help the victims.
We welcome the fact that the Deputy Special
Representative of the Secretary-General has already
convened a meeting with United Nations agencies and
non-governmental organizations in Kabul, with the aim
of assisting the Interim Administration.

At the midpoint of the six-month term of the
Interim Authority of Afghanistan, and with the
Secretary-General's comprehensive report issued last
week, we have a sufficient basis for reviewing the
progress made thus far and for considering ways to
proceed henceforth.

I am happy to note today that last Saturday, as the
result of the successful "back to school" campaign,
over 1 million Afghan children have gone back to
school, many of them for the first time in six years.
Looking back over the three and a half months since
the Bonn Agreement was signed, we cannot but note
that a number of significant achievements have been
made. The Interim Authority has been established; the
Loya Jirga Commission is up and running; the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) has
been deployed; and the Tokyo Conference was held
successfully, as were national conferences, with the
participation of regional commanders and governors. It
is also important to note that salaries have been paid to
the civil servants of the central Government and that
salary payments are on the way for local officials.

The fact that so much progress has been made in
this short period towards the restoration of peace and
stability is indeed extraordinary, but the situation in
Afghanistan is still fraught with grave difficulties. It is
therefore necessary to continue our efforts well into the
foreseeable future so as to ensure that Afghanistan will
be able to pursue its course of development in a
peaceful and stable environment. In this context, allow
me briefly to touch upon a few points which Japan
believes to be of particular importance.

On the political front, the next important step is
the convening of the emergency Loya Jirga. We
warmly commend the accomplishments made so far by
the Loya Jirga Commission, particularly its successful
visits to the regions. A number of additional needs will
emerge as the convening of the Loya Jirga approaches,
and the timely initiatives taken by the Governments of
Germany, the United Kingdom and other countries to
support this process are much appreciated.

It is important for all parties to remind
themselves that the emergency Loya Jirga will mark
only the midpoint in the process leading to the
establishment of a legitimately elected Government.
Key words for the Loya Jirga should be compromise
and tolerance, with all parties working together to
establish an effectively functioning Transitional
Authority that is capable of carrying the country
through the next phase of the Bonn process.

It is essential to ensure that the recovery and
reconstruction process continues to have a positive
impact on the political process. In this regard, all
parties need to be reminded that, as stated in the co-
chairs' summary of conclusions of the Tokyo
Conference,

"assistance will be conditional on all Afghan
parties' positively contributing to the process and
goals agreed in Bonn."

On the other hand, we are beginning to detect a
certain level of frustration in Afghanistan at the current
pace of implementation of the pledges and
commitments. The donors and United Nations agencies
must do their part by rapidly implementing their
assistance in a strategically coherent and coordinated
manner so that the people of Afghanistan can tangibly
feel the will of the international community. While I
am happy to note that some concrete results are starting
to emerge, as exemplified by the "Back to School"
campaign led by the United Nations Children's Fund,
we will need to strengthen our efforts so as to continue
producing such results. In this connection, the
Implementation Group meeting to be held in Kabul on
10 and 11 April under the chairmanship of Finance
Minister Amin Arsala will be an important opportunity
to coordinate our assistance to Afghanistan.

For its part, Japan has been making steady
progress in the disbursement of the $250 million that it
pledged in Tokyo for 2002. As introduced by Under-
Secretary-General Prendergast in his statement to the
Council two weeks ago, Japan has funded the United
Nations Development Programme's Recovery and
Employment Afghanistan Programme, designed to
provide employment for over 20,000 people in labour-
intensive public works projects in Kabul. Japan is the
single largest contributor to the "Back to School"
campaign. Other recent contributions include $20
million for demining activities and $12 million for
basic medical equipment, medicine and other health-
related items. I urge Council members to refer to the
fact sheet attached to the distributed text of my
statement for a more comprehensive list of Japan's
contributions as of March 2002.

I have touched upon two important aspects of the
situation in Afghanistan: the political process, on the
one hand, and recovery and reconstruction, on the
other. Needless to say, neither of these processes can
proceed without the provision of nationwide security.
In this regard, we thank the countries participating in
ISAF, especially the United Kingdom for its leadership,
and welcome the progress made so far in the training of
the Afghan military and police. We take note of the
request made by Chairman Karzai for the expansion of
ISAF and agree with the Secretary-General that,
whatever form of international security assistance is to
be provided, speed is of the essence. I wish to add my
voice to those who are asking the Council for its early
examination and its determined action.

Before I conclude, allow me to reaffirm Japan's
support for the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative as they pursue their mandate in
Afghanistan. In this context, we hope that the Security
Council will act soon so that the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan will be established
in a timely manner.

Lastly, let me appeal to the people of Afghanistan
to continue their efforts to produce concrete results on
both the political and reconstruction fronts, which are
also necessary in order to sustain the willingness of the
international community to lend its support. I say this
not as a critic, but as a committed friend of
Afghanistan. All of us here at the United Nations know
how difficult it is to sustain international attention, and
this unique opportunity to help Afghanistan develop as
a stable and prosperous country must not be
squandered.

