Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation welcomes and
supports the efforts of the Personal Envoy of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kohler, including through his
initiative to hold round-table talks in Geneva.

For the first time in many years, a chance has
emerged for achieving a just and mutually acceptable
solution to this long-standing problem that aligns
perfectly with the relevant Security Council resolutions.
Two rounds ofnegotiations have already been held, and
we hope that they have laid the foundation for further
progress in the political process. We trust that the
next meeting, which all of the parties are prepared to
take part in - Morocco and the Frente Popular para
la Liberacion de Saguia el-Hamra y de Rio de Oro
(Frente POLISARIO), and their neighbours, Algeria
and Mauritania - will result in substantive progress.

The international community generally, and the
Security Council, in particular, must assist the Special
Envoy in his work. For our part, we are working
with Morocco, the Frente POLISARIO, Algeria and
Mauritania. We have close, friendly relations with
all of them, which we cherish, especially since our
multifaceted ties have stood the test of time. We
believe that the African Union also has a potentially
significant role to play. We are supporting the activities
of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in
Western Sahara (MINURSO), which counts Russian
military observers among its ranks. It plays a crucial
stabilizing role in the region, and its effective work
enables us to maintain an environment conducive to
advancing a settlement for Western Sahara on the basis
of the relevant Council resolutions. However, while we
recognize the continued importance of implementing
the tasks that are part of the Mission's mandate, we
believe it is wrong to create an artificial commotion
about the extension of its mandate, to attempt to use
the resolutions on it to define the direction that the
negotiations will take under the auspices of the United
Nations, or to change previously agreed approaches.
We believe that even if a settlement is achieved, the
Mission will inevitably be needed for a long time
after that.

Regrettably, in recent years amendments have been
introduced into the resolutions extending MINURSO's
mandate that in our view undermine the Security
Council's impartial and objective approach to the
issue of Western Sahara. Eroding previously approved
parameters is unacceptable. We must keep in mind that
they define the parties to the Western Sahara conflict and
provide for ultimately reaching a mutually acceptable
solution that guarantees the self-determination of the
people of Western Sahara through procedures that are
in line with the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations. We have disagreed with the
artificial modification of those parameters in prior
years and have said so directly, and we were unable to
support such an approach on this occasion with regard
to resolution 2468 (2019). Our arguments for correcting
the imbalance were blatantly ignored, although what
we were asking for was a restoration of the previously
agreed wording. That has once again raised questions
about the penholdership system on country-specific
subjects in the Council.

Replacing the fundamental principles of the
Western Sahara settlement with abstract wording about
the importance of maintaining a realistic approach or
seeking compromises leads to ambiguity, undermines
trust in our work and dims the prospects for the political
process. Moreover, such an approach does not help to
create a constructive atmosphere for negotiations. We
well remember that at many meetings with the Council
Mr. Kohler has asked us to express our united support
through a consensus public response from the Security
Council. And there was a window for compromise.

Russia will continue to be an impartial, balanced
player with regard to the Western Sahara settlement and
will maintain contact with all the regional stakeholders.
We will work actively to support the negotiation process
launched by Mr. Kohler with the aim of arriving at a
mutually acceptable solution. We urge our colleagues
to contribute constructively as well. It is vital that
we act in order to disrupt the status quo, which is not
viable. We must keep in mind that the vacuum in the
political process and the unresolved issue of Western
Sahara could be exploited by a number of terrorist
entities, which would have a negative impact on the
military and political situation in the entire region.

