Mr. Tachie-Menson (Ghana): I wish to thank the
Presidents and Prosecutors of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR),
not only for their detailed reports, but also for their
resourcefulness, professionalism and commitment to
duty under difficult conditions, which have contributed
to justice and a large measure of peace and stability in
two troubled regions of the world.

We appreciate the integral role being played by
the ICTR in the reconciliation and reconstruction
process in Rwanda. It is undeniable that the Tribunal
has made an invaluable contribution to the restoration
of democracy and the rule of law by bringing to justice
to the victims of the genocide. We are also impressed
by the progress being made with regard to the
prosecutions and trials of the accused persons. We are
confident that all this puts the ICTR on course to
meeting its completion strategy. To that end, the
Tribunal must continue to receive the necessary
resources.

In that connection, we welcome the referral of
less serious cases to national jurisdictions. Those
referrals are not only essential to easing the Tribunal's
work load, but also necessary in helping with the
capacity-building of the domestic judicial system, and
at the same time infusing a sense of ownership of the
judicial proceedings among the local communities. If
the psychological wounds of the genocide are to heal,
the participation of local communities in the judicial
process can act as a catalyst.

On the issue of genocide, the Tribunal's efforts,
which culminated in the completion of investigations,
are to be commended. It is important that the genocide
trials, which form the core of the Tribunal's mandate,
be completed within the timeframe established in the
completion strategy. We hope that a shift of focus from
investigations and arrests to trials will enable the
Tribunal to complete its work on time.

With regard to the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia, the assessment in the reports by the
President and the Prosecutor indicate the steady
progress that has been made in the disposal of cases
since the last report to the Council. We are also pleased
to note that the proposals of the working groups on
speeding up trials and on appeals are being
implemented, hence the hectic pace of the cases being
handled by the Tribunal. On that point I wish to
reiterate the position of my delegation that
unreasonably lengthy trials bogged down by delays and
complicated rules of procedure do not project the
required image of transparency and efficiency.

The Tribunal's outreach programme, which has
brought to the population of the affected areas insight
into the workings of the Tribunal, will no doubt play an
important role in the healing and reconciliation
process. By demystifying the Tribunal, the outreach
programme has assisted in remedying the sense of
remoteness of the judicial process that may be felt by
victims in affected communities.

We agree with the report's prognosis that the
failure to secure the arrest and trial of six high-level
fugitives who are wanted for the gravest crimes within
the target date of the completion strategy may
undermine the legacy of the Tribunal as far as the fight
against impunity is concerned. The fact that some high-
level fugitives are still at large is a matter of great
concern to my delegation. Certainly, the fugitives
cannot be hiding without some sort of assistance or
tacit support from certain quarters. We call on the
relevant States to exercise the necessary political will
and to do whatever is in their power to bring those
fugitives to justice. There can be no closure to the
traumatic period in which those fugitives played an
ignoble role if the culprits are not brought to justice.

On the completion strategy, we hope that with the
streamlining of the Court's procedures, a mode of
operation for the targets dates will be met. We feel that
the Council should consider extending the period to
enable the trial of high-level fugitives who are still at
large to take place.

