Mr. Skoog (Sweden): My delegation aligns itself
with the statement to be made later today on behalf of
the European Union and with the Nordic statement.

I want to begin by thanking you, Mr. President,
and the Japanese delegation for scheduling today's
open debate, which provides us with an opportunity to
continue our important discussions on the increasingly
complex security challenges facing the world today and
how the Council can better address them.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his,
as always, insightful briefing on the subject and for
the visionary reform agenda that he has put forward,
which is, in many ways, aimed at improving the United
Nations response to many ofthe challenges that we face.

Multidimensional poverty, climate change,
transnational organized crime, food insecurity, weak
governance, abuses and violations of human rights and
growing inequality are only a few ofthe challenges that
are increasingly influencing the situations that appear
on the Council's agenda. The negative impacts of those
threats to international peace and security are likely
to intensify. As the body responsible for maintaining
international peace and security, the Security Council's
preventive role is perhaps now more important than
ever. However, prevention will not be possible without
a comprehensive and holistic strategy to address
those challenges.

The evidence in support of more comprehensive
and holistic approaches to prevention and sustaining
peace is building. The recent joint United Nations
and World Bank report, entitled Pathways for Peace:
Inclusive Approaches to Preventing Violent Conflict,
identifies exclusion, inequality and power imbalances
as the principal causes of many of today's conflicts.
A lack of opportunity provides fertile ground for
conflict, radicalization and instability. During our visit
to the Lake Chad basin region, we saw first hand the
adverse effects of climate change on the stability of
the region. That has also been obvious in the Council's
consideration of the situations in Darfur, Somalia and
the Sahel. In our work on Afghanistan, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Sahel region and Colombia,
among others, we have seen how organized crime,
illicit financial flows, the drugs trade and trafficking
in persons and natural resources fund warfare and have
a devastating impact on civilians.

True conflict prevention requires an understanding
of the structural nature of such challenges and their
interplay with political decisions. Building on the
sustaining peace agenda and in line with the United
Nations reform processes, what then is needed to
put conflict prevention at the core of our actions and
to enhance our collective ability to deal with those
contemporary complex security challenges? I would
like to make three suggestions.

First, we need a thorough understanding of the
drivers of risk, the political will and adequate resources
to address them early on, and a United Nations system
that has the flexibility to respond. Frank, timely and
cross-pillar analysis and information are critical if
the Security Council is to be effective at preventing,
managing and resolving conflicts. Enhancing the
United Nations system's joint analysis and integrated
strategic planning capabilities, including improved risk
assessments and risk management strategies, would
allow the Council and the United Nations system as
a whole to address conflicts in their early stages. We
are confident that the ongoing reform efforts, led by
the Secretary-General, will better position the United
Nations system in that regard.

As highlighted by numerous countries at the Arria
meeting on climate and security last Friday, there
is a clear need for the United Nations to enhance its
capabilities to better foresee, understand and respond to
climate-related security risks. That includes identifying
and responding to the risks of instability and insecurity
that arise from how the effects of climate change
interact with social, economic and political factors.

Secondly, research and experience show that
conflicts are more likely to become armed in unequal
societies. The promotion of gender equality and women's
participation in peace and security efforts is therefore
essential to sustaining peace. For that reason, it is
important to consistently integrate a gender perspective
into our long-term strategies and, when responding to
complex challenges ahead, to understand how they
affect women and men and better target responses.

Finally, there is an evident and inherent link
between respect for human rights and international
humanitarian law and the maintenance of international
peace and security. Respect for and protection of human
rights contributes to efforts to address the root causes
and drivers of instability, thereby helping to prevent
and resolve conflicts and to sustain peace.

A general erosion of respect for international
humanitarian law is straining the credibility of this
body and putting the people whom we send into the field
at great risk. Constant attacks on humanitarian workers
and the assault against the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the

Congo earlier this month are shocking examples.

Responding early to violations of international
humanitarian law and violations and abuses of human
rights can effectively prevent conflicts before they
become a threat to regional and international peace
and security. When conflicts do occur, accountability
for such violations is vital for both justice
and reconciliation.

In conclusion, the best way to prevent societies
from descending into Violence and crisis is to ensure
that they are made resilient through investment in
inclusive and sustainable development. With the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and the sustaining
peace decisions, we have a strategy. What we now need
is political will, including in this organ, commitment to
multilateralism and a reinvigorated United Nations to
implement it.

