Mr. Akram (Pakistan): Permit me at the outset to
extend the warm felicitations of the Pakistan delegation
to you, Mr. President, and to the delegation of Greece
on the skilful manner in which you are guiding the
work of the Council. I would also like to express our
appreciation to Ambassador De La Sabliere and to the
French delegation. Ambassador De La Sabliere
conducted his presidency with his usual grace,
understanding and competence.

I would like to join other delegations in thanking
the Chairmen of the three committees, who briefed the
Council today. We support the efforts of all three
committees in promoting greater transparency and
dialogue with Member States concerning their
respective areas of activity. We hope that the
committees will also ensure the involvement and
participation of the general membership of the United
Nations in their work.

On this occasion, I would like to offer some
specific comments on the reports we have received.

First, with regard to the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC), we have noted the first country
visits. We welcome the emphasis - particularly that of
the CTC - on providing counter-terrorism-related
technical assistance to States.

Concerning the Al-Qaida/Taliban sanctions
Committee, we have noted the views of its Chairman
about focusing on the new and growing generation of
supporters who may never have left their countries of
residence but have embraced the core elements of the
Al-Qaida message. Moreover, we believe that
sufficient evidence and identifying particulars must
accompany new and existing designations on the
Committee's consolidated list. That is necessary in
order to meet judicial and legal requirements and to
allow national authorities to defend legal challenges to
the freezing of assets and other sanctions measures.
With regard to the 1540 Committee, that

Committee - whose mandate is to prevent the
acquisition of weapons of mass destruction by non-
State actors, including terrorists - needs to focus on

the absence of a definition of various terms used in the
resolution and on the absence of agreed international
standards to assess actions taken by Member States to
implement the resolution.

The Committee also has to take into account the
different levels of State capacity to implement its
provisions and it should ensure that it does not infringe
upon, erode the authority of, or duplicate or complicate
the work of, established treaty regimes and
international bodies established under those treaties. In
this context, it will need to be taken into account that
different States have a differentiated nature of
obligations under various treaties.

I would like to join others in expressing our
solidarity with the victims and families of those
affected by the recent terrorist incidents, particularly in
the United Kingdom and Turkey. We strongly condemn
such acts of terrorism and reiterate our commitment to
fighting this menace in all its forms and
manifestations.

Geography and history have combined to present
Pakistan with a special challenge and a special role in
combating terrorism. Pakistan's commitment to the
campaign against terrorism is clear, present, tangible
and visible. In a recent statement at the National Youth
Convention, President Musharraf made an appeal to
"stand up and launch a jihad against extremism for
peace, brotherhood and unity in the society and for
knowledge, progress and poverty alleviation".

Pakistan has taken a number of measures on the
domestic front. For the first time in history, our armed
forces have carried out operations, which are still
ongoing, in the tribal areas along our border with
Afghanistan. We have suffered over 300 casualties in
this operation. We have been able to capture or
extradite more than 600 terrorists, including key
operatives of Al-Qaida.

Our Government is also engaged in an active and
direct campaign to eradicate extremism from our
society. This campaign includes the reform of the
madrasas, a small fraction of which have preached
extremist views. President Musharraf will outline our
comprehensive efforts tomorrow in an address to the
nation.

The challenge of terrorism is both local and
global. All those who have confronted terrorism and
extremism know full well that success requires
sustained and comprehensive efforts encompassing
police action, societal change and creation of economic
opportunities, as well as the solution of the political
issues that provide the excuse and the oxygen to the
terrorists.

The responsibilities to address terrorism are,
therefore, both national and international. The role of
the United Nations is central and critical. Within the
United Nations, and especially through the three
committees reporting today, the international
community is creating an international legal regime to
counter all forms of terrorism. The deliberate killing or
maiming of civilians is not justifiable. All acts of
terrorism are condemnable, whether committed by an
individual, a non-State actor or a State.

The absence of a definition of terrorism should
not hold up action against terrorism. At the same time,
we must ensure that counter-terrorism measures have
built-in safeguards to uphold human rights and
fundamental freedoms, including the right of peoples
to self-determination.

There can be no basis for the exclusion of State
terrorism - that is, the perpetration of sustained
violence and brutality by a State against an innocent
civilian population whose only crime is its opposition
to foreign occupation and the denial of the right of
self-determination. Nor can States conducting such
terrorist acts against civilian populations be allowed to
portray the resistance of these legitimate movements as
terrorism.

We support the Secretary-General's initiative for
a comprehensive counter-terrorism strategy. This must
include measures to address the root of the problem.
Root causes do not justify terrorism, but they do
explain it, and understanding of the causes of terrorism
is essential to success against this gruesome and
unacceptable tactic. Those causes include political and
economic injustices, festering international disputes,
foreign occupation and denial of the right of peoples to
self-determination, as well as cultural, social,
economic and political marginalization and alienation.
The essence of President Musharraf's strategy for
enlightened moderation is to address the causes of
terrorism at the root and comprehensively eradicate
them.

The perception of being disadvantaged, and even
deliberately discriminated against as a faith and
culture, results in frictions within societies and often
strengthens extremist forces. Promoting greater mutual
understanding among all religions and cultures is now
a political and a moral imperative. We must remove
misunderstandings, especially deliberately propagated
negative caricatures such as some we have heard here
today. It is important to emphasize that the vast
majority of the adherents of any faith, especially Islam,
are peaceful, tolerant, honest, just and caring people.
Those who hold militant views are a small minority,
and those who act on those militant views are an even
smaller minority.

The central message of all religions is almost
identical. The root causes of friction between cultures
and civilizations are not primarily religious
differences, but mostly competing political and
economic interests and misunderstandings. We
therefore strongly support the Spanish initiative for an
alliance of civilizations.

