Mr. Nambiar (India): I wish to felicitate you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for this month. I also congratulate
Syria for its steering of the Council's work in August.

This open meeting of the Security Council has
been convened at relatively short notice to deal with
the increasing spiral of violence in the Middle East and
the decision of the Israeli authorities to initiate action
that could lead to the expulsion of President Arafat.

India has consistently regarded President Arafat
as the elected leader of the Palestinian people and as a
symbol of their cause. His expulsion and removal from
the scene would be indefensible in international law. It
would represent an affront to the Palestinian people, as
well as to the international community at large, and
must attract the severest condemnation worldwide.
Apart from serving no constructive purpose, it would
negate all efforts towards reconciliation. More
important, it is likely to lead to an increased wave of
anger and resultant violence in the region. Such a move
is bound to exacerbate the situation and could prove
politically counterproductive. It would definitely have
a negative effect on the Middle East peace process.

Israel remains oblivious of the limitations of its
uni-dimensional policy based on a military approach
that relies on the might of the Israeli Defence Force,
without recourse to a concomitant political approach.
Its policy of military blockades, curfews and
restrictions perpetuates continued dislocation of normal
life, economic deprivation and loss of freedom and
further demoralization of the Palestinian people. That
has led, inevitably, to continuing acts of violence and
retribution against Israeli forces.

India has always maintained that the only answer
to the ongoing violence would be for both sides to
resolutely move forward on the path of dialogue and
reconciliation. There must be no wavering in the face
of the gravest provocations posed by extremist
elements on both sides, who seem to share a common
goal, namely, that of denying peace to their peoples.
We urge both sides to refuse to be provoked into
responding by abandoning the path to peace.

The few months of relative calm after the launch
of the road map put forward by the Quartet offered
hope to the peoples of the region and the world over
for the prospect of peace. Unfortunately, the brutal
reach of terror and retribution has negated each
budding move towards peace. Targeted assassinations,
acts of unwarranted violence, indiscriminate killings
and the cycle of reprisals must be condemned in the
strongest possible terms. They cannot contribute to a
sense of security for any of the parties.

The occupied territories continue to face the
threat of economic collapse and social destitution. For
the sake of the people of the region it is critical that the
two sides, with the assistance of all other parties
concerned, move resolutely forward in their search for
a peaceful resolution of the conflict.

Israel has an obligation to exercise self-restraint
and patience. It has resorted increasingly to extreme
measures, such as extra-judicial killings and armed
incursions in Palestinian areas. We are not unaware of
the provocations Israel itself has been subjected to. But
its decision to persevere with the construction of a wall
that cuts across a wide swath of Palestinian land,
annexes agricultural areas, destroys dwellings and
separates families is both unjust and illegal. Such
actions can only increase the sense of despair and
frustration among Palestinians and aggravate a
situation already vitiated by the imposition of
hardships and the suffering imposed by a regime of
blockades and roadblocks.

India has consistently supported the Palestinian
cause. Apart from this having roots in our traditional
ties with the Arab world, India's commitment to peace
and stability in the region is a cardinal element of its
foreign policy. As part of a broader traditional
engagement with Palestine, thousands of Palestinian
students have studied in India. There are extensive
people-to-people contacts between us, and we have
assisted the Palestinian National Authority in
upgrading human resources and its nation-building
capacities. That will continue to expand.

We have recently seen the Israeli Deputy Prime
Minister's reported statement on the assassination of
President Arafat being an option. We note that the
reported statement injects greater stridency in Israel's
announcements. India joins the international
community in urging Israel to exercise restraint in
respect of any plan it may have that could adversely
affect the safety of life and personal freedom of
President Arafat or remove him forcibly from
Palestinian territory.

At the same time, India strongly condemns all
acts of terrorism and violence, and reiterates its
position that there can be no justification whatsoever
for attacks against unarmed civilians, women and
children. Only a complete cessation of violence can
provide the conducive environment for a continuation
of dialogue. We reiterate the need for both sides to
fulfil their obligations under the Quartet road map, and
strongly emphasize that every effort be made to ensure
its implementation, so that the vision of two States
living side by side within secure and recognized
borders can be realised and a just and durable peace is
established in the region based on Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 1397 (2002).

