Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
We are grateful to the Chairman of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006), Mr. Nestor Osorio, Permanent Representative
of Colombia, for his briefing on the Committee's work.

During the reporting period, the Committee
continued to actively carry out its assigned tasks. In
view of the heightened sensitivity of the sanctions issue,
it is particularly important for the Committee to act in
a balanced and objective manner, without violating its
mandate. That must continue in the future as well.

We note certain progress in the work of the
Committee's Panel of Experts. The latest report of
the Panel (S/2012/395) seems more balanced as
compared to previous documents, while the majority of
recommendations fall mostly Within the mandate. It is
important that the Experts build their activities on an
impartial, independent basis while using only reliable
sources and credible information.

Russia fully complies with all Security Council
sanctions against Iran. However, we believe that the
effectiveness of the sanctions regime and, overall, the
collective nature and unified action of the international
community on outstanding issues concerning the Iranian
nuclear programme are being hampered by additional
unilateral restrictions.

In a number of cases, the sanctions can have
an extraterritorial effect, which is categorically
unacceptable from an international legal point of view.
The members of the international community must
scrupulously comply with relevant Security Council
resolutions, and not violate them.
Russia has always called for a solution to matters
linked to the Iranian nuclear programme based upon
purely mutual political, diplomatic methods carried out
incrementally and with respect for the interests of the
participants in the negotiations. The six international
negotiators have made concrete proposals on the
Iranian nuclear programme that have been submitted
to Iran during the negotiating round in Baghdad on
23 and 24 May. We trust that the upcoming meeting
in Moscow on 18 and 19 June will include the start of
comprehensive consideration of the proposals. We trust
that all delegations, including Iran, will come to the
Russian capitol ready for a constructive dialogue, which
will allow us to achieve positive results, including a
gradual convergence of positions and further progress
aimed at the resolution of existing differences.

Of course, we understand that in Moscow we will
not be able to agree on all of the issues concerning the
parties. However we think that the negotiating process
must absolutely continue beyond the upcoming round.

