Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt): I have the pleasure today
to address the Security Council on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement. I will begin by expressing the
sincere sentiments of solidarity and sympathy of the
Movement's members with the Government and the
People of China as it tackles the consequences of the
massive earthquake that struck them today, resulting in
human and material losses.

I would like to begin my statement by
emphasizing the importance of convening this open
debate at this critical juncture where the international
community, including the members of the Quartet,
exerts tireless efforts to bring about a two-State
solution and achieve comprehensive peace in the
Middle East region. Advancing the cause of peace by
ending Israel's occupation of the Palestinian and Arab
territories that it has occupied since 1967 remains one
of the most important priorities and goals of the
Non-Aligned Movement. The Non-Aligned
Movement's commitment to the goal of peace is
unwavering, but the current Israeli practices and
policies in the Occupied Palestinian Territory,
including East Jerusalem, raise concerns and doubts
about Israel's intentions with regard to achieving peace
and about the viability of the two-State solution.

Despite the international consensus on the two-
State solution on the basis of the pre-l967 borders and
the serious efforts by all international and regional
partners to relaunch negotiations, including proximity
talks, a just and lasting settlement to the question of
Palestine is still visibly far from being achieved owing
to Israel's positions and continued non-compliance
with international law and Security Council
resolutions.

A serious effort by the Security Council is needed
to strengthen efforts aimed at overcoming the current
impasse and pressing for the early resumption and
conclusion of the negotiating process. Obviously,
negotiations cannot be resumed while measures exist to
forcibly impose a fait accompli on the Palestinian
people by altering the demographic composition,
character and status of the occupied Palestinian
territory, particularly in and around East Jerusalem.

The Non-Aligned Movement reiterates its
demand that Israel, the occupying Power, adhere to
international law and international humanitarian law,
fulfil its obligations under the road map and promote
an environment conducive to negotiations and
achieving peace. The Movement reaffirms that no
unilateral action undertaken by Israel will be allowed
to prejudice the outcome of negotiations nor will it be
recognized by the international community. The
international community, including the Security
Council, must be resolute in confronting Israeli
settlement activities and in demanding that Israel abide
by its obligations. Israel must unambiguously negotiate
on and resolve all core issues, namely, Jerusalem,
settlements, refugees, borders, security and water, in a
comprehensive manner and within a fixed time frame.

The Security Council has an obligation towards
that objective. It must shoulder its responsibility in
maintaining peace and security in the Middle East and
in the establishment of an independent and viable State
of Palestine on the basis of the two-State solution. The
Non-Aligned Movement is alarmed at Israel's
continued provocations and taking of illegal measures
in the West Bank, including in and around occupied
East Jerusalem, particularly plans for building new
settlement units and measures to control and annex
holy religious sites. The Movement condemns the
Israeli announcement that it will include the Ibrahimi
Mosque in Al-Khalil (Hebron), the site of Bilal's
Mosque in Bethlehem (Rachel's Tomb) and the Walls
of the Old City of Jerusalem in its national heritage
listing. Further, the Movement condemns attacks
carried out by the Israeli occupying forces against
Palestinian worshippers at the Al-Haram al-Sharif
compound, including Al-Aqsa Mosque. In this regard,
it is imperative that the Security Council bear in mind
the religious sensitivity and feelings of frustration and
despair prevailing around the world owing to the
repeated Israeli attempts to alter the character,
composition and status of East Jerusalem and to
control religious holy sites, often without any reaction
from the Council.

Recalling that the annexation of occupied East
Jerusalem is illegal, null and void and has not been
recognized by the United Nations and the international
community, the Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms that
East Jerusalem is an integral part of the occupied
Palestinian territory and is the capital of the future
State of Palestine. In this regard, the Non-Aligned
Movement condemns the decision by the Government
of Israel to move forward with planning for new
housing units in and around the City, including the
announcement of the approval for the construction of
1,600 new settlement units in East Jerusalem and 112
other units near Bethlehem, in defiance of the broad
international consensus against them and the repeated
calls to stop all settlement activities.

The Movement welcomes the Quartet's intention
to monitor developments closely in and around
Jerusalem and to consider additional steps that might
be required to address the situation on the ground. The
Movement calls on the Security Council to take similar
steps and reaffirm its previous resolutions on East
Jerusalem, particularly resolution 478 (1980), in order
to stop further deterioration in the already volatile
situation and to promote a climate conducive to the
pursuit of peace.

The unresolved crisis in Gaza also continues to
cause negative repercussions on efforts to advance
peace in the region and inflicts unacceptable suffering
on the Palestinian civilian population. We continue to
witness unbearable human suffering caused by the
continuing illegal Israeli blockade. In this regard, we
reiterate that international humanitarian law,
particularly the Fourth Geneva Convention, and United
Nations resolutions must be respected. The
Non-Aligned Movement demands that Israel
immediately lift its illegal blockade and implement
resolution 1860 (2009) and the resolution of the tenth
emergency special session of the General Assembly
(A/RES/ES-10/6).

The Movement welcomes all endeavours aimed at
achieving this goal, including Secretary-General's visit
to Gaza and his efforts to enable the immediate and
sustained opening of all border crossings in order to
alleviate the crisis in Gaza and ensure its urgent
reconstruction. Further, the Non-Aligned Movement
stresses once again the urgent need to begin
reconstruction in Gaza immediately and deplores
Israel's continued obstruction of the reconstruction
process, including projects to be implemented by the
United Nations, despite the availability of financial
resources.

The Non-Aligned Movement further emphasizes
the importance of conducting investigations into the
serious violations of international humanitarian and
international human rights law reported by the United
Nations Fact-Finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict,
known as the Goldstone report (A/HRC/ 12/48). Those
investigations must be independent and credible and
conform with international standards. The Non-
Aligned Movement further stresses the importance and
urgency of Palestinian reconciliation and reiterates its
support for all efforts to achieve it, including Egyptian
and regional endeavours.

In addressing the situation in the Middle East, the
Non-Aligned Movement remains deeply concerned
over Israel's ongoing systematic violations of
Lebanon's sovereignty, in breach of Security Council
resolution 1701 (2006), and the threat of potential
escalation. The Movement reiterates its call for the full
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006), including
Israel's full withdrawal from all Lebanese territories in
the Shab'a farms, the Kfar Shuba hills and the northern
part of Al-Ghajar village.

On the occupied Syrian Golan, the Non-Aligned
Movement reaffirms that all measures and actions
taken or to be taken by Israel, the occupying Power, to
alter the legal, physical and demographic status of the
occupied Syrian Golan and its institutional structure, as
well as measures to impose jurisdiction and
administration there, are null, void and have no legal
effect. The Non-Aligned Movement demands that
Israel abide by resolution 497 (1981) and withdraw
fully from the occupied Syrian Golan to the borders of
June 4, 1967, in implementation of resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973).

In conclusion, the Non-Aligned Movement
remains committed to the goal of the two-State solution
for peace and highlights the serious consequences of
the ongoing Israeli measures in the region. It is vital at
this critical juncture that all parties shoulder their
responsibilities to move towards a comprehensive and
durable settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict.
Furthermore, the international community has to take a
robust posture to strengthen the process and to reaffirm
clear terms of reference for negotiations on all core
issues of the Palestinian track, as grounded in
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002), 1515
(2003) and 1850 (2008), the Madrid principles, the
Arab Peace Initiative and the Road Map. The
international community, including the Security
Council, must not allow Israeli intransigence and
illegal measures to obstruct its decisive steps to
translate the two-State Vision into reality.

