Mr. Passy (Bulgaria): Allow me first to express
my gratitude to the French delegation and to Minister
De Villepin for organizing this meeting, which gives us
an opportunity to take stock of what has been achieved
and to consider new measures and initiatives. I wish
also to thank Secretary-General Kofi Annan and the
President of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC)
for their important statements.

I wish to avail myself of this occasion to
welcome the five new non-permanent members of the
Security Council and to wish them success in carrying
out their responsibilities. I am confident that the
tradition of unanimous decisions on matters related to
the fight against international terrorism will be
maintained.

Fifteen months after the adoption of resolution
1373 (2001), we can affirm that a great deal has been
done. However, the multifaceted measures undertaken
so far do not give us grounds to conclude that
terrorism, as a major threat to international peace and
security, has been eliminated. We condemn in the
strongest terms the recent terrorist acts, as well as
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, as no
circumstances or motives can ever justify them.
Worldwide, in the past three months alone, three
Bulgarians have been killed by terrorists.

International cooperation is of key importance for
results in the fight against terrorism. Other
international regional and subregional organizations,
with the appropriate expertise and mechanisms, can
play an important role as well. In this regard, I would
like to welcome the initiative of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee to hold a special meeting on 7 March with
representatives of international and regional
organizations. As a member of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) troika
and, consequently, as its future Chairman-in-Office in
2004, Bulgaria will actively contribute to the synergy
between the different bodies.

Looking at the balance of what has been
achieved, we cannot but underscore the great input of
the CTC in strengthening the overall capacity of the
States Members of the United Nations to fight this evil.
I would like to express my high esteem for the
activities of the Committee and of its Chairman, Sir
Jeremy Greenstock. I wish Spain success also as the
next Chairman of this most important subsidiary organ
of the Security Council.

We consider that the CTC has successfully
managed its initial task of focusing attention on the
need for legislation covering all aspects of resolution
1373 (2001) and for ratification of the 12 international
instruments related to the fight against terrorism. In
supporting the priorities set out in the various phases of
CTC activities, Bulgaria is of the opinion that, even
now, the Committee can direct greater attention to the
close links that exist between international terrorism
and international organized crime, drug trafficking,
money-laundering and the illegal trade in weapons.

A matter of growing concern is the risk of access
by terrorists to weapons of mass destruction and
materials for their production. In this regard, I would
like to express Bulgaria's support for "Principles to
prevent terrorists, or those that harbour them, from
gaining access to weapons or materials of mass
destruction", adopted by the Group of Eight in June
2002 in Kananaskis, Canada and endorsed by the
General Assembly.

Bulgaria recognizes that the 12 United Nations
conventions and protocols constitute the primary legal
framework for the fight against terrorism. The last two
of them to which Bulgaria was not yet a party have
now been ratified. I avail myself of this occasion to
appeal to all States that have not yet ratified those
conventions to do so as soon as possible. As well, I
would like to stress that the legal framework that those
instruments outline will be incomplete until the
negotiations on a comprehensive convention against
terrorism and on an international convention on the
suppression of acts of nuclear terrorism are concluded.

The coordination and the harmonization of the
fight against terrorism at international level must be
coupled with adequate efforts at the national level.

In order to improve and broaden cooperation at
subregional level, Bulgaria hosted in 2002 a regional
political forum of the South-East European States,
dedicated to international cooperation in the fight
against terrorism. That initiative was consistent with
the view that achievements can be improved when
States work within the collective efforts of the region
and was meant to boost cooperation with NATO, the
European Union, the Council of Europe, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
the Stability Pact for South Eastern Europe and the
Central European Initiative.

Bulgaria has, on many occasions and at different
political levels, declared that terrorism cannot be
identified with an ethnic or religious group. We must
not allow the terrorists to use cultural and religious
differences to breed feelings of mistrust and hatred
among nations and in that way to justify their terrible
acts of violence.

Counter-terrorism measures need to be constantly
improved because terrorists have demonstrated an
extraordinary ability to take advantage of the
weaknesses and omissions of international cooperation.
I am confident that today's open meeting of the
Security Council will give new impetus to
strengthening the capabilities of States in their fight
against one of the most dangerous phenomena of the
present world.

