The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of the Philippines.

We join the other members of the Security
Council in thanking the Secretary-General for his
important statement. We are also grateful to
Mr. Volcker for presenting to the Security Council the
Committee's final report on the oil-for-food
programme.

The programme was admittedly the largest, most
complex and most ambitious humanitarian relief
operation in the history of the United Nations. It is
therefore natural that an assessment or evaluation of a
programme of that magnitude would require an
elaborate process. It is also understandable that a
project of that scope would produce a voluminous
outcome document to highlight its multifarious aspects,
ranging from programme management and
administration to programme effectiveness. Given the
complexity of the programme - not to mention the
lengthy report that documents it - we certainly need
more time to further study the many findings and
recommendations that Mr. Volcker and his group have
suggested in the report.

However, it is timely that this report should come

at this stage, when the whole of the United Nations is
busy talking about reform. The reform of the United
Nations is one of the things that the report calls for in
order to improve the Organization's overall
effectiveness in the future, given the upsurge of threats
and challenges that the Organization faces. It is that
same reform that the Secretary-General has advocated
in his "In larger freedom" report. More important, it is
also the reform of the United Nations system that the
High-level Plenary Meeting will discuss next week. In
short, this is a question of urgent reform, and the time
for that reform, as the Volcker report has rightly put it,
is now.
As the whole of the United Nations reviews the
overall management system, it is important to ensure
that appropriate reform measures be put in place and
incorporated into a draft outcome document that our
leaders can adopt in a week's time.

With respect to the subject of reforms, the
Philippines commends the Secretary-General for
initiating the whole reform process of the United
Nations even before the creation of the Independent
Inquiry Committee to review the oil-for-food
programme.

The Philippines is confident that many of the
recommendations, as well as the lessons learned from
the report, will serve very well as substantial inputs for
the ongoing reform process of the United Nations.

I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Iraq.

