Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution 2359
(2017). Through this important and, in many ways,
seminal text, the Security Cuncil expresses its full
support for the Force conjointe du G5 Sahel, established
by the Group of Five States for the Sahel (G-S) to
combat the terrorist threat they face, which knows no
borders. The resolution calls on the entire international
community to provide logistical, operational and
financial assistance to the G-5 States, in particular via
the swift holding of a donors conference. Lastly, via
the resolution, the Council expresses its determination
to meet on a number of occasions in the months to
come in order, among other things, to consider possible
measures to be taken to support the deployment of the
G-5 Joint Force France. France will make that a priority
during its presidency of the Security Council in the
month of October.

The resolution we just adopted provides robust
and decisive support to a major African initiative,
endorsed and authorized by the African Union, that
seeks to combat terrorism. The resolution makes a
contribution to the strategic approach to encourage the
willingness of African countries to take responsibility
for the security of their continent. It is fully in line with
the need - promoted by the Secretary-General - to
bolster the partnership between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations, especially
in Africa.

The Joint Force will support and complement
the efforts of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
by operating on territory thus far not covered and by
conducting counter-terrorism activities, which does not
fall within the mandate of MINUSMA. By contributing
to securing the region, it will also enable MINUSMA
to focus on its priority tasks and will facilitate the
implementation of its mandate. It will also operate
in coordination with the French forces of Operation
Barkhane, with which operational contacts have already
been established on the ground.

For France and for Europe, peace and security
in the Sahel constitutes a crucial priority that has a
direct impact on our own national security. The 4,000
French troops deployed in the region at the request of
the G-5 countries are pursuing their counter-terrorism
operations by supporting the forces of the G-5 States.
Twenty of them have laid down their lives in the
process. At a time when terrorism strikes everywhere
throughout the world, we cannot leave the Sahel to
become a new haven for terrorist organizations from
all over the world. It is our collective security that is
at stake in the Sahel, not just the security of the G-5
countries. That reality means that we must act together
and to coordinate. It is for that reason in particular that
the G-5 States have turned to the Security Council.
France deeply believes that the Security Council has a
moral and political responsibility to provide unanimous
support to our African partners, who are coming
together to combat the terrorist threat, in particular
in the Sahel. That shows just how important our vote
today is.

The Council has provided steadfast support to the
building of African capacity to respond to crises. It
has also been a steadfast supporter of African States
and organizations in their determination to take their
destiny and security into their own hands. Providing
clear support to the G-5 Sahel Joint Force is therefore
above all a demonstration of coherence to our African
partners and friends. It is also a matter of promoting an
ambitious vision, namely, that of a strategic partnership
with our African friends.

African States and organizations are increasingly
assuming responsibility for deploying their own forces to
fight directly against terrorism, thereby complementing
United Nations peacekeeping operations. We wish to
take this opportunity to pay tribute to the sacrifices that
they have made for their own security, and also for ours.
We commend this profound and positive development
with a view to guaranteeing international peace and
security. It is our collective responsibility, and the
responsibility of the United Nations in particular, to
support them tangibly in their efforts at a political
level - but also at a financial level, as often they lack
the necessary resources to effectively combat terrorism.
France intends to step up its efforts to support African
States and organizations in their determination to take
responsibility for their own security and to respond to
the terrorist threat.

Let us make no mistake: resolution 2359 (2017)
is a seminal text. Not only is the Security Council
providing strong, decisive support for the mobilization
of our African partners in the struggle against terrorism
through the G-5 Sahel Joint Force, but the resolution
also embodies a strategic vision, that of a partnership
with our African partners in the field of peace and
security, of which we are opening a new chapter today.
Rest assured of France's determination to foster the
profound, irreversible impetus that the Security Council
has generated today in its relationship with Africa.

