Mr. Diagne (spoke in French): At the outset, allow
me to say what an immense honour it is for me to be
able to address the Council in a meeting dedicated to
a topic of such importance. For that honour, I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for having once again
expressed your confidence in me.

I would also like to clarify that my contribution to
this meeting is from an academic perspective. I am a
philosopher who has long been engaged in the study,
among other things, of the intellectual and spiritual
traditions of Islam. Islamic philosophy is one of my
specialities. I say this by way of an apology in advance,
as I may not speak the language of international
institutions, but I hope Council members will forgive
me for that.

I would like to highlight the phrase "intellectual
and spiritual traditions of Islam" that I used earlier.
I think that such language needs to be underscored,
because in the sound and fury of the Violence being
perpetrated today in the name of religion, we may lose
sight of the fact that these religions have long and deep-
rooted traditions that ultimately express humankind's
aspiration to achieving its full potential. I believe that
is a point we need to insist upon.

In my capacity as a philosopher and an academic, I
would therefore like to share some of my own thoughts,
which are focused on the third question in the concept
note before us (S/2016/965, annex), concerning the
promotion of interfaith and intercultural dialogue. The
other reason for this choose, beyond my interest in it as
a philosopher, is that such promotion of interfaith and
intercultural dialogue is and always has been a major
policy direction of my country, Senegal.

The question raised by this issue, I believe, is
twofold. Its first aspect is what needs to be promoted
within and interfaith and intercultural dialogue. The
second aspect, is how can that be done?

On the first, it is not merely an abstract exercise
of comparative religions, whatever the philosophical
interest of such a dialogue might be. It will be agreed
that such a dialogue must be focused on the universal
affirmation of values that enable coexistence on our
shared planet, which is now more united than ever before
in the history of humankind. Respect for universal
human rights - and these human rights are universal
because they can be translated into all languages,
in all cultures and all spiritual and philosophical
traditions - is certainly one of those values to be
promoted in the framework of cooperation between
the United Nations and the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation (OIC). I would like to further underscore
two values that I think need to serve as the cornerstone
of this will to live together.

The first is pluralism. l stress that notion because
it seems to me that pluralism is the authentic response
to extremist violence, to all forms of violence based
on tribalism and all murderous identities, which,
unfortunately, we are seeing propagate and spread
everywhere in our world. The second great value on
which this cooperation should be based is what I will
call ecological awareness.

It seems to me that fruitful cooperation between
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation and the
United Nations must seek to promote pluralism. That
requires all spiritual traditions, including Islam, to be
aware of their capacity to be open to differences and
to oppose exclusivism. Let there be several sects, let
there be many interpretations. That is not a problem.
The problem arises when one interpretation declares
itself to be exclusive, when a sect declares itself to be
the only way. That is where the promotion of pluralism
is important.

The Organization of Islamic Cooperation and the
United Nations share a belief in the ongoing mission of
advocating the unity of a human community in respect
for diversity, which is one of its constituent features.

Pluralism is evoked in the sacred text of Muslims when
it says that, rather making of humankind a single and
homogeneous community, God has confronted people
with the tests of difference by enjoining people to
respond with competition in good works, because,
ultimately, says the text, only God knows what he wants
to see in the nature of our variety.

It seems to me that this states clearly that plurality,
differences, are natural things, that differences are in
the natural order of things and that it is right and proper
that it is so. In addition to the reference in the texts, a
rich intellectual and spiritual tradition supports what I
have just said, in the sense of promoting pluralism. It
is pressing that in the cooperation between the United
Nations and the Organization for Islamic Cooperation,
promotion of pluralism should be at the very heart of
dialogue and exchanges.

I also think that interreligious and intercultural
dialogue organized in cooperation between the
Organization for Islamic Cooperation and the United
Nations must focus on - and here I move to the second
value that I mentioned - the promotion of what I call
ecological awareness. That is an urgent and pressing
need in our times, when the concept of climate change
has become tangibly clear, in spite of all the denials that
we can unfortunately hear here and there.

The reason why I refer to the value of ecological
awareness is because religions have a natural role to
play in this task. It will be for the cooperation between
the Organization ofIslamic Cooperation and the United
Nations to show that this is the case for Islam. The reason
for bringing this up in a conversation on, especially, the
fight against extremism and violence is because it is
necessary to draw attention to the nameless violence that
is carried out against our common human security, and
that is ecological violence. This is underscored because
of the significance of that central notion in Islam, that
the human is the Lieutenant of God on Earth. In a word,
he is the Caliph. Now this lieutenancy, this Caliphate,
confers on the human the responsibility to care for the
integrity of creation and its ongoing renewal.

To quickly evoke Islam's philosophic tradition
on that point, I recall one element of the Islamic
intellectual philosophical tradition. a philosophical
novel of a twelfth century Andalusian author, Abou
Bakr Ibnou Tufail, who wrote a philosophical novel,
entitled "Hayy Ibn Yaqzan". It is a proper name. One
of the many lessons that can be drawn from this novel
is that for the individual, achieving full awareness
of what he or she is, what he or she can become, and
what is his or her duty towards the Creator - that is to
reach an understanding of the responsibility to protect
the environment and all beings with which we share
our Earth.

That is why I evoked the second value as being
at least as important as that of pluralism in building
cooperation that will truly promote human security.

In conclusion, I direct attention to one word -"how",
which is one of the questions I had asked. The answer
to the "how" is single word - education. For human
security there are immediate measures that must be
taken to respond to violence. This point was underscored
by the Assistant Secretary General of the OIC. But
the true, lasting response is education. The preamble
to the UNESCO Constitution reminds us that acts of
violence begin in the minds of men, and therefore it is
in the minds of men that barriers to extremism must be
built. That is why it is vital that cooperation between
the Organization ofIslamic Cooperation and the United
Nations should be firmly founded on education. They
must pursue joint efforts to develop together education
in pluralism and education in ecological awareness, the
two values on which I focused my statement.

Once again, I thank you, Mr. President, for your
trust, and I also thank the Council members for
their attention.

