Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The high level of representation at this
meeting attests to the importance of the issue of
peacebuilding in countries emerging from conflict as
well as the importance of formulating practical
recommendations on improving the United Nations
system's activities on the ground and coordination
between the system and other participants in
peacebuilding processes.

We share the view that assistance by the United
Nations and other partners in post-conflict
reconstruction early in the revival of countries that
have experienced through hot periods of crisis is
fraught with many difficulties in terms of coordination
and complementarity of efforts, financing and national
capacity-building of beneficiary States. We believe that
peacebuilding activities must be based on the principle
of national responsibility for determining priorities and
approaches to their implementation. Assistance by the
United Nations or other international partners should
be implemented with the agreement of national
Governments and with respect for the principle of the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of States, as well as
bearing in mind the specificities of the country in
question.

The modalities for United Nations post-conflict
assistance, whether in the form of peacekeeping
operations, special political missions or joint United
Nations peacebuilding presences, must be determined
with the agreement of the host Government and must
include a rational division of labour among regional
organizations, international financial institutions and
bilateral partners.

We believe that the Peacebuilding Commission
has an important role to play in coordinating

peacebuilding efforts in post-conflict States. The
Commission's work to date shows the difficulties that
arise when putting into practice the concept of
combining within one structure all interested players,
including international financial institutions, regional
organizations, the donor community, civil society and
non-governmental organizations.

We believe that the Commission should not take
on an executive role in the detailed determination of
peacebuilding priorities in countries on its agenda, but
rather should focus on coordination in those fields that
require the stepped-up attention of the international
community so as to contribute its activities to existing
mechanisms for interaction, first and foremost, within
the United Nations system.

A separate area of the Commission's work should
be the mobilization of additional donor resources, inter
alia, through a full-fledged integration into its work of
international financial institutions, regional
organizations, the private sector, the creation of
medium- and long-term financial mechanisms and trust
funds.

We attach great importance to the Peacebuilding
Fund as a mechanism for emergency financing, which
promotes the involvement of longer standing
development assistance mechanisms. We are cognizant
of the need to bolster civilian potential of both the host
States and partners providing assistance in these fields,
including the United Nations, in order to resolve the
task of institutional capacity-building, security sector
reform and socio-economic reconstruction.

We welcome the first steps of the Office of Rule
of Law and Security Institutions in strengthening the
important assistance role played by the United Nations
in this field, as well as the efforts of those regional
organizations and Member States in strengthening their
own peacebuilding, including civilian, capacities.
These efforts must be targeted at training national
experts and strengthening institutional capacities of
host countries.

We cherish the hope that the issue of
strengthening civilian expertise in the context of
peacebuilding will be granted due attention by relevant
United Nations system bodies involved in developing
the Organization's potential in this field.

By way of conclusion, I would like to convey my
gratitude to the delegation of the United Kingdom for
the preparation of the draft presidential statement and
to state that we endorse it.

Mr. President, I hope that I lived up to your
expectations.

