Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I deliver this statement on the humanitarian situation in north-west Syria on behalf of the co-penholders, namely, Belgium and Germany. At the outset, let me thank our briefers, Special Envoy Geir Pedersen and Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock, for their insight into unbelievable human suffering. Idlib is becoming more and more a symbol of carnage. Just a week ago, Mr. Lowcock described the humanitarian catastrophe (see S/PV.8707) in facts and figures. We do not see any improvement. Instead, numbers increase day by day, the suffering is compounding and we continue to stand idly by. From | February to 4 February alone, 34 civilians were killed, including nine women and seven children. Eighty-three civilians were killed in air strikes and ground-based strikes between 20 January and 30 January. Among them were 20 women and 33 children. More than 580,000 people have been displaced by the recent offensive around Idlib. Six thousand five hundred children are forced to flee every single day, totalling 300,000 since the beginning of December 2019. In Idlib, at least 53 medical facilities are currently out of order. Those are recent and truly shocking statistics from various United Nations official sources - not from the Internet or based on fake news. They are reliable and trustworthy sources. The President of the International Committee of the Red Cross, Peter Maurer, recently said that public interest in the war in Syria hasdecreased significantly although violence, once more, is on the rise. As co-penholders, we will do everything to shed light on the humanitarian consequences of the war in Syria. As the Security Council, we must fulfil our responsibility to protect human life. More engagement, not less, is needed. We remain deeply concerned about the safety of the 4 million civilians in north-west Syria. The ongoing military offensive causes immense human suffering, death, displacement and destruction in the midst of winter. Families are literally left out in the cold, without protection, proper health care or shelter. Children are forced to leave school and spend their precious childhood fleeing from one uncertainty to the next. People flee with nothing more than the clothes on their back. Where do they go? The density of the population at the Turkish border increases every day because people move north to escape the fighting. Humanitarian assistance - for example, temporary housing - is urgently needed. Civilians have the right to be protected from the horror of war, and warring parties have the obligation to ensure their protection. Once again, we recall that there are humanitarian obligations that need to be observed. There are rules to warfare; we should not forget that. More than 80 per cent of the people in need in the north-west are women and children. As the World Health Organization stated on Monday, at least 53 medical facilities are currently out of order. Providing help for the 2.9 million people in need of medical assistance becomes increasingly difficult every day. One of the main reasons for that is the ongoing bombardment of civilian infrastructure, such as hospitals and schools. Those attacks are totally unacceptable. We, the co-penholders, condemn the violence and call for accountability forthose responsible. We also condemned the attacks perpetrated by Security Council-designated terrorist groups. However, counter-terrorism efforts can never absolve the parties from respecting their obligations under international humanitarian law. Despite the dire situation in the north-west, we should not forget the north-east. A total of 2.5 million out of 4.1 million inhabitants rely on humanitarian assistance. Safe, durable and unhindered humanitarian access is essential. As we heard in the Council last week, words have to be followed by deeds. We call onthe Syrian regime and Russia to ensure the protection of civilians and to comply with international humanitarian law. We call for an immediate and fully observed ceasefire and full humanitarian access to all people in need. A sustainable solution can be achieved only by political progress, as agreed upon in resolution 2254 (2015). There is no sustainable military solution. The current offensive in Idlib must stop. In my national capacity, let me say that I add my voice to those who are deeply concerned about the recent escalation and the attack by Syrian regime forces against a Turkish observation post, which led to the death of several members of Turkey's armed forces. I would like to underscore that such escalation is unacceptable.
