Mr. Hunter (United States of America): I thank
Assistant Secretary-General Zerihoun and Ambassador
Vieira for their briefings on the situation in Guinea-
Bissau. I also thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2018/1086) on the strategic assessment of the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-
Bissau (UNIOGBIS). We look forward to discussing
that assessment with our Council colleagues as we
negotiate the Mission's future next February.

Today, we are having yet another Council meeting
on the situation in Guinea-Bissau instead of focusing on
the future of the country and the welfare of its people.
We are faced with another self-imposed political wound
and a delay in the implementation of the Conakry
Agreement. The Council addresses intractable issues
every day; however, in Guinea-Bissau, we have before
us a problem for which there are immediate and tangible
solutions. This spring, after waiting through nearly
four years of self-inflicted political gridlock, Guinea-
Bissau's frozen Government appeared to thaw, but
only after the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) took the bold step of sanctioning 19
spoilers of the Conakry Agreement. At that time, the
President of Guinea-Bissau had appointed a consensus
Prime Minister and scheduled legislative elections for
18 November. Given registration challenges, that date
was delayed. And while we understood the logistical
challenges that prompted the delay, the country's
leaders have once again been capitalizing on a stalled
process for their own selfish political objectives. Let us
be clear - that has to end now.

We appreciate the recent announcements that have
set a date for the elections. However, we are greatly
concerned that the date set is well beyond the January
time frame set by ECOWAS. It is critical that there
be no further delays or slippage for the legislative
elections. Furthermore, we expect that the presidential
elections will and should take place separately and as
scheduled in summer 2019. Following the apparent
improvement of the country's political situation this
spring, Guinea-Bissau's partners and friends have
provided the necessary support needed to prepare for
and hold the elections. We are pleased by the progress
and voter registration that has been observed over the
past several months.

However, like our partners in the region and the
international community, we are very concerned over
recent events in Bissau, specifically the actions of
the public-order police and the blocking of visiting
technicians seeking to access the technical support
office of the electoral process headquarters. We note
that, despite those actions and the ongoing delay, a
frustrated and disappointed public has shown patience,
and the pre-election environment has remained
relatively calm. However, that should not be construed
as passive acceptance. We urge President Vaz, Prime
Minister Gomes, Mr. Domingos Simoes Pereira, who
is the leader of the African Party for the Independence
of Guinea and Cape Verde, and other stakeholders to
follow through on their pledges to foster unity, continue
the implementation of the Conakry Agreement and hold
the elections without delay.

The United States also welcomes the Secretary-
General's strategic assessment of UNIOGBIS. We
appreciate that that report provides a frank assessment
of the strengths and weaknesses of the work of
the United Nations in Guinea-Bissau over the past
several years. We also appreciate that the report ties
its recommendations for the reprioritization of tasks
and options for a future United Nations presence to
conditions that must be met. While further detailed
discussions will be required in the Security Council
prior to the February mandate renewal, we support in
principle the concept of a three-phase drawdown and
the transfer of tasks from UNIOGBIS to the United
Nations country team.

What is clear is that for that transition to be
possible, Guinea-Bissau's electoral process must be
credible and must proceed on schedule. Furthermore,
Guinea-Bissau must avoid a return to extended political
gridlock. We also agree with the sentiment expressed
in the strategic assessment that, given the significant
investment that the United Nations has made in Guinea-
Bissau over the past two decades, the utmost care must
be taken to design a transition process that maintains
the gains achieved and identifies the appropriate parts
of the United Nations system that are to assume any
remaining tasks. We reiterate the need for stakeholders
to take the right action and put the people of Guinea-
Bissau first, which entails the immediate rescheduling
and holding of the critical legislative elections.
