Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me to thank
you, Madam President, for convening this important
open debate. We are also grateful for the briefings and
presence of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon; the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Mr. Zeid Ra'ad Al
Hussein; and Mr. Karamoko Diakite.

There are no exact figures on the number of small
arms and light weapons currently in circulation globally.
Some sources estimate that at least 875 million small
arms and light weapons are available, many of them in
the hands of non-State individuals and entities. Reports
are that between 7 and 8 million of those weapons are
produced every year. The legal international sales of

such weapons bring in at least $8.5 billion annually.
In addition, illicit sales, according to the World Bank,
account for up to an additional 20 per cent.

Hundreds of thousands of small arms and light
weapons, including heavy machine guns, grenade
launchers, ground-to-air missiles, portable anti-aircraft
systems, portable rocket launchers, rifles and
handguns, are diverted every year into the illicit market
and to non-State actors, including terrorist groups. The
diversion of those weapons exacerbates armed violence
and fuels conflicts, civil wars and transnational
organized crime, including drug trafficking, trafficking
in women and children, and it undermines respect for
international humanitarian law and human rights.

At least 508,000 persons die violent deaths every
year, including approximately 60,000 women and girls,
and most of them are victims of small arms and light
weapons. Such are the statistics of the culture and the
logic of death.

Although the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons has been a constant for decades in North
Africa and the Middle East, recent reports on the
subject point to an unprecedented escalation of the
phenomenon throughout the entire region. There is no
doubt that military intervention, war and the collapse of
institutions in Iraq and Libya, as well as the escalation
of the conflict in Syria, are the key factors explaining
this staggering increase in the trafficking and flow of
small arms and light weapons throughout the entire
region.

The Secretary-General's 2013 report on small arms
and light weapons (S/2013/503) referred to the impact
caused by the collapse of the Libyan State and its
terrible consequences for the security of neighbouring
countries. The report demonstrated that munitions and
explosives had ended up in at least 12 countries of the
Maghreb, the Sahel, the Levant and the Horn of Africa.
It also documented the terrible impact that the military
intervention and war in Iraq had had on the security of
the Middle East, leading to the collapse ofthe country's
institutions and army, with the subsequent proliferation
in the flow of weapons and explosives of all types.

Within their capacities, States can and must manage
and monitor their arsenals appropriately; promote
cooperation mechanisms, mark firearms when they are

being manufactured and imported; prohibit the export
or transfer of unmarked small arms and light weapons;
penalize illicit trafficking in those weapons; and
enforce law. For that reason, the collapse of States and
the disappearance of their institutions play a decisive
role in aggravating the problem we are discussing
today. The staggering increase in the flow and illicit
traffic in small arms and light weapons in North Africa
and the Middle East, with its terrible toll in violence,
impunity, crimes against humanity and massive human
rights violations, is one of the terrible consequences of
political destabilization, interventionism and the wars
in Iraq, Syria and Libya.
In addition to the problem caused by the collapse
of States and institutions in the region, there is another
element that we must address, namely, the promotion
and proliferation of non-State armed groups as an
instrument of political destabilization and fomenting
war as a mechanism for overthrowing Governments.
Many non-State actors in North Africa and the Middle
East receive small arms and light weapons from
sponsoring States. Each weapon that lands in the hands
of non-State actors in such countries as Iraq, Libya and
Syria stokes barbarity, war, cruelty, suffering and the
death of innocent persons.

There is a very thin line between non-State actors
and terrorist groups. There are armed and extremist
groups that act with absolute disdain for human life and
human rights, that, once they are given small arms and
light weapons of all kinds, acquire significant military
capacity and, more important, huge lethal capacity to
deal death to every nook and cranny of the region. It is
for that reason that we are very concerned that major
small arms and light weapons-producing countries
have refused to include a prohibition on the transfer
of conventional weapons, including small arms and
light weapons, to non-State actors in the framework
of previous negotiations on this issue at the United
Nations. That has created a large legal vacuum that
allows them to continue to supply small arms and light
weapons to their political allies throughout the world.

The Security Council has a clear definition of
non-State actors. Furthermore, we have resolution
1540 (2004), which establishes a valuable precedent
for the prohibition of the transfer of weapons of mass
destruction to non-State actors. We thus have enough
legal and political elements to extend the scope of the
prohibition on the sale and trafficking in small arms and
light weapons to non-State actors and terrorist groups.
Whoever supplies small arms and light weapons to
non-Stateactors-whethertheybemilitiasordemocratic
opposition movements in countries in conflict, in wars
or in processes ofpolitical destabilization, and whatever
their name or motive, in societies overwhelmed by
poverty, inequalities, exclusion and various forms of
social discrimination - are stoking those conflicts
and creating conditions for an unthinkable expansion
of violence, suffering and death, as is unfortunately
the case today in many of our brother countries in the
Middle East and North Africa.

It would be an extraordinary contribution to the
preservation of peace, the protection of human rights
and the promotion of international law if the Security
Council, in the context of this open debate, and given the
situation of humanitarian tragedy, conflicts and wars
besetting North African and Middle Eastern countries,
were to take a decisive step as a firm expression of our
political will to adopt a draft resolution that clearly
prohibits the sale, supply, trafficking or transfer of
small arms and light weapons, provided that the draft
resolution includes non-State actors and terrorist
groups.

We would like to insist on the fact that the prohibition
must encompass non-State actors and terrorist groups.
This provision cannot be avoided by resorting to double
standards and excuses. It is particularly important,
given that it is those entities that are today acting with
full impunity, causing chaos, death and suffering to
the most vulnerable and to the peoples of these regions
beset by violence. This is an matter of political will for
the parties that have the most responsibility to bear on
this issue.

