Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank the Nigerian presidency for having organized this
meeting, and Mr. Dmitry Titov, Ms. Zainab Bangura
and Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu for their participation in this
important debate.

Peacekeeping operations currently deployed in
the field are mandated to cooperate in the reform of
their respective security sectors as they seek to provide
countries emerging from conflict with capacities
essential to ensuring the rule of law. Broader mandates
involve greater responsibilities for the United Nations
system and in particular for the Council. They also
require the closer attention of, among others, the Heads
of mission, Special Envoys and Representatives and
Force Commanders, who must grasp the strategic value
of such reforms and assume leadership in ongoing
coordination with national authorities, as appropriate .

From that perspective, we believe that the central
objective of security sector reform remains the
creation of national institutions that are subject to
civil authority, effective, inclusive and accountable
so to contribute to international peace and security,
sustainable development and the full exercise of
human rights. These reforms should be based on State
policies in the long term, take advantage of existing
institutional capacities, prevent their total collapse and
take into consideration, inter alia, local traditions or
cultural heritage. The incorporation of radical elements
into permanent institutions of a State is not advisable,
which is why we must find mechanisms for their
demobilization and social reintegration.

However, there can be no doubt that monitoring
these reforms in countries emerging from conflict
must be a priority and ongoing task of the Council.
Understanding that security sector reform is
undertaken in specific and unique political contexts,
we favour the implementation of broad and inclusive
national agreements and commitments that will lay the
foundations for transformative processes that ensure
national ownership. The cooperation of other States
and organizations can contribute to the effectiveness
and sustainability of these processes.

We are aware in turn that any reform requires
parallel readjustments in judicial and prison systems,
as well as the systematization of the training of security
forces and their financing. Without the ability to
prosecute criminals and without predictable economic
resources, security institutions will work in a vacuum
that may limit their work, at the risk of entrenching bad
practices that will have to be unlearned. Responsible,
transparent and efficient security forces have the
enormous potential to make the people feel safe, which
is essential to facilitating the processes ofreconciliation
and confidence-building among civil society, armed
groups and the Government. We believe in an inclusive
process of reform that seeks the allegiance ofthe people
as the beneficiaries ofpeacebuilding and the rule of law.

We have much to learn from countries that have
successfully emerged from conflict and established
professional and inclusive forces that serve the rule of
law. The lessons learned and best practices developed
can form a kind of catalog of potential solutions
and serve other countries undertaking key reforms.
Under resolution 2151 (2014), we must intensify the
exchange of experiences, an area where South-South
cooperation can play a leading role. Latin America has
deep experience in security sector reform that could be
shared with other regions. In this context and by way of
illustration, since 1996 Chile has maintained technical
assistance programmes with the Haitian National
Police whereby approximately 60 Haitian officers and
non-commissioned officers are trained in the military
schools of my country. That involvement has played a
key character in our participation in the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti.

At the same time, it is necessary for countries
undertaking reforms to consider the effective and equal
participation of women in all stages of these processes,
which will also require a cultural change. The impact
of such inclusion may facilitate national reconciliation
and the restoration of trust between civil society and
institutions. We hope that the comprehensive survey
of the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) will
offer guidelines in this area, including on the training
of contingents with regard to the incorporation of the
gender perspective and the policy of zero tolerance of
violence against women, including sexual Violence.

We wish to conclude by insisting that mandates
be adapted to local realities and that the international
community design its cooperation around national
programmes and priorities, with comprehensive and
coherent approaches that create strong and responsible
countries and institutions able to take the path of peace.

