Mr. Zlenko (Ukraine): The delegation of Ukraine
fully associates itself with the position presented by the
Permanent Representative of Argentina, Ambassador
Cardenas. We support all the provisions of his statement,
which fully reflects our understanding of this important
issue of cooperation between the members of the Security
Council and the troop-contributing countries.

A year ago, at a formal meeting of the Security
Council, we discussed this vital problem. As a result, the
informal mechanism of consultations was established. Its
functioning has shown usefulness, but at the same time it
has lacked effectiveness. In our opinion, the present
exercise should result in the institutionalization of a
mechanism of consultations.

In this regard, I cannot but mention Article 44 of the
United Nations Charter. It clearly defines the principle of
consultations between the two groups of States. Although
this Article deals with operations undertaken in
accordance with Chapter VII, the principle contained in
this Article is in full conformity with the spirit of the
United Nations Charter and should be interpreted
extensively.

The practice of consultations, held since November
1994, has shown that instead of a dialogue between the
Security Council members and the troop-contributing
countries, we have had either monologues by the
contributors or briefings by the Secretariat. Regrettably,
the members of the Security Council played the role of
mere statists, and the level of representation of the
Council members at these meetings speaks for itself. In
this context, we hope that formalizing the relationship of
the aforementioned States, in accordance with Article 29,
as suggested by Argentina, will automatically upgrade the
level of these consultations.

It is also necessary to define the role of the
Secretariat in this context. The mechanism to be
established in accordance with Article 29 easily resolves
this somewhat sensitive issue. In this case, the Secretariat
will offer its services to the member States of the
Security Council and troop-contributing countries, and
will play an auxiliary role. Primarily, troop contributors
will have an opportunity to influence the formulation and

 

adoption of the decisions relating to the peace-keeping
operations in which they participate.

Finally, our delegation believes that the formalization
of the process of consultations will create enhanced
opportunities for the improved provision and exchange of
information between the member States of the Security
Council and the States contributing to the peace-keeping
operations. Under present conditions, the valuable proposals
made by the delegations of the troop-contributing countries
do not find any practical application; at least, we are not
aware of any. It also seems odd that the best reference
papers with regard to the United Nations peace-keeping
operations are prepared by the Department of Public
Information and not by the Department of Peace-keeping
Operations. With a new institutionalized mechanism, these
useful documents, in more detailed form, could also be
prepared by the Secretariat for the troop-contributing States.

The delegation of Ukraine believes that today's
exchange of views will help the member States of the
Security Council to take an appropriate decision that meets
the interests of the international community as a whole.

