Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Mr. De Mistura for his briefing.
Russia has been following the March round of
the intra-Syrian talks in Geneva very closely and
encouraging all the participants to work constructively
to arrive at mutually acceptable decisions and
compromises regarding a peaceful settlement. In
that context, we have been in active contact with the
Syrian authorities and with a broad cross-section of
the opposition.

We support Mr. De Mistura's efforts and believe
that he will enhance them. The fact that there have been
developments in the Geneva process, and that the sides
have launched parallel conversations on all four of the
agreed-on discussion baskets on the agenda and have
begun studying the conceptual proposals of Mr. De
Mistura's mediation can be considered an achievement.
We expect the Geneva process to continue steadily.
There should be no prolonged pauses. We already went
through that negative experience in 2016. I would like
to say to Mr. De Mistura that rather than give up, he
should continue his painstaking work with the Syrian
delegations, actively encouraging them to conduct
dialogue and seek common denominators.

However, the statement by Mr. Rycroft of the
United Kingdom showed that he is thinking only about
how to make Mr. De Mistura's task more difficult, stop
the political process developing and bring confrontation
and hostility to the Security Council. But the fact of the
matter - and many in the United Nations are already
aware ofit - is that he is afraid. He has been losing sleep
over the possibility that we could be working together
with the United States. He is afraid of that. He is doing
everything he can to undermine that cooperation. That
is why he should look at me. He should not look away.
Why is he looking away? This is precisely why he said
nothing today about the political process. He did not
listen to Mr. De Mistura's briefing, and that was on
purpose. He makes insulting demands of the guarantors
of the Astana process, but what have he and his allies
done to advance the ceasefire? In London and Paris
they are receiving opposition groups - illegal armed
groups. They were suddenly afraid that things were
moving towards peace and a political settlement. They
serve the interests of armed groups, many of which
have been murdering Christians and other minorities in
the Middle East. They are committing acts of terror in
churches on Palm Sunday. That is who they care about.
They j abe completely lost his way with their anti-regime
notions. What do they think they are doing?

So it turns out that for them, regime change is more
important than the positions of the majority of the States
Members of the United Nations. Mr. Rycroft was not
speaking about the item on our agenda today. He has
insulted Syria, Iran, Turkey and other States. I would
ask you, Madam President, to ensure that the rules
of procedure for this meeting are respected, because
that is your job when some members are irresponsibly
resorting to insulting slang in the Security Council. He
should not dare to insult Russia again.
We are nevertheless very grateful to Mr. De Mistura
for his work. In the run-up to the next round, further
efforts will be required to ensure that the intra-Syrian
dialogue is genuinely broadly representative. Every
patriotic Syrian party should be able to take part in
the negotiations on an equal footing in order to discuss
how to preserve Syria as a unified, secular State in
which all historical communities can live in peace, as
has always been the case, and take part in rebuilding
the country. The opposition should have an inclusive
and consolidated delegation whose members have a
common position that takes account of the views of
the key factions. There is no room for arrogance here.
We should be thinking not about pride and arrogance
but about the future of Syria. That is the substance
of Mr. Rycroft's concept document. He should think
about the future of his own State, not interfere in these
people's affairs. Let them conduct their dialogue calmly.
Mr. Rycroft should not interfere with Mr. De Mistura.
Look at those mentors!

In seeking a formula for a political solution - and I
know that this is Mr. De Mistura's position 4 we cannot
allow any interruption in the work of State institutions,
especially the security institutions, which bear the
main burden in combating the terrorist threat. If we
look at the other countries of the Middle East, Africa
and other regions, it is clear that we cannot create State
institutions even on paper 4 and Mr. Rycroft wants to
destroy the ones that remain in Syria, one of the most
important countries in the region.

We insist on discussions being held without any
preconditions. We know that that is his position. Against
the backdrop of the political efforts, it is obviously
unacceptable for the opponents of the Government in
Damascus to try to gain military advantages. We should
recall that before the March round of negotiations
began, the opposition tried to advance on various
fronts, including in the vicinity of Syria's capital. We
hope that the relevant capitals will cool the hotheads
and that such reckless acts will not be repeated.

This is Mr. Rycroft's responsibility when he
professes to support the Astana process. He says one
thing in the Security Council but believes another,
and then in fact does a third thing. I would like to ask
him to do his part of the work. Here are London and
Paris working with opposition groups. He and his allies
should summon them and tell them to support the Astana
process. They should tell them that they should not even
think of firing on the Russian Embassy in Damascus.
But he will not even agree to put out an ordinary
announcement condemning the attack on the Russian
Embassy in Damascus, his diplomatic colleagues.

In a situation in which tensions have mounted
owing to the missile strike by the United States, the
importance of political efforts has only increased.
Clearly, provocations such as the incident in Khan
Shaykhun will only strengthen the positions of those
who favour a military solution. We need to determine
the facts and conduct a comprehensive investigation.
I was surprised, indeed amazed, to hear that French
experts have already reached the conclusion that
Damascus is responsible. No one has visited the scene
of the crime yet. How do they know?

The fate of the country should be determined by the
Syrians themselves, not by someone else. That is final.
We, together with the other guarantors, Turkey and
Iran - and here I want to also warmly thank the the
President of Kazakhstan for his leadership - are ready
to continue working on the Astana platform. Russia has
been responsible in addressing its obligations regarding
the strengthening of the ceasefire. But Mr. Rycroft and
his allies should also do their part in working with the
opposition groups. Astana cannot serve as a panacea in
a situation in which others are working to undermine it.

Significant progress has been achieved in terms of
local truces, which have made it possible to ease tensions
and normalize people's lives from a humanitarian
point of View. Many have spoken today about access
to besieged areas, and that is an issue that should be
resolved. But let us be fair. Why is food not supplied
to areas that are controlled by the Government? What,
are they a different kind of people? Let us be honest.
We know the situation. Support is needed from capitals
that at the moment are providing only empty criticism.
The Astana process has a unique and special value. It
is aimed at practical weays of ending the violence and,
most important, it represents a form of direct support
to the Geneva process that Mr. De Mistura is leading.
We know that he and the overwhelming majority of
States Members of the United Nations greatly value the
Astana process.

We would also like to draw the attention of the
international community and the United Nations to
the significant contamination of Syrian territory by
mines, unexploded ordnance and improvised explosive
devices. We regularly inform the Council about the
significant activities carried out by Russian experts to
deal with this problem. We call for the formation of an
international coalition to demine Syria. Blackmail to
the effect that demining will begin once there is regime
change is unacceptable and hypocritical.
The specialized United Nations service could
play an important role in that regard. Of course, the
humanitarian component is very important in that
respect. People need to feel safe, when they return to
their homes and economic activity, that their children
will not be blown up and civilians will not suffer. At
the same time, mines must be cleared from the World
Heritage site in Palmyra. Those are the kinds of issues
we must work on. We need to discuss problems related
to migration - not regime change but mine clearance
and conflict resolution. People will return to their
homes by themselves; they do not need to be forced to
do anything. These are the kinds of issues that need to
be tackled. We need to work together on improving the
social conditions in which people live.

Instead, international and regional forums are
convened where virtual billions are pledged without
even the representatives of Syria being present. How
is that related to statements made here in the Security
Council that the fate of the Syrian people is in their
own hands? Many of us are giving serious thought
to the post-conflict future of Syria and the return of
internally displaced persons and refugees. That would
be the most meaningful and important response to the
terrorists' acivities.

But to exclude Damascus and the representatives
of the Syrian Arab Republic from this process is
unprofessional, unacceptable, unethical and arrogant.
A political settlement is the only way to restore peace
in Syria and to ease the tensions in the Middle East
through Syria and a political improvement in that
country. That is the path towards normalizing the
situation in many countries of the Middle East. We have
an opportunity to make Syria a model of cooperation
towards a settlement, but destructive geopolitical
projects will not contribute to that. We will not give
them a free pass in the Security Council.

