Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): Ijoin my
colleagues in offering my condolences to the people
and authorities of Haiti. We must now mobilize to
provide the Haitian people with all the help they need.
France has already done so from the French West
Indies and the metropolitan territory.

I also express my condolences to the Secretary-
General for the loss of the Secretariat personnel among
the victims of the earthquake, and to the troop-
contributing countries for the soldiers of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti who remain
unaccounted for. I am aware that there are a number of
Chinese soldiers among them.

I should like to thank you, Sir, for organizing this
debate on a subject of great importance to France. As
has been said, cooperation in matters of peace and
security between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations is provided for under
Chapter VIII of the Charter. Such cooperation also
aligns with the interests of the United Nations and the
regional organizations alike. On the one hand, the
operations of regional and subregional organizations
need the essential political and legal legitimacy that is
conferred by the Security Council's mandates. On the
other hand, the United Nations can benefit from the
operational expertise and means of regional
organizations, particularly at a time when the gravity
and number of conflicts worldwide requires the
mobilization of all available resources. That is true at
every stage of crisis management and prevention, early
warning, peacekeeping and peacebuilding.

Among the regional organizations, the European
Union stands out by virtue of its highly developed
cooperation with the United Nations. It is well known
that the European Union has a security and defence
mandate to participate in peace and security initiatives
in Europe and beyond. We have operational capacities
that enable us to support the United Nations and to
participate in several concurrent operations in different
theatres. At the political level, members of the
European Union share a common commitment to the
United Nations Charter.

It is hardly surprising, therefore, that today i as
the representative of the European Union noted - that
organization is one of the principal contributors to
world peace and security within the framework defined
by the United Nations Charter. On all continents, the
European Union demonstrates that the European
enterprise is not only in the interests of its citizens, but
that it is also a new way to express the values of our
continent throughout the world.

In addition to the central role of the European
Union, I should also like to emphasize the role of the
African Union in the maintenance of peace and
security in Africa within the framework of United
Nations resolutions, be it in the context of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur or
of missions authorized by the Security Council, such as
the African Union Mission in Somalia. At the bilateral
level, the European Union also supports the
strengthening of the capacities of the African Union
and subregional African organizations, particularly the
Economic Community of West African States, in the
field of peace and security. The European Union assists
African Union peacekeeping missions through its
African Peacekeeping Facility.

Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations is therefore
growing. It fills a very obvious need. Because its
legitimacy is based on the United Nations Charter, such
cooperation under Security Council auspices
presupposes respect for the values of our Organization,
in particular international humanitarian law.

Naturally, we lend our full support to the draft
presidential statements before us on the subject of
today's debate and on the situation in Haiti.

