Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union. The
countries of Central and Eastern Europe associated
with the European Union - Bulgaria, the Czech
Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland,
Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia - the associated
countries Cyprus, Malta and Turkey, and the European
Free Trade Association country belonging to the
European Economic Area Iceland align themselves
with this statement.

Today the Ministers of Foreign Affairs of the
European Union are holding a special meeting in
Luxembourg to discuss the tragic situation in the
Middle East.

Since the Security Council public meeting that
took place last Friday night, the situation of terror and
violence on the ground has escalated further. The
European Union is dismayed at this seemingly
unending spiral of death, destruction, revenge and
reprisal. We reiterate our urgent call on both sides to
take immediate and effective action to stop the
bloodshed. Terror and violence must stop. The
Palestinian Authority and the Israeli Government must
prove their leadership and assume their responsibilities
with respect to their own peoples. Months and years of
violence should have taught us that we cannot conceive
of a military solution to this conflict.

We reiterate that there is no military solution to
this conflict. The language and the logic of war have to
stop and be replaced by dialogue and negotiation.
Peace and security for both parties can be achieved
only through negotiation. In this regard, it is essential
to address and implement security, political and
economic measures in parallel and simultaneously in a
single process.

The European Union warmly welcomes the
adoption of Security Council resolution 1402 (2002),
which reflects the grave concern and the strong
commitment of the international community.
Resolutions 1397 (2002) and 1402 (2002) must both be
implemented immediately, in particular the demand for
an immediate cessation of violence, including acts of
terror, provocation, incitement and destruction; the call
for both parties to move immediately to a meaningful
ceasefire; the call for the withdrawal of Israeli troops
from Palestinian cities, including Ramallah; and the
call for the parties to cooperate fully with Special
Envoy Zinni and others to implement the Tenet work
plan and the Mitchell report's recommendations, with
the aim of resuming negotiations on a political
settlement.

The European Union wishes to recall the common
understanding of the Security Council members that
operative paragraph 1 of resolution 1402 (2002) does
not indicate - I repeat, does not indicate - any
sequence of the elements listed, as stated by the
Council President.

The European Union condemns in the most
categorical terms the latest terrorist attacks and
reiterates its demands to the Palestinian Authority and
to its President, Mr. Arafat, to adopt all possible
measures to stop the cycle of violence, to dismantle all
terrorist networks and to ensure that initiators and
perpetrators of the attacks of recent days do not go
unpunished. However, the legitimate fight of Israel
against terrorism and its reaction to the brutal attacks
also have to be compatible with the effective operating
capacity of the Palestinian Authority and of its
President, legitimate representatives of the Palestinian
people. This capacity should in no way be weakened.

Therefore, the European Union urges an end to
the occupation of the headquarters of the Palestinian
Authority in Ramallah and to the isolation and
restriction of movement of President Arafat, and calls
for the immediate withdrawal of the Israeli Defence
Forces from that city and from other areas under the
control of the Palestinian Authority. Closures and other
restrictions must be lifted immediately. There is
nothing to be gained by destroying the Palestinian
Authority. Peace cannot be achieved by ignoring or
continually humiliating one's opponent, or simply
hoping to destroy him.

Israel, notwithstanding its right to fight terrorism,
must respect international law. The practice of
extrajudicial killings is contrary to international law.
The use of excessive force cannot be justified. The
actions against medical and humanitarian institutions
and personnel are absolutely unacceptable and contrary
to United Nations conventions and international
humanitarian law. Such personnel must be able to
perform their functions fully. Both parties must respect
international humanitarian standards and protect
civilian lives.

The European Union welcomes the resolution
adopted at the summit of the League of Arab States in
Beirut, which could be a solid basis for progress
towards a political perspective for a fair and
comprehensive peace in the region and the
establishment of normal relations between Israel and
the Arab world, safeguarding the security of all
countries involved and offering them a future of
stability and prosperity.

The European Union is currently in close contact
with the parties, the countries in the region, the United
States, the United Nations and Russia. In order to break
this cycle of unprecedented violence, the "quartet" of
special envoys must be given full access to all parties
to try to help them to achieve an immediate ceasefire.
Diplomat and consular representatives must also have
full access to their own citizens in the territories and be
able to fully perform their tasks.

In the face of escalating violence and mutual
distrust, the European Union remains convinced that an
impartial monitoring mechanism is called for, and we
urge the parties to accept observers. The European
Union and its member States stand ready to participate
in such a monitoring mechanism.

Israel needs recognition of its right to live in
peace within secure boundaries guaranteed by the
international community, in particular the Arab
countries. At the same time the Palestinian people also
need the recognition of their right to live in peace, in a
democratic, viable and independent State of Palestine,
bringing an end to the 1967 occupation. We reaffirm
that a just, lasting and comprehensive solution to the
conflict must be based on Security Council resolutions
242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 1397 (2002) and on the
principles of the Madrid Conference, of Oslo and
subsequent agreements.

