Mr. Motoc (Romania): At the outset, I would like
to associate myself fully with the statement to be made
shortly by Ambassador Ryan of Ireland on behalf of the
European Union.

I would also like to thank Under-Secretary-
General Guehenno for his informative briefing on the
recent, and very serious, ethnically motivated violence
in Kosovo and on the launch of the Kosovo Standards
Implementation Plan.

Romania has condemned in the strongest terms
what happened in Kosovo in the tragic days of 17 to 20
March. Images of people forced out of their homes,
assaulted and murdered, their holy sites burned and
destroyed, just because they belong to a different
ethnicity, do not resonate with rightful aspirations to
prosperity or with the higher values of democracy and
freedom for the whole of the Balkans, and they
certainly do not belong to the Europe of the twenty-
first century.

Once again, we urge all inhabitants of Kosovo
and their political leaders to start healing the wounds
and to think about a future in which such violence is
inconceivable.

Romania would like to commend the men and
women of the Kosovo Force (KFOR) and the law and
order personnel of the United Nations for putting down
the violence, limiting its already serious consequences
and bringing to an end the dangerous course that the
violence had taken. We also welcome the wise manner
in which the Government of Serbia and Montenegro
addressed that painful situation.

We support the strong measures that the
international presence in Kosovo has taken to restore
stability, to enhance the security and the protection of
all communities and of their religious, historical and
cultural sites, to bring to justice the perpetrators of the
organized and targeted violence and to reinforce the
rule of law and public order. In the light of the valuable
though sad lessons we all have learned recently, we
would like those measures to be further pursued -
along with other measures, including increasing the
prerogatives of local government, which is accountable
to the local communities - in order to make lasting
stability possible in Kosovo.

In that respect, we urge the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government to commit themselves
fully and unconditionally to a democratic, tolerant and
multi-ethnic Kosovo, in particular with respect to the
protection and promotion of the rights and freedoms of
the members of all minority communities.

Romania notes with appreciation that the Kosovo
Standards Implementation Plan was finally launched in
Pristina on 31 March, under the auspices of Special
Representative Harri Holkeri and Prime Minister
Bajram Rexhepi. We consider that the Plan, as a
working and guiding document, if genuinely
implemented and adequately reviewed in the light of
recent events, could maximize Kosovo's progress in
achieving the standards.

Romania continues to strongly support the
"standards before status" policy that was devised for
Kosovo in implementation of Council resolution 1244
(1999). At this stage, we consider that standards are the
only sound way towards a stable Kosovo. The
international community has solidly reaffirmed its
commitment to that policy.

I would like to stress once again that the
standards in themselves indisputably constitute values
for all inhabitants of Kosovo. Romania believes, as do
many other countries in South-East Europe, that the
rule of law, tolerance and democracy are not merely
abstract virtues but absolute prerequisites for a stable
and better life. We would like the population of Kosovo
to join us in that belief and to reach out for its place in
Europe.

With respect to standards implementation, which
we note began five years ago, we see in recent events a
powerful reminder of the urgent need for progress. In a
very tragic way, the violence has indicated just how
much remains to be done in Kosovo to ensure that
every person who lives or wishes to return there enjoys
exactly the same rights, freedoms and security.

The recent, cold reality check should further
focus the efforts and cooperation of all concerned. We
are looking especially towards the Provisional
Institutions and Kosovo's political leadership, which
have a direct and democratically confirmed
responsibility to all inhabitants of Kosovo.

In that respect, we also welcome the 2 April open
letter by Kosovo's leaders showing their commitment
and their understanding of the challenges in rebuilding
relations and rebuilding Kosovo. We expect them to
put that commitment into practice strongly and in a
timely fashion in the course of standards
implementation and by taking priority steps to help
Kosovo recover from the recent violence.

Last but certainly not least, I would like to
reiterate Romania's strong support for the work of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo and KFOR as they continue to carry out their
challenging tasks in Kosovo.

