Ms. Bahous (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to thank Peru and you, Mr. President, for ably presiding
over the Security Council this month. I also thank the
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for his briefing this morning.

The Middle East is currently experiencing a most
difficult and complicated phase. At the same time, it is
most urgent to make joint efforts to confront the grave
challenges and conflicts before us. The whirlwind of
conflict and the political and security developments
of these crises are pushing the region towards further
violence and instability. They are rising to dangerous
levels that threaten regional security as well as
international peace and security. Unfortunately, the
division within the Security Council and its inability
to shoulder its responsibilities to bolster security and
stability in the Middle East will further exacerbate
current conflicts and undermine prospects for their
political and diplomatic settlement.

Despite the success achieved in confronting
terrorist groups and undermining their capacities, their
total elimination will require furtherjoint action in the
framework of a common vision and methodology. We
always underscore that peace and stability in the region
hinge on a just settlement of the Palestinian question,
whose centrality we have always reiterated. We call
on the international community to give priority to
reaching a comprehensive solution in accordance with
the resolutions of international legitimacy. Temporary
or piecemeal solutions are no longer sufficient or
acceptable if we wish the Middle East to live in
sustainable security and stability.

The Israeli occupation of Palestinian territories
has caused indescribable suffering for the Palestinian
people, who have suffered from systematic violations
and been denied their legitimate rights for decades.
The occupation fuels violence and hatred and will
undermine the remaining prospects for peace. A just,
comprehensive and lasting peace will be achieved only
when Israel fully withdraws from all the territories
occupied since 1967 and an independent Palestinian
State, with East Jerusalem as its capital, has been
established, in accordance with the relevant resolutions
of international legitimacy and the Arab Peace
Initiative. These are absolute prerequisites, as they can
help to resolve the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

The international consensus on ending the conflict
on the basis of the two-State solution is a reaffirmation
of the fact that these are prerequisites for a true peace.
Peace is a strategic Arab choice that we reiterated
time and again during our chairmanship of the Arab
summit last year, and was also reaffirmed at the most
recent Arab summit, the Jerusalem summit, held in the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. We will continue, along with
our brethren in the State of Palestine and in the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia, which holds the chairmanship of the
current summit, to make every effort to achieve peace
and support all efforts and international initiatives
aimed at saving the two-State solution, as well as to
support our steadfast Palestinian brethren so that they
can enjoy the right to freedom and statehood.

We stress the importance of implementing
the resolutions of the Security Council, especially
resolution 2334 (2016). Their non-implementation
would encourage the occupying Power to continue with
its illegal settlement activities and to avoid shouldering
its obligations in terms ofachieving peace in accordance
with international law. Jordan strongly condemns the
illegitimate and illegal attacks by Israel in the occupied
Palestinian territories, especially its repeated violations
against the Al-Aqsa Mosque and the Al-Haram
Al-Sharif. These provocations are carried out in total
disregard for the sentiments of Muslims. International
law and the relevant United Nations resolutions have
reaffirmed the legal status of East Jerusalem as an
occupied territory and rejected any Israeli measures
aimed at changing its status in any way.

Jerusalem is the key to peace in the region. We
reaffirm its importance for the three monotheistic
religions and the enduring right of Palestinians, Arabs,
Muslims and Christians to the city. We will pursue our
efforts to preserve the historical and legal status of the
holy sites in East Jerusalem, based on the historical
custodianship of the Hashemite Kingdom over them.
This is a historical responsibility that his Majesty King
Abdullah II is honoured to hold.

We also condemn the unjustified violence
carried out by the occupying Power against unarmed
Palestinians, mostly women and children, in the Gaza
Strip recently, in blatant violation of international law
and international humanitarian law, as well as the
relevant United Nations resolutions. The Palestinians
have the right to demonstrate peacefully, and we stress
the Secretary-General's call for an independent and
transparent investigation to be carried out into the
recent events in Gaza.

Peace cannot be achieved through violence,
persecution and oppression. This will only exacerbate
extremism and terrorism in the region and undermine
the prospects for peace and a return to negotiations
between Palestinians and Israelis. Turning a blind
eye to these illegal practices by Israel and its use of
excessive force against civilians would only encourage
the occupying Power to continue to carry out more
oppressive practices against the Palestinian people,
who must be protected against such practices.

Jordan supports the request made by the State of
Palestine to seek full membership status at the United
Nations based on the Palestinian people's right to a State
with a status equal to that of other States Members ofthe
Organization. We urge the international community to
shoulder its full responsibilities to provide the necessary
care to Palestinian refugees and the necessary political
and financial support to the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA), so as to enable it to continue to provide
humanitarian and social services until a just solution
is reached on the basis of General Assembly resolution
194 (III) and the Arab Peace Initiative.

Jordan appreciates the generous financial
contributions made by a number of countries at the
Rome conference and the Arab League summit held
in Al-Dhahran, However, the financial situation of
UNRWA is still of concern to us all. The continued
deficit in its budget will have serious repercussions for
the humanitarian situation and the services provided to
more than 5 million Palestinian refugees if we do not
address the situation in the coming months.

Concerning the Syrian crisis, we reiterate that the
conflict can be resolved only through a political solution,
pursuant to the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex) and resolution 2254 (2015) and on the basis ofthe
principles of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Syria, in a way that meets the aspirations of the Syrian
people. Jordan has supported regional and international
initiatives such as the Astana, Vienna and Sochi talks
in the framework of operationalizing the Geneva track
under the auspices of the United Nations and not as
an alternative to that track. De-escalation agreements
are an excellent opportunity to end the fighting and to
strengthen security in Syria. We stress that the ongoing
violence will move us further away from a political
solution and pave the way for a new wave of internally
displaced persons (IDPs) and refugees. This would also
undermine humanitarian efforts to deliver assistance
to civilians and IDPs in besieged and hard-to-reach
Syrian areas.

The ongoing fighting will also serve terrorist
groups and pave the way for such groups to strengthen
their abilities following the successful efforts made to
undermine their capacities and presence in Syria, Iraq
and the region, which would definitely have dangerous
repercussions for international and regional relations.
We congratulate Iraq on its victories and stress our
support as it complements its political process with the
participation of all segments of the Iraqi population.

Jordan strongly condemns the use of chemical
weapons by any party and stresses the need to carry
out an independent international investigation into the
use of such weapons. The perpetrators must be held
accountable. Resort to such weapons will not serve the
cause of achieving a peaceful resolution of the Syrian
crisis but will only exacerbate the conflict and threaten
the international non-proliferation regime.

In conclusion, the current deterioration of the crises
in the region requires the international community to
take a series of steps and actions to create a political
environment that is conducive to achieving peace in
the region and not based on confessionalism, racial
discrimination or inequality. What is needed is a just
peace that meets the aspirations of the peoples of the
region, especially young people who yearn for security
and stability and represent the largest segment of
our societies.

It is our duty to provide an environment that enables
the current generation to contribute to building and
prosperity of the Middle East and not resort to violent
extremism and terrorism. We have only one option,
namely to take decisive and urgent measures to rebuild
trust and overcome differences. Let us give a serious
chance to just, comprehensive and lasting peace and
intensify our joint diplomatic efforts in that direction.

