Mr. Dj ani (Indonesia): Like other speakers, I would
like to welcome Your Excellency as President of the
Security Council and to thank Kuwait for convening
this very important meeting. I look forward to the
discussion. I would also like to thank Mr. Maurer,
President of the International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC), and Ms. Ghelani, Director for Operations
and Advocacy of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, for their valuable briefings.

Again like others, Indonesia commends Kuwait on
taking up the difficult but essential issue of missing
persons in armed conflict. We also congratulate you,
Mr. President, on the adoption of resolution 2474 (2019)
on the issue of missing persons in armed conflict,
initiated by Kuwait. Indonesia supports the resolution,
and we believe that its implementation will strengthen
efforts towards preventing persons from going missing
as a result of armed conflict and serve to meaningfully
address the situation of such persons. The issue is
indeed an integral part of advancing our efforts to
protect civilians in armed conflict.

Last month, during Indonesia's presidency of the
Security Council, our Minister for Foreign Affairs
presided over the open debate on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict (see S/PV.8534). The
protection of civilians in armed conflict has been an
important part of Indonesia's constitutional mandate
and will continue to be a significant element of our
foreign policy.

The number of missing persons in armed conflict
presented in the report of the Secretary-General on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict (S/2019/373)
is alarming. More than 23,000 requests have been
received by the ICRC in relation to only two armed
conflicts. This morning, as Mr. Maurer also mentioned,
there are a large number of missing persons and in 2018
alone, more than 45,000 new cases were registered.
Once again, that is an alarming number, especially
since, as Mr. Maurer said, that figure is only the tip of
the iceberg. Something must be done in that regard.

While historically conflicts have taken a toll
on civilians, that must not be an accepted fact. In
that context, Indonesia would like to emphasize the
following three pertinent points.

My first point is on the importance of preventing
persons from going missing as a result of armed
conflict. The establishment of information centres for
coordinationandthepoolingofinformationarenecessary
upon the outbreak ofa conflict in order to minimize the
number of missing persons. Concurrently, providing
appropriate training to armed forces, ensuring detainee
registration, producing proper means of identification
and establishing well-functioning processing systems
that involve all the authorities concerned are among the
necessary measures. Prevention should be the priority.

Secondly, the development and upholding of national
laws, along with complying with responsibilities under
the relevant international humanitarian instruments,
are vital. The Geneva Conventions of 1949 and their
Additional Protocols of 1977 are a key part of the legal
framework to safeguard civilians in armed conflict.
Even those countries that are not yet a party to those
instruments should undertake efforts to align with them.
There should not be any doubt. Parties to armed conflict
bear the primary responsibility for taking all necessary
steps to ensure the protection of civilians, including
reducing the number of cases of missing persons.

Thirdly, increased international cooperation and
support are an important way forward to address the
issue. The developments in forensics can lead to the
bolstering of efforts to find and identify missing persons
in armed conflicts. Sharing information and expertise
in the areas of science and modern technology is a
useful way to reduce the number of missing persons.
However, it should be ensured that such support and
cooperation are tailored to respond to the needs of the
country in conflict and are provided at its request.

Last but not least, we fully concur that the issue
of missing persons should feature prominently in
dialogues and peace processes to resolve conflicts from
the outset. We should focus on the humanitarian aspect
in addressing the issue.

Reaffirming Indonesia's support for today's
topic, we hope that our deliberations will contribute
meaningfully to advancing the issue of the protection
of civilians in armed conflict, focusing in particular on
the humanitarian aspect.

