Mr. Dejammet (France) (spoke in French): Allow
me first of all to associate myself with the condolences
expressed by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Namibia
to our friends in Kenya in connection with the recent air
disaster there.

I wish also to express our gratitude to the President
of Zambia and to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
South Africa for having joined us here today.

The very timely debate undertaken at your initiative,
Sir, has enabled us during the past few weeks under your
presidency to combine general deliberations with
deliberations on a number of topics and with the
consideration of several specific situations, in the hope
that by pooling general and specific deliberations we
would be able to agree on concrete action.

On our general deliberations, I believe that taken as
a whole the debate you initiated, Sir, enabled us to
engage in a prioity assessment of the international
community's need to continue to stand by Africa, as was
stressed by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of South
Africa, and to emphasize the need for assistance: official
assistance. Much has been said about progress linked to
globalization and about the merits of growing
international trade as a substitute for official assistance.
But I believe that the facts show that official development
assistance continues to be an absolute necessity; we must
provide such assistance.

Even the quite different, private meeting you
organized, Sir, with Senator Jesse Helms was not without
its usefulness; Senator Helms made reference to the
assistance provided by his country and linked it with
United Nations resolutions, which was a good thing. This
demonstrated that he understands that the United States is
obliged in all respects to implement United Nations
resolutions. But, to cite just one example, the figure for
official development assistance provided by France - a
far less wealthy country than the United States - is
virtually identical to the total figure mentioned by Senator
Helms. This, I believe, shows that a great deal still
remains to be done and that everyone must make an effort
to come closer to the percentages agreed upon by the
United Nations and the international community for
official development assistance.
 

There must be assistance, as a priority, for Africa. We
must acknowledge that, at the origin of so many
difficulties, crises and conflicts, there lies the problem of
poverty and destitution.

There must be assistance for refugees and displaced
persons. Here, Mrs. Ogata's statement was of great interest.
She proved that she knew how to be flexible with respect
to the statute of her Office and to provide assistance to
displaced persons, not solely to refugees. You too, Mr.
President, have focused the Council's attention on this
matter in a most useful way. Clearly, in the face of
situations such as those in Angola and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, it is imperative that we find the
means to help internally displaced persons, as well as
refugees - irrespective of administrative, technical and
constitutional issues. In that connection, your comments,
Sir, and those of Mrs. Ogata were most welcome.

There must be assistance to combat the AIDS
epidemic, a scourge which has been shown to be one cause
of instability and crisis in Africa. Here, let me mention one
argument developed by a number of delegations during the
debate: preventive measures are not enough; it is necessary
also to treat the sick and work to restore them to an
adequate state of health. Otherwise, our efforts will be
marked by striking inequality, with prevention in the
countries of the South and treatment in the countries of the
North: an inequality favouring AIDS patients in the
countries of the North and marked by a discontinuity
between the two approaches. I stress that we must convene
a conference making it possible for the countries of the
South to have access to medicine and treatment on
affordable terms.

There must, of course, be assistance to help African
countries to restore peace, including by means of
peacekeeping operations. As Ms. Frechette rightly noted,
Mozambique is a very good example, where there has not
been a failure. There are a number of other examples that
could be cautiously mentioned as well, including what the
United Nations has done in the Central African Republic,
which has made possible a degree of stabilization sufficient
to allow elections to be held in acceptable conditions. But
a United Nations operation was required for this to take
place.

Let me also note the success of United Nations action
in Guinea-Bissau. To be sure, it took place far from the
television cameras and was carried out with great
discretion. I believe that the Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Samuel C. Nana-Sinkam, did good
work in ensuring that the elections could take place in an
entirely democratic manner and that good relations could
be restored between Guinea-Bissau and its neighbours -
all, I repeat, thanks to the assistance which was provided
at very low cost by the Representative of the Secretary-
General; thus, by the Secretary-General and, hence, by the
United Nations. This shows that the United Nations can
indeed do useful work in Africa, and at low cost.

Those are all reasons why the Council's general
deliberations were of great interest.

I turn now to the crisis situations of which we are so
well aware. With respect to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, the appearance in New York of all the heads
of State who signed the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement was
extremely useful. We heard from them a reaffirmation of
their commitment to respect and implement the
Agreement, as well as their unanimous wish to see the
speedy deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping
operation. That was important. The meeting also provided
an opportunity for exchanges between the heads of State
who are signatories to the Agreement and the Secretary-
General, with a View to obtaining clarification from the
Secretariat about what the Organization can do - and
wants to do - to support the peace process.

Now the ball is back in the court of the Security
Council. We are going to have to act. We are going to
have to rapidly adopt the draft resolution expanding the
mandate and increasing the staffing of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUC), on the basis of the recommendations
of the Secretary-General. We are going to have to provide
the United Nations with the necessary resources - that
is, we will have to pay the contributions that will be
required and to provide the personnel and logistic support.
We will have to lend our support to the national dialogue.
We will have to keep in mind the next stage of the
peacekeeping operation, to which we committed ourselves
in the presidential statement of 26 January - and there
will be a next stage. This will involve considering very
seriously the possibility of securing the borders of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo with Uganda, Rwanda
and Burundi. This would be in the context of responding
to the legitimate security needs of all these countries.

It will be necessary, finally, to take steps to ensure
that all the parties respect their commitments and
implement the Agreement in good faith. As several
Council members have suggested, we must also concern
ourselves with the question of the illegal exploitation -

 

with the theft, we could say - of the natural resources of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, an illegal
exploitation which could be both a purpose of and a means
for the occupation of part of the territory of this country by
foreign forces. This is an aspect of the situation that we
must think about.

Finally, we must support the holding of the
international conference on peace, security, democracy and
development in the Great Lakes region, a conference that
has been endorsed by many Council members, even here
this morning, as has been noted by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Namibia. The goal is an international conference.
It was the brainchild of the Organization of African Unity
(OAU), but it must be jointly organized under the aegis of
both the United Nations and the OAU in order to involve
the entire international community in all the issues, in
particular the issue of aid. This conference project -
which, again, was initiated in 1994 by the OAU - has
increased in importance over time. We must now try to
make the conference a practical reality.

Burundi is another regional situation that has rightfully
drawn our attention. This situation can change and has in
fact already changed for the better, thanks to President
Mandela taking charge and thanks to his authority. We
must give him not only our political support but also our
financial support. But let us keep in mind that the situation
in Burundi is not good. We must not add to the political
and security problems facing the country additional
problems related to the precariousness of the country's
economic situation - a situation that is steadily worsening
and that may well, in turn, give rise to extremists of all
sorts. Given this situation, we definitely must both be firm
on the principles - commitment to the peace process, to
the ceasefire and to ceasing to put population groups in
camps - and at the same time provide international
economic aid to Burundi, in order to help its very poor
people. Let us not ignore this need to mix firmness on
principles with aid to the people of this country.

As regards Angola, we must continue to support the
Lusaka Protocol and the resolutions of the Security Council,
in particular those that concern the strict application of the
sanctions against UNITA. We must oversee the progress of
the establishment of rule of law and of respect for
international humanitarian law. We will say more about this
soon, during the meetings to be devoted to considering
sanctions.

With regard to Sierra Leone, we must as soon as
possible adopt the draft resolution that would expand the
mandate of the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL) and increase its staffing to 11,000 people, so
as to reinforce the still-fragile implementation of the
Lome Peace Agreement.
Finally, as regards the problem between Ethiopia and
Eritrea - no matter how very sensitive this problem may
be, and while we embrace the virtues of discretion and of
silent diplomacy - we cannot ignore this conflict, which
has already resulted in several tens of thousands of
deaths. The Council must therefore be prepared -
intellectually at least - to give, at the appropriate time,
its concrete support to resolving this conflict.

We might say the same thing about the situation in
Somalia. As soon as the proposals of President Guelleh of
Djibouti are formalized, it will be useful for the Council
to apply all its weight to obtaining the implementation of
these proposals by all the parties concerned.

There you have, Sir, in a few words, what seemed
to us useful to say once more in the context of thanking
you for having devoted the greater part of the Security
Council's efforts during your presidency to Africa. In this
way, you have shown the commitment of your country to
work with others on Africa. We thank you for this, and
we invite the upcoming Argentine presidency to make
February another "month of Africa", because the subjects
that we have dealt with remain extremely important. It is
up to Argentina to take and transform the ball that has
been passed to it by this excellent player of American
football, Mr. Holbrooke.

