Mr. Singer Weisinger ((Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank Mr. Jean-
Pierre Lacroix for his detailed briefing on the progress
and latest developments in Haiti. We appreciate the
presence of Her Excellency Ms. Mona Juul, President
of the Economic and Social Council, and welcome
Ambassador Meza-Cuadra.

I would like to begin by expressing our hope that
this meeting will allow us to join forces and make
firm commitments with the common objective of
supporting the legitimate authorities of the Republic
of Haiti in their efforts towards democratic stability
and development. In particular, we trust that we will
move forward on measures to address the humanitarian
needs of the population and support the institutional
framework of the country.

This is the first time since 2004 that Haiti will
not have a peacekeeping mission. We congratulate the
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
on its work during the years of its deployment and
commend its efforts to ensure a successful transition.

In order to ensure that it meets its goals and
contributes to stability in the Republic of Haiti, the
political mission to be deployed must have our full
support, backing and resources. Haiti is at a crucial
juncture today and the Haitian State needs our
collective assistance in order to move forward. Various
challenges, ranging from the worsening economic
situation and food insecurity to the adverse effects of
climate change and the high levels of violence, continue
to be of concern. All that could derail the efforts under
way to achieve peacebuilding and stabilization.

It is essential to take into account the security
conditions and Haiti's ability to ensure stability on its
territory; hence, the importance of the efforts being
made to strengthen the response capacity of the Haitian
National Police through an increase in its personnel,
training on human rights and crowd control and
appropriate equipment so as to enable it to maintain
public order and respond to group and gang violence.

In that regard, we are optimistic about initiatives
such as the community violence reduction programme,
which has been successfully implemented. That is
an example of the impact of those initiatives on such
important areas as the strengthening of the rule of law
and the protection of human rights at the community
level. However, for such efforts to be successful, it is
necessary to deal with other fundamental issues, such
as the economic situation, which is becoming more
complex every day.

In that regard, we encourage all key actors in Haitian
public life to participate without delay in an inclusive
and good-faith dialogue that strengthens institutions,
overcomes individual interests and fully benefits the
Haitian people. Likewise, we call on the international
community to join those efforts and support national
initiatives to promote stability and development.

The humanitarian situation continues to be fragile
and is affected by the unpredictable weather in the
country, exacerbated by climatic phenomena such as
drought, which has weakened the ability of the most
vulnerable to meet their basic needs, for example food,
water and health-care services.

Given the existing challenges, there is a need for
an in-depth review of the appropriate strategies to
assist the Haitian people, as well as close cooperation
between the Government and its partners, in order to
achieve the successful transition to a new stage in the
United Nations presence in the country.

We wish to conclude this statement by appealing to
the international community to stand with the Haitian
people and to support the efforts of the Secretary-
General and his representatives in the country in pursuit
of stability and sustainable development of Haiti.

