Ms. Leskovar (Slovenia): Allow me at the outset
to thank France for having organized this open debate
on protection of civilians. I would also like to thank
Under-Secretaries-General Amos and Le Roy and
Assistant Secretary-General Simonovie for their
important contributions to today's discussion.

Slovenia fully aligns itself with the statements
delivered by the Acting Head of the Delegation of the
European Union and by the representative of
Switzerland on behalf of the Human Security Network.

The situation of civilians in armed conflicts
around the world remains alarming. Civilians continue
to account for the majority of casualties in conflicts
and are often the deliberate targets of different forms of
violence by all parties to conflict. Special attention
should be paid to the most vulnerable groups, in
particular women and children.

The issue of the protection of civilians is gaining
importance in this Chamber. In November 2009, the
Council took an important step forward with the
adoption of resolution 1894 (2009) and introduced new
provisions that focus on humanitarian access, the
implementation of protection measures in
peacekeeping operations, and monitoring and
reporting. We welcome the informal consultations of
the Security Council on the broader issue of
protections of civilians that took place in February
under the Brazilian presidency.

The Security Council's activities in protecting
civilians have been of particular relevance over the
past few months, particularly with the adoption of
resolutions on Libya and Cote d'Ivoire. The Council
proved that it can act both timely and decisively in
order to protect civilians. We welcome the fact that the
Council has started to address concerns with respect to
the protection of civilians more systematically, and we
call upon it to continue to address these concerns
consistently in its country-specific resolutions and
presidential statements.

As we have emphasized in our previous
statements in this Council, impunity represents one of
the major obstacles to the prevention of grave and
systematic violations committed against civilians in
armed conflict on the ground. All parties to conflict,
including non-State actors, must comply with
international humanitarian, human rights and refugee
law. Ending impunity is essential if war-torn societies
are to recover from conflict and to prevent any future
human rights abuses. That is why we believe that the
Council should also be sensitive to the issue of
accountability when discussing country situations on
its agenda.

In that context, we stand firm on the position that
there can be no sustainable peace without justice. We
therefore welcome the fact that resolution 1970 (2011)
on Libya also contains a reference to the International
Criminal Court (ICC). The systematic fight against
impunity for grave crimes committed predominantly
against civilians started with the establishment of
international tribunals, such as the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, and later
on the ICC. In our opinion, the support of the
international community and of individual States for
those tribunals is of vital importance. Equally
important is the cooperation of States with them.
Slovenia reiterates its support for all international
criminal tribunals, especially the ICC.

Situation-specific resolutions have increasingly
called for protection to be prioritized in the
implementation of peacekeeping mandates. We
particularly welcome the development of
comprehensive strategies on the protection of civilians,
which assist missions in understanding the relevant
threats facing civilians in their areas of operation and
enable them to better channel their efforts towards
addressing them. Special attention should be given to
including appropriate wording on sexual and gender-
based violence when formulating peacekeeping
mandates, given the ongoing reports of mass rapes and
similar crimes from conflict zones. It is essential that
the Council provide peacekeeping missions with clear
mandates and appropriate resources to enable
peacekeepers to implement their mandate fully.
The impact of explosive weapons on civilians,
particularly in densely populated areas, remains a
concern. They cause severe harm to individuals and
communities and increase suffering by damaging vital
infrastructure. They continue to constitute an obstacle
to the return of refugees and displaced persons,
humanitarian aid operations, reconstruction and
economic development, as well as the restoration of
normal social conditions, and have serious and lasting
social and economic consequences for populations.
Here, I wish to emphasize that my country implements
various projects in the field of mine action carried out
by the International Trust Fund for Demining and Mine
Victims Assistance in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
established by the Slovenian Government.

Let me conclude by stressing that the continuous
support and engagement of the Council are crucial to
the protection of civilians on the ground. The Council
has recently demonstrated its willingness to act swiftly
and decisively, together with relevant regional
organizations, in responding to disproportionate attacks
on civilians. Future efforts should seek the
consolidation of such determination and of applicable
international law into effective action on the ground.

