Mr. Hermida Castillo (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish): We congratulate you, Madam, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. We welcome the convening of this debate
on the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.

Nicaragua endorses the statement made by the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and that made
by Ambassador Neville Gertze of Namibia on behalf of
the United Nations Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.

The Government and the people of the Republic
of Nicaragua reaffirm its call for peace, solidarity
and mutual respect among peoples and for a peaceful
solution to disputes.

Nicaragua expresses its full solidarity with the
State of Palestine. We believe that a just and lasting
solution to the Palestinian question is key for peace and
stability in the Middle East. That peace and stability
will come about only through the full implementation
of General Assembly and Security Council resolutions
on Palestine.

We must make particular mention of the urgent
need to implement Security Council resolution 2334
(2016) in order to ensure the viability of the two-
State solution, which, after 70 years, would ultimately
restore the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people.
Nicaragua supports the two-State solution, with the
State oflsrael and the State of Palestine within the 1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital.

We hope that through dialogue, negotiation and
continuing efforts to seek a peaceful political solution,
and with the good faith of both parties, both peoples
can live in lasting peace, given that both States and
their peoples have the same right to peace, security and
sustainable development.

At this time, as we press ahead with the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the achievement of the Sustainable
Development Goals, Palestine has the same right as
everyone else to live in peace and receive assistance
for development, cooperation and investments in order
to ensure sustainable development. In our struggle for
global peace, which is the unswerving commitment of
the people and Government of Nicaragua, the solution
to the Palestinian question, in accordance with United
Nation resolutions, holds a special place.

In conclusion, we believe that peace in the Middle
East entails resolving the Palestinian question,
including the withdrawal of Israel from Lebanon, the
Syrian Golan and, in short, from all occupied Arab
territories. Similarly, it is essential to put an end to
foreign interference and intervention in the region and,
finally, to achieve peace and security in the Middle
East for all peoples of the region.

