Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): As always, we thank Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, for his very comprehensive and clear
briefing this morning. In the two years in which we have
seen his and his team's work close up, we have noted
their tremendous dedication, honesty and commitment,
all very praiseworthy qualities. We encourage them to
continue on that path in order to facilitate the Council's
work concerning the region. We also thank Ms. Raemer
for her briefing.

We welcome the fact that consideration is being
given to the request that many members have frequently
made to have the reports on the implementation
of resolution 2334 (2016), as well as other reports
submitted to the Council on other items on its agenda,
distributed in written form before the relevant meetings,
in order to avoid the possibility of mistaken analyses.
Assuming no emergency situations arise during
the remainder of this month, I think this will be my
delegation's last statement on the question of Palestine.
I would therefore like to take this opportunity to once
again express our deep concern about the fact that no
visible progress has been achieved over the past two
years either in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict or in the
relationship between the main Palestinian factions.
When Equatorial Guinea began its term on the Security
Council in January of last year, resolution 2334 (2016)
had reached its one-year anniversary. At the time, there
was no sign of any meaningful improvement regarding
the resolution's demands, and today, three years on,
almost nothing has changed.

According to the report before us (S/2019/938),
the situation on the ground has only deteriorated
over the past three years. Settlements have expanded
significantly, demolitions have accelerated and
violence and incitements to violence also persist. We
note that the situation has continued to contribute to the
tension between the parties, endangering the lives of
Israelis and Palestinians and compounding the severe
socioeconomic destabilization in the Gaza Strip. As a
country that has friendly relations with both Israel and
Palestine, and in accordance with international law,
Equatorial Guinea considers the settlement activities
to be an obstacle to peace, and their expansion is a
categorical threat to the physical viability of a two-
State solution. We therefore urge the Government of
Israel, in line with its stated aim and desire to seek a
resolution to the conflict, to relax its policies in the
occupied Palestinian territories, including by ending its
demolition of Palestinians' homes and property and all
of its settlement activities in general. We nevertheless
also recognize Israel's right to legitimate self-defence.

As we all know, most of the Israeli attacks on
Gaza, while they are sometimes disproportionate,
are responses to insurgent acts from within the Gaza
Strip itself. As the largest Palestinian force in the area,
Hamas must abandon its path of arms and terror and
instead work diligently to prevent any provocations or
attacks aimed at civilian areas in Israel. Those attacks,
and the unacceptable exchanges of years past, are the
main causes of the insecurity, lack of services and all
the socioeconomic inequalities facing the inhabitants of
the region today. In that regard, we urge the Palestinian
political elite to work seriously on a strong, definitive
Palestinian reconciliation that prioritizes the interests
of all of its people rather than those of individual
factions. Palestine needs to be united and to address
issues that will enable its people to live dignified and
safe lives, as well as ensure prosperity for current
and future generations. In that regard, we support the
efforts of Egypt, which to date has continued to work
with the parties.

As I did in January (see S/PV.8449), I would like to
remind the parties that there have been difficult periods
in the history of their conflict, including very bloody
and destructive events, and yet despite that, Israel has
not achieved the security it seeks, nor has a Palestinian
State been established that is recognized by Israel and
the international community. Violence is therefore not
the best option for resolving this conflict, nor will it
ever be. We believe that both parties have the right to
live in peace and security.

I would like to conclude by reaffirming the position
of Equatorial Guinea, which, in line with the United
Nations resolutions and other international instruments
in force, supports a two-State solution based on the
1967 borders, with Jerusalem as the capital of both
States, based entirely on negotiations between the
parties and ensuring their safe and friendly coexistence
in harmony with the other countries of the region.

