Mr. Duque Estrada Meyer (Brazil): We thank
the Secretary-General for his report (S/2017/939)
and briefing, and extend our appreciation to all the
other briefers.

Human trafficking is among the most despicable
crimes known to humankind, as it affects those most
vulnerable. This debate is an opportunity to renew our
political commitment to eradicating human trafficking,
while recognizing the multifaceted nature of the
problem. Brazil reaffirms the importance of prevention
and the provision of assistance to victims, alongside
enforcement actions.

We cannot shy away from acknowledging that
long-term solutions will arise only from multilateral
approaches to peace and security that tackle the
underlying causes of conflicts and firmly set dialogue
and mediation as priorities. More often than not,
military intervention leads to increased civilian
suffering and vulnerability.

Brazil supports every effort aimed at recovering
the dignity of the victims and ensuring that they have
access to justice. Closer cooperation among States and
international agencies can help rescue victims and
put in place measures to bring the perpetrators of this
serious crime to justice. Advancing the universality of
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
would also contribute to ensuring accountability for
those responsible for these crimes in the context of an
armed conflict.

It should be clear that terrorism and transnational
organized crime are different problems, requiring
different remedies. An interrelationship between these
phenomena might arise in specific circumstances, but
should in no way be deemed universal. It is critical to
pay attention to the forum in which these issues are
primarily discussed.

While human trafficking may occur in some
scenarios plagued by armed conflict, there are
no intrinsic or automatic linkages between these
phenomena. Human trafficking also takes place in
situations that are not related to threats to international
peace and security, such as displacements following
natural disasters.

If the scourge of human trafficking is to be
effectively addressed by the United Nations, the
Security Council should be mindful of the mandate and
technical expertise of the General Assembly, the Human
Rights Council and the Peacebuilding Commission,
as well as of the role of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime in this regard.

Individuals crossing borders are especially
vulnerable to human traffickers. The international
community has a responsibility to resolve the refugee
crisis. It is not coherent to defend the responsibility to
protect and the protection of civilians, while turning
our backs on those fleeing conflict and persecution.
Brazil is proud to welcome Syrian refugees through the
issuance of humanitarian visas.

Brazil reiterates that the criminalization of
irregular migration is unacceptable, since it ultimately
strengthens human trafficking and leads to the disrespect
of the fundamental rights of migrants. It is critical not
to confuse the criminalization of the trafficking of
persons with the criminalization of migration in and of
itself. Our actions should aim at protecting the rights of
and providing assistance to those people who are forced

to leave their homes and fall prey to human traffickers,
and not to victimize them yet again.

The Brazilian experience of granting humanitarian
visas to Haitians since 2012 has shown that one of the
most effective means of dismantling criminal human
trafficking networks is to provide regular and safe
ways of entry for those forced to move. It is also worth
mentioning that, last year, Brazil adopted a new national
law on human trafficking that includes strengthened
measures aimed at providing protection and assistance
to the victims. It sets forth more severe penalties for the
perpetrators of the crime and provides the possibility of
issuing residence permit to the victims.

Let us all work together to ensure that human
trafficking is brought to a definitive end, keeping ever
in mind the best interests and dignity of the victims.

