Mr. Thanarajasingam (Malaysia): My delegation
would like to express its appreciation to you, Mr. President,
for convening this meeting on the situation in Lebanon.

We note that the Permanent Representative of
Lebanon, as reflected in document S/ 1996/280, requested
that the Council convene an urgent meeting on the
afternoon of Sunday, 14 April, given the grave
developments in his country.

Speaking during the debate on Palestine held earlier
today, the Malaysian representative referred to the
worsening situation in the Middle East. He stated that the
combined effect of Israeli action in Palestine and Lebanon
at a time of political volatility in Israel itself had reinforced
the position of those exploiters in Israel who want to derail
the peace process, and of extremists outside Israel who
would like to undermine the fragile foundations of peace in
the Middle East.

The latest series of Israeli attacks, which began last
Thursday, have continued to escalate, threatening the
peace process. The large-scale Israeli bombardment of
many towns and villages in Lebanon, including its capital,
Beirut, has resulted in an alarming number of civilian
dead and wounded, thousands of displaced persons and
severe damage to property. These acts of aggression
cannot but be condemned. It is thus incumbent on the
Council, as a first step, to call for an immediate and
unconditional end to these acts of aggression against
Lebanon.
These attacks have driven hundreds of thousands of
innocent people from their homes to take to the refugee
path. In turn, the refugee problem has begun to pose
serious challenges to the Lebanese Government, which
has in recent years made important strides in rebuilding
the country's economy and stability. The deliberate
attempt to displace innocent people and wilfully create
suffering for them cannot be condoned. In this regard, the
international community must play its role in addressing
the plight and problem of the refugees as well.

The Israeli occupation of southern Lebanon not only
violates the sovereignty of Lebanon but is becoming
militarily indefensible. The way to protect Israeli security
is through a political compact with neighbours, and the
integrity of Lebanon must be part of that compact. The
military occupation of southern Lebanon by force cannot
guarantee lasting peace and security. In the end, as
leaders such as the late Israeli leader Rabin and the
Palestinian leader Arafat realized, only genuine peace can
promote and eventually safeguard security, stability and
development in the region.

Malaysia fully supports the following five requests,
made earlier to this Council by the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon.

First, Israel must stop immediately its aggression
against Lebanon and withdraw all its reinforcements.

Secondly, the Israeli aggression against Lebanon
must be condemned.

Thirdly, Israel must immediately comply with and
fully implement Security Council resolution 425 (1978).

Fourthly, assistance must be provided for Lebanon
and its people to overcome the suffering and casualties
resulting from the Israeli aggression.

 

Fifthly, the Council must remain seized of this issue.

In conclusion, I wish to underline the need for a
comprehensive, durable and peaceful solution to the Middle
East situation, one that is just and fair and built on the
relevant resolutions of the United Nations.

