Mr. Radomski (Poland): Let me start by expressing
our gratitude to Mr. Francois Lounceny Fall, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA), and Ms. Reena Ghelani, Director for
Operations and Advocacy of the United Nations Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, for their
comprehensive and informative briefings.

Central Africa continues to face serious political
and security challenges; however, we have noted
some positive developments towards the consolidation
of democratic governance. As electoral processes
dominate the political agenda in the region, we
commend the fact that several of them took place
without major incidents. Nevertheless, further steps
towards consolidating stability are needed. Building
trust among all the stakeholders remains an essential
precondition for the establishment of a stable and
constructive political environment.

We praise the important work carried out
by UNOCA in terms of good offices, preventive
diplomacy and mediation, as well as in support of
the United Nations and regional initiatives to achieve
peace and security in the region. At the same time, we
remain concerned about the human rights situation in
some countries of the subregion. Poland calls on the
authorities of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Burundi to take immediate steps to prevent further
violations and abuses in that regard and to ensure
respect for the fundamental freedoms for all citizens.
We also appeal to the authorities of Cameroon to take
the necessary mediation efforts aimed at a peaceful
resolution of the crisis in the South-West and North-
West Anglophone regions.

The security situation in Central Africa remains
complex and fragile. Many sources of instability
persist, including cross-border threats such as illicit
trafficking in wildlife and natural resources, as well as
violent conflicts between herders and farmers. Climate
change is a root cause of conflicts and a threat multiplier
in Central Africa. We must emphasize adaptation to
climate change and at the same time work to strengthen
countries' resilience to such threats.

Acts of terrorism and violent extremism also
continue to hamper socioeconomic development.
We are concerned about the fact that Boko Haram
and the Lord's Resistance Army continue to pose a
serious threat to security across significant parts of the
region. Poland condemns all acts of violence by those
groups, including attacks on civilians, the recruitment
of children and sexual and gender-based violence. In
that context, we welcome the African Union Peace and
Security Council's decision to maintain its regional
cooperation initiative for eliminating the Lord's
Resistance Army, and hope that it will obtain renewed
support from other international partners. It is important
that the underlying causes of these problems receive an
urgent and consistent response, especially through the
promotion of good governance and economic reforms,
since the unstable situations in some States of Central
Africa are the main cause of the humanitarian crisis
that persists throughout the region.

In conclusion, Poland fully supports the actions
undertaken by the United Nation and the European
Union in Central Africa. At the same time, we recognize
the key role of the relevant regional partners and
organizations and commend their efforts to address the
challenges to peace and security and enhance regional
cooperation. I also want to express our full support to
Special Representative Fall and the staff of UNOCA.
We are grateful for their continuing efforts to advance
peace and security in Central Africa.

