Mr. Argiiello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Following the Annapolis summit of last November, the
peace process between Israel and the Palestine
Authority gained new impetus in defining the final
goal of the peace process and the path that the parties
should follow to reach it.

However, the expansion of Israeli settlements in
the occupied territories, the policy of restriction on
movement of Palestinians in the West Bank, the
ongoing building of the wall of separation within the
boundaries of the Green Line, the closure of the border
crossings to Gaza, which has created an alarming
humanitarian situation, and continuous Palestinian
terrorist attacks in Jerusalem are impeding the trust
that is necessary between the parties to reach a peace
agreement.

The resolve of Israeli and Palestine Authority
leaders to reach a possible peace agreement, which was
demonstrated this month in Paris during the Union for
the Mediterranean summit, gives us hope for the
future. We remain convinced that a lasting peace
cannot be achieved without negotiations between
Israel, Syria and Lebanon. That is why we welcome the
beginning of proximity peace talks between Syria and
Israel under the auspices of Turkey.

At the same time, we welcome the
re-establishment of diplomatic relations between Syria
and Lebanon. We also believe that another step forward
is the Doha agreement, which facilitated the election of
the Lebanese President and the establishment of a unity
cabinet. All of that is necessary to ensure the authority
of the Lebanese State over all its territory. That is why
we stress compliance by all States of the region with
the provisions of 1701 (2006), which establishes an
3
arms embargo on and the disarming of Lebanese
militias.

The Argentine Republic will not tolerate the
activities of terrorists or those who harbour them. We
therefore call on the Special Tribunal for Lebanon to
begin its work as soon as possible so as to ensure that
the perpetrators of the assassination of former Prime
Minister Hariri do not go unpunished, because we
believe that there can be no lasting peace without a
foundation of justice.

We reiterate the commitment of the Argentine
Government to a fair and lasting peace in the Middle
East on the basis of Security Council resolutions, the
reactivation of the regional dimension of the peace
process, the elements of the road map and the new
dynamism generated by the Annapolis Conference.

