Ms. King (Australia): I wish to thank you, Sir, for
presiding over today's debate. Your presence here today
is a clear reflection of your Government's commitment
to peace and security in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. I would also like to thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Kobler, Special Envoy
Robinson and Minister Lourenco for their briefings
and acknowledge Angola's crucial role as Chair of the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
(ICGLR). I wish also to acknowledge the presence
in the Chamber of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO) Force Commander, General dos
Santos Cruz.

The participation of ministers from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the region underlines the
importance of reinvigorating the momentum and
political will needed to definitively break the cycle of
violence in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The conflict's staggering toll is a searing reminder
ofthe stakes involved: over 5 million lives lost, millions
displaced and horrific human rights abuses perpetrated
with impunity against men, women and children.

We have seen some promising signs of progress:
the defeat of the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23); the
weakening of the Allied Democratic Forces; and
important strides made by the Democratic Republic of
the Congo with the passage of the amnesty law, ongoing
police reforms and steps to re-establish State authority
in areas formerly controlled by armed groups.

But we know all too well that these gains are
fragile and reversible, as Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Kobler has reminded us this
morning. A myriad of armed groups still operate in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Civilians continue to face horrific acts of violence, as
the recent massacre in Mutarule and the instability in
Katanga testify, and the pace of key reforms is far too
slow.

I would like to focus on three areas where urgent
progress is crucial if the elusive goal of peace, stability
and development in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is to be achieved. We must seize the current
window in advance of the upcoming electoral cycle.

First, with respect to the Forces Democratiques de
Liberation du Rwanda (FDLR), no one underestimates
the destabilizing impact that the FDLR has had on the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the region. The Council has been clear on the
imperative of ending this threat once and for all. We
welcome the first steps taken towards disarmament of
the FDLR, but the initial surrender of close to 200 low-
ranking FDLR combatants, while positive, falls well
short of our ultimate objective.

The agreement reached at the July ICGLR-Southern
African Development Community ministerial meeting
on a six-month period for the FDLR to voluntarily
surrender and disarm could potentially deliver a solution
to the FDLR issue that avoids further bloodshed. That
would be welcome, given how entrenched FDLR
combatants are in their local communities.

For the initiative to be effective, it is essential
that there be no ambiguity and no preconditions to the
disarmament. But the current signals of non-cooperation
are worrying. We must closely monitor and assess the
results achieved, including through the three-month
midterm review in October, and be clear in our definition
of success: that is, real and full disarmament, not
tactical deceit by the FDLR to regroup. The criteria set
out by Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Kobler seem appropriate and should be applied. We
must continue to apply pressure and maintain a credible
military option, as we have mandated in resolution 2147
(2014).

The process can be transformative; other armed
groups are watching closely. But the risk of failure, and
the destabilizing precedent this could set, are also real.

Secondly, regarding the implementation of the
Nairobi Declaration, we have seen the impact of
concerted military action by the Congolese armed
forces and the Intervention Brigade in defeating the
M-23, and the subsequent surrender of some 4,000
members of armed groups. A total of 250,000 people
have been able to return home in North Kivu and
500,000 in South Kivu.

We welcome the steps taken by the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to implement the provisions
contained in the Nairobi Declaration, including
on amnesty. It is crucial that M-23 elements be
repatriated from Rwanda and Uganda and that further
progress be made to operationalize the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programme.
Effective DDR would not only prevent the re-emergence
of another M-23-like rebellion, but would also provide
an important incentive to other armed elements to
abandon their predatory way of life.

Finally, let me touch on accelerating the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework. The Framework included clear
commitments from all relevant parties, for the first
time, to integrate political, security and development
efforts - an essential nexus to tackle the root causes
of violence. Eighteen months on, there has been some
progress, but key reforms are lagging, in particular
regarding the Democratic Republic of the Congo
security sector and the establishment ofa rapid-reaction
force, a vital component of MONUSCO's exit strategy.

The Framework requires political will, together
with human and financial resources, to be successful.
MONUSCO and its Intervention Brigade have acted as
a circuit-breaker, creating the political space to pursue
the necessary reforms. The ground-breaking decision
by the Council to establish the Brigade was the right
one, but the opportunity it creates must be seized. We
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Kobler for his reaffirmation today of the MONUSCO
leadership's commitment to ensuring a robust approach
by the whole Mission to the protection of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo's civilians, which is, as we all
know, the core of the Mission's mandate.

The true litmus test of the Framework will be the
improvement it provides in the lives of civilians: the
provision of basic social services by the Government,
reform of State institutions, the strengthening of the
rule of law and effective accountability.

Let me end by paying tribute to outgoing Special
Envoy Mary Robinson for her efforts to deliver a
framework of hope and for her important work to
champion women's participation in all aspects of the
peacebuilding process; these efforts must continue. We
wish her well in her new position, and we look forward
to working with Said Djinnit. His engagement with
regional leaders, civil society and other stakeholders
will be crucial to ensuring that the framework of hope
truly delivers on its promise.

