Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): At the
outset, and like the delegation of Equatorial Guinea,
allow me to offer my delegation's condolences to
the Government and the people of Kenya following
yesterday's terrorist attack, which claimed
numerous victims.

My delegation welcomes the presence among us of
Ms. Kamissa Camara, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of Mali, to whom we extend
our warmest congratulations on her appointment to her
high office, as well as our ardent wishes for success in
the lofty mission that has been entrusted to her.

We thank Ms. Bintou Keita, Assistant Secretary-
General for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs,
for her excellent introduction of the report of the
Secretary-General on the status of implementation of
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali
(S/2018/ll74), as well as the multifaceted support
of the United Nations Multidimensional Mission for
Stabilization in Mali (MINUSMA) in pursuit of lasting
peace and stability in that country, in accordance with
resolution 2423 (2018).

The Secretary-General's report inspires my
delegation to comment on the political, security and
humanitarian situations in Mali.

Cote d'Ivoire notes with interest the Secretary-
General's assessment of the actions take by the Malian
parties towards the implementation of the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation emanating from the
Algiers process, which remains essential to achieving
a sustainable end to the crisis in Mali. In that regard,
it welcomes the creation of the Ministry for Social
Cohesion, Peace and National Reconciliation as an
institutional tool that will lead to better coordination
of Government action in the operationalization of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation. My country
urges Malian political actors, as well as civil society, to
further coordinate their efforts to bring about a lasting
return to peace and stability in Mali, particularly in the
northern and central regions.

The Pact for Peace, signed on 15 October, which
calls for a more inclusive approach to the peace
process, as well as the commitment of the signatory
armed groups to adhere to an accelerated disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) process and
the integration process of the Operational Coordination
Mechanism in Gao, Kidal and Timbuktu, are
encouraging signals. In that context, it is essential that
the efforts of local actors receive the continued support
of the international community, including the United
Nations, the Economic Community of West African
States and the independent observer, who must maintain
their level of engagement in support of peace in Mali.
My country encourages the Malian authorities to
capitalize on the positive momentum of the presidential
election, with a view to organizing legislative elections,
which will further entrench democracy in Mali.

On the security front, cote d'Ivoire shares the
concerns expressed by the Secretary-General on the
situation in the northern and central regions of Mali,
in particular where attacks by extremist groups and
recurrent episodes of community violence undermine
the social balance that is the foundation for peaceful
coexistence among the people of the region. Human
rights violations by extremist groups and the emergence
of self-defence groups unquestionably undermine
all efforts by the Malian Government and the
international community to restore peace and stability
to those regions.

That situation requires urgent action by the Council
to redeploy police and judicial institutions in order to
enable the Malian State to fully assume its sovereign
functions. Cote d'Ivoire therefore calls for continued
MINUSMA support for the capacity-building of
the Malian armed forces and police, as well as their
redeployment to ensure the protection of civilians in
affected areas. Those measures must be accompanied
by strengthening judicial institutions, particularly
those specializing in the fight against terrorism and
organized crime.

It is also important to give greater impetus to the
DDR process and security sector reform, which are
essential for reducing violence and building a Malian
army as a tool for peace and stability. To that end, my
country welcomes the launch, on 6 November, of the ad
hoc accelerated DDR process, which has enabled the
integration of combatants from the signatory groups. In
turn, they will ensure the security of the DDR process,
under the control of the Technical Commission on
Security, and will participate in armed action against
terrorist groups.

The difficult humanitarian situation, which,
according to the Secretary-General's report, could
affect 7.2 million people in 2019, remains a matter of
serious concern. In that regard, cote d'Ivoire welcomes
the assistance provided by specialized agencies.
However, we remain convinced that multifaceted
responses to humanitarian challenges must be part of an
approach based on promoting economic development,
including combating poverty and unemployment - the
underlying, general causes of insecurity and instability
in the Sahel. In that connection, it is fitting to welcome
the launch of the Alliance for the Sahel and the United
Nations Support Plan for the Sahel, which aim to
intensify and better coordinate support to the States
of the region in order to bring about shared prosperity
and a secure environment in northern Mali and the
Sahel region.

My country commends the combined efforts of
the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) member
States and international donors, which made it
possible, at the conference held in Nouackchott on
6 December, to mobilize €2.4 billion to finance the
40 key projects included in the 2019-2020 Priority
Investment Programme.

MINUSMA, an essential pillar of the current
security framework in Mali and the region, deserves the
continued support of our Council. The complementarity
of its actions with the various forces involved, namely,
the Malian armed forces, the G-5 Sahel Joint Force,
Operation Barkhane and the European missions, is a
major asset in the fight against terrorism and organized
crime throughout the region. We therefore consider it
imperative to enhance its capacity to react effectively
and even anticipate attacks against its civilian and
military personnel.

The terrorist attacks spreading to neighbouring
countries are a reminder that, well beyond Mali's
borders, the fight against terrorism and transnational
organized crime is a regional security issue. To that
end, it requires coordinated efforts by all regional and
international actors.

Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the unity of the Council
and the continued mobilization of the international
community in support of MINUSMA, as well as its
logistical and operational support to the G-5 Sahel Joint
Force, in accordance with resolution 2391 (2017). We
reiterate our call for the Security Council to strengthen
its support for the Malian Government.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire reiterates its conviction
and confidence in the Malian people and Government to
make the Malian people's yearning for peace, stability
and prosperity a reality. We support the press statement
proposed by France.

