Sir David Hannay (United Kingdom): The resolution
the Security Council has just adopted marks the end of a
United Nations peace-keeping operation which, since July
1991, has played a vital role in bringing El Salvador along
the path to national reconciliation, peace and democracy.
The United Nations Observer Mission in El Salvador
(ONUSAL) has shown what can be achieved with a clearly
defined mandate, wide international support and the
necessary political will of the parties. The British
Government congratulates the Secretary-General, successive
ONUSAL Heads of Mission and the dedicated personnel
who have participated in the operation on a job well done.

But, above all, we congratulate the long-suffering
people of El Salvador. The moderation, vision and courage
shown by both sides in the sometimes difficult
implementation process since the Peace Accords were
signed has been critical to the success of the process, and
will remain so in the future. It is as important as ever that
both parties to the Accords keep that process on track to
make possible the speedy completion of all elements of
those Accords. We welcome the commitment made by
President Calderon S01 and by the leadership of the Frente
Farabundo Marti para la Liberacion Nacional (FMLN) to
full implementation.

Perhaps the most innovative contribution by ONUSAL
has been in the field of human rights observance in El
Salvador. ONUSAL has helped Salvadorans to consolidate
the institutions needed to uphold human rights once the
Mission concludes. The British Government welcomes the
reduction in human rights violations since the peace process
began. We remain concerned, however, that some violations
have continued and we are also concerned at the recent
resurgence of political violence. The Human Rights
Ombudsman appointed by the Government of El Salvador
will have a key role for the future. We hope he will get the
full support of all political forces in El Salvador.

We welcome the Secretary-General's proposal to set
up a small political team with verification responsibilities
and a good-offices function. As the Council has made clear,
this office does not represent a continuation of the peace-
keeping mission which comes to an end this weekend. But
the office will form part of a wider effort by the United
Nations and the international community to consolidate the
achievements of ONUSAL, to help with the rebuilding of
El Salvador's institutions and to address El Salvador's
development needs. My Government will continue to
make a significant contribution to all these efforts.

