Mr. Fulci (Italy): I wish to begin, Madam, by
expressing our compliments to you on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
February. I have no doubt that, under your experienced,
dynamic and skilled leadership, the Council's work this
month will be effective and exemplary. I wish also to
express my sincere admiration to your predecessor, Sir John
Weston, for his outstanding contribution to our work in the
month of January.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the European
Union, Poland, Romania, Slovakia, Lithuania, Malta and
Latvia associate themselves with this statement.

We wish first of all to thank the Secretary-General for
his thorough report on the peace process and on the United
Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III). It is
clear that the peace process is at a turning-point. It is up to
the Angolan parties to demonstrate whether the new
direction will be a positive one.

As the Secretary-General points out in his report, the
peace process has been moving at a disappointingly slow
pace and is still fragile. To strengthen it and make it
irreversible, good-faith cooperation between the parties
will be the primary ingredient.

The European Union welcomes the commitment
recently undertaken both by the Government and by the
Uniao Nacional para a Independencia Total de Angola
(UNITA) on a new timetable to move the peace process
forward. The Union is also encouraged by the steps taken
so far in this direction, especially by the Government of
Angola, and urges both parties to increase cooperation on
important aspects of the peace agreement, such as the
formation of the joint armed forces.

It now appears essential that UNITA confirm its
recent pledge to accelerate the quartering of its troops,
which has not yet reached significant levels. Yesterday,
we were informed by the Secretariat that only 3,659
soldiers out of the 16,500 to be demobilized by 8
February were present in the quartering areas. Failure in
this essential task could indeed jeopardize the entire peace
process and have an adverse effect on the support the
international community has shown so far.

The European Union notes with satisfaction the steps
taken by the Government of Angola in the
implementation of the peace process, including
withdrawing its forces and starting the quartering of its
rapid reaction police. The Government must now speed
up compliance with these commitments.

Delays in demining activities raise serious concerns,
as do reports that efforts of the Angolan parties in this
area continue to be minimal. Demining has a strong
humanitarian significance, because of the intense suffering
land mines impose on innocent civilian populations,
especially children. Demining will also allow the
resumption of productive activities, thus increasing the
gradual return to normal conditions of life throughout the
country.

The European Union is equally concerned over the
further deterioration of the Angolan economy, which is
partly a result of complex post-war problems, but which
also reflects the Government's difficulty in implementing
effective stabilization measures and necessary reforms. It
notes that without a strong stabilization policy it will not
be possible to establish the basis for reconstruction and
for social and economic development.

 

The continued seriousness of the security situation and
persisting obstacles to humanitarian activities throughout
Angola are quite disturbing. Both parties should facilitate
and ensure the safety of the delivery of humanitarian
assistance. The European Union and its member States will
continue to make assistance available to the Angolan
population, provided that security conditions improve.

The European Union stresses the importance of
international support for the peace process in Angola, and
underlines the stabilizing role of UNAVEM. III in the
current fragile situation. The Union reaffirms its strong
support for the operation. It is crucial that UNAVEM. III
operate as efficiently as possible, and that due consideration
be given to the security of its personnel.

Recently, a number of initiatives have been undertaken
to signal to the parties the growing impatience of the
international community - which has responded
generously to the appeals for financing the rehabilitation of
the country - and the need to make real, concrete progress
in the implementation of the Lusaka Protocol.

The European Union remains committed to the
Angolan peace process, and is undertaking de'marches with
both the Government and UNITA to urge them to make
further, and rapid, progress in the implementation of the
Lusaka Protocol, and towards peace.

