Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (Spoke in Chinese): At
present, the overall situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo remains stable. In the year since he took
office, President Tshilombo Tshisekedi has made great
efforts to strengthen his Government's capacity in
governance and security and to promote economic and
social development, with positive results. This fully
demonstrates the will and ability of the Government
and the people of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to independently solve the problems facing the
country. At the same time, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo is still facing many challenges in achieving
lasting peace, particularly in View of the severe problem
of armed groups in the eastern part of the country. As
such, it is necessary for the international community to
maintain is support.

Since its establishment nearly 20 years ago, the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
has played an important role in maintaining peace and
stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
In the current complex situation, the Mission must
continue to fulfil its mandate.

China welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2502 (2019), renewing the MONUSCO
mandate, and appreciates the flexibility of Council
members during the negotiating process, which
contributed to reaching consensus on the text and
demonstrated the unity of the Security Council. China
hopes that MONUSCO, in delivering its mandate, will
continue to enhance communication, coordination and
cooperation with the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We also hope that the Secretariat
conducts the strategic review of the MONUSCO
mandate on the basis of respect for the views of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo Government so as
to ensure the gradual and orderly transfer of security
responsibilities from the Mission to the security forces
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. China stands
ready to work with the international community to
continue to contribute to the early realization of peace,
stability and development in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.

