Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): It is a particular
pleasure for Bangladesh to see you, Sir, a wise and capable
diplomat, presiding over the Council's deliberations on this
important subject.
Bangladesh commends the timely initiative of the
Security Council in convening this meeting. This gives the
States Members of the United Nations an opportunity to
come up with ideas on how best the cause of international
peace and security can be served and also how best the
issue of post-conflict peace-building can be addressed. Our
deliberations will help identify areas that are of interest to
the United Nations and the international community.

The international situation today remains fluid. A
climate of uncertainty persists. Commitments made in some
major areas of international cooperation remain to be
fulfilled. The interests of developing countries surely
warrant high priority. The gap between the developed and
developing countries, particularly the least developed
countries, continues to widen. The problems that derive
from poverty and social injustices are in many instances
being compounded. Underdevelopment, poverty and social
injustice constitute a source of frustration and even a
possible cause of new conflicts. Stability, security,
democracy and peace are far from being consolidated on a
global scale. That will require a reversal of growing
international inequalities. Disputes among nations and also
within nations, violent conflicts, aggression, foreign
occupation and interference in the internal affairs of States
continue to frustrate the object of peaceful coexistence of
States and peoples.

As we look at the nature of the conflicts and social
strife that the world is experiencing today, we notice that
inter-State wars and foreign occupation have been on the
decline since the end of the cold war. This encouraging
development is expected to contribute to the lessening of
Violence in the long run. However, intra-State conflicts,
social strife, deprivation, abuses of human rights, ethnic
aggrandizement and xenophobia continue to pose
problems that result in violence and impinge on
international peace and security.

International peace and security can best be
strengthened by the actions not just of States but also of
men and women, through the inculcation of a culture of
peace and non-violence in every human being and in
every sphere of activity. The elements of a culture of
peace draw on age-old principles and values which are
respected and held in high esteem by all peoples and
societies. The objective of a culture of peace is the
empowerment of people. It contributes effectively to the
overcoming of authoritarian structures, and the
accompanying exploitation, through democratic
participation. It works against poverty and inequality and
promotes development. It celebrates diversity, advances
understanding and tolerance and reduces inequality
between men and women. We regard the culture of peace
as an effective expedient to minimize and prevent
violence and conflict in the present-day world.

Over countless millenniums, humankind has failed
to abolish or do away with war. Indeed, such eminent
persons as Nobel Laureates Lester Pearson and Bertrand
Russell have expressed the view that some people may
even be thrilled at the prospect of war. What is clearly
needed, therefore, as the eminent American philosopher
William James said, decades before the United Nations
came into existence, is something that is the moral
equivalent of war - something that would be as heroic
to people as war has often been depicted to be, but that
is also compatible with the essential human spirit, which
war emphatically is not. That is the need that the culture
of peace strives to fulfil.

Conflicts in developing countries have their roots in
poverty, hunger, ignorance, economic deprivation and lack
of accountability in the use of political power. We need
to address the root causes of conflict in a comprehensive
and holistic manner.

The maintenance of international peace and security
will depend in large measure on favourable conditions for
durable peace after military conflict. The transition from

 

peacekeeping to peace-building obviously needs the close
attention of the international community. Such a transition,
if not properly managed, could seriously undermine peace
and security. In fact, we have witnessed societies emerge
from conflict situations only to indulge in fresh intra-State
or intra-group conflicts. That is an aspect of peace and
security and peace-building that cannot be overemphasized.

In the wars and conflicts of today the parties involved
quite often resort to actions which constitute flagrant
violations of human rights and international laws,
particularly humanitarian laws. The weaker and vulnerable
groups of society become easy and innocent victims of
conflicts. Abuses of the rights of women and children are
most common. In this regard, we welcome the role being
played by the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict. We also endorse
the idea of treating children in conflict situations as zones
of peace.

Bangladesh is committed to the cause of international
peace and security. We have been a major contributor to
the peacekeeping and peacemaking efforts of the United
Nations and are prepared to work constructively with
Member States in the promotion of the objectives of the
United Nations Charter.
