Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Jean
Arnault, for his briefing. China commends the efforts
made by the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), under Mr. Arnault's leadership,
to promote reconstruction in Afghanistan.

We note with satisfaction that there has been
progress in the peacebuilding process in Afghanistan.
In the political field, the new Government, under the
leadership of President Karzai, has gained wide
acceptance by the people of Afghanistan. Central
Government authority has gradually been established,
and elections to the lower house of Parliament and the
provincial council have progressed in an orderly
manner.

In the area of development, Afghanistan has
overcome the negative impact of natural disasters and
has maintained momentum in its rapid development.
The urban economy too has shown a significant
increase, and agricultural production has reached
record high levels.

In the area of security, the reform of the military,
police and security sectors and the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme have been
moving ahead smoothly. The Government of
Afghanistan continues to make great counter-narcotics
efforts and has achieved some progress in that area.

All this shows that, with the help of the United
Nations and the international community, Afghanistan
has made steady progress along the road towards
reconstruction, development and recovery.

The election of a broad-based parliament is not
only a final step in the completion of the Bonn process;
it is also urgently needed for the establishment of
Afghan Government authority. We sincerely hope that
all ethnic groups and factions in that country can
maintain a commitment to national reconciliation and
unity, that they will actively participate in the elections
so as to ensure the smooth conduct and successful
outcome of the election, thus paving the way towards
completion of the peacebuilding process in
Afghanistan. Lack of funding has now become a factor
that could limit the smooth conduct of preparations for
the elections. We urge the donor community to take
urgent measures to meet their commitments and to
make further pledges so as to fill the funding gap.

Stabilization and an improved security situation
are crucial to preparations for the elections and for
economic reconstruction, as well as to international
relief efforts. The deterioration in the security situation
in Afghanistan is a source of grave concern and should
be reversed as soon as possible. We hope that the
Afghan Government, with the assistance of UNAMA,
the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) and
other parties concerned, can draw on the experience
gained and lessons learned from last year's presidential
election and continue to take effective measures to halt
the increase in violence and to eliminate any possible
security threats to the electoral process.

Sustainable socio-economic development, which
is a fundamental guarantor of lasting peace and
stability in Afghanistan, is also urgently required,
including with regard to efforts to counter narcotics in
that country. Many years of war have not only
produced an urgent desire in Afghanistan for recovery,
they have also resulted in serious threats, including
narcotics. We hope that the international community
can continue to make efforts to help Afghanistan
develop an effective plan for integrated development
and the countering of narcotics. We also hope that the
international community will be able to work to
eliminate the scourge of drugs, which has had a serious
impact on peacebuilding in Afghanistan, as soon as
possible so as to promote steady recovery and the
healthy development of the economy in that country.

Lasting stability and development in Afghanistan
is in the interest of world peace and security. China has
taken concrete action in the past three years to support
and participate in Afghanistan's reconstruction. We
have provided Afghanistan assistance within our
capabilities.

We support the continuation of the international
community's important and positive role in
Afghanistan's stability and development. We look
forward to the concrete recommendations to be made
by the Secretary-General regarding United Nations
efforts in the post-Bonn process. We also support the
draft presidential statement to be adopted at the
conclusion of the Council's debate today.

