Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): I would like to begin,
Sir, by expressing appreciation for the manner in which
you are presiding over the work of the Security Council
and by taking this opportunity to welcome you as the
Permanent Representative of France. I am confident
that your profound experience and excellent diplomatic
skills will contribute greatly to the Council's activities
and to the United Nations as a whole.

Let me also thank you and the delegation of
France for convening this important meeting. Ukraine
believes that the practice of holding Security Council
open debates on children and armed conflict is a clear
manifestation of the great significance of this issue.
Security Council resolutions 1261 (1999), 1314 (2000)
and 1379 (2001) became a strong basis for advocacy on
behalf of war-affected children. Various references to
this issue have been made in a large number of other
Security Council resolutions, presidential statements,
briefings and open debates. All this testifies to the
Council's involvement in this important matter and to
the fact that the protection of children is a priority
concern in the area of peace and security.

We are pleased with the considerable progress
made lately in the field of protection of children
affected by armed conflict. The entry into force of two
international instruments - the Optional Protocol to
the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict and the
Rome Statue of the International Criminal Court
(ICC) - which qualify crimes against children as war
crimes, has become a milestone in strengthening and
developing worldwide standards for the protection of
children.

I would like to express appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his report on this issue
(S/2002/ 1299). For the first time, the report contains a
list of parties to conflicts that continue to recruit and
use children. Some 300,000 boys and girls are
currently being exploited as child soldiers around the
world. In our view, the publication of this list is yet
another important step forward in our efforts to put an
end to the impunity of those who disregard the rights of
war-affected children.

But it may not be enough just to condemn or
prohibit the recruitment of children. We need to ask
ourselves: why do children join armies? If we are to
prevent children from participating in the fighting, we
need to understand specifically the causes that force
children to become soldiers.

Ukraine welcomes the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Mr. Otunnu, and his Office aimed
at creating, in cooperation with the Secretariat and the
United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), guidelines
for United Nations peacekeeping personnel to ensure
that children's rights and needs are given proper
attention and response during the peacemaking process.

Peacekeeping missions have a crucial role to play
in providing protection to children. In order to
implement this particular dimension of their mandate, a
child protection adviser should be responsible for
coordinating activities to ensure the protection and
welfare of children. We are especially appreciative of
the fact that the first advisers of this kind have already
been deployed in Sierra Leone, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and, recently, in Angola.
Despite the progress achieved so far, much
remains to be done to ensure the effective protection
and rehabilitation of children in times of war. We
should not forget the alarming fact that during the last
decade of the past century the world lost some 2
million of its youngest lives as a direct result of armed
conflicts. Another 6 million were injured, and over
more than 10 million were traumatized. Today, more
than 20 million children have been displaced within or
outside their countries due to war. Every month, nearly
800 children are killed or crippled by landmines.

There is no doubt that the effective monitoring of
adherence to the provisions of international law and the
consequent obligations, as well as to the commitments
pledged by parties to conflict, are essential actions for
ensuring the protection of children and their rights. In
that regard, it is important to continue to include
observations concerning the protection of children in
reports to the Security Council on specific conflict
situations.

When designing peacekeeping operations, the
Security Council, in our view, should make every effort
to protect both children and their supportive
environment: schools, hospitals, health centres and
religious institutions. Ukraine strongly endorses the
concept of children and their protective and nurturing
institutions being considered as zones of peace. It is
important also to focus on children in post-conflict
reconciliation programmes. There is an urgent need for
the international community to support programmes,
including advocacy and social services, for the
demobilization of child soldiers and their reintegration
into the community. Such children should be offered
new experiences that will change their identity from
that of soldiers. Education and training remain
fundamental to that end. In our view, more attention
should also be given to greater involvement by women
in peacekeeping missions. We believe that that would
help to enhance the capacity of missions in terms of
protecting girl children and dealing with gender-
sensitive aspects.

Finally, I wish to stress that the Secretary-
General's report sets out an important agenda and a
basis for future work by the Council and by other
United Nations bodies. Ukraine looks forward to
further progress in that direction and is prepared to
contribute specifically to the subsequent consideration
of the issue of children and armed conflict.

