Mr. Burian (Slovakia): I too wish to thank
Ambassador Kumalo and the Secretariat for preparing
a comprehensive report on the recent Security Council
mission to Timor-Leste (S/2007/711). The report very
precisely reflects the observations of the mission, and
we fully share its findings and conclusions. That is
why I will limit my statement to only a few comments.
Before doing so, I wish to stress that we fully align
ourselves with the statement that was delivered earlier
by the Permanent Representative of Portugal on behalf
of the European Union.

We welcome the progress in the process of peace
consolidation in Timor-Leste following the conflict in
2006. At the same time, the situation in the country is
still fragile and there are many challenges that should
be addressed in order to make the path towards
stability and prosperity in the country irreversible and
sustainable. Outstanding problems, including the issues
of internally displaced persons, petitioners and the case
of Mr. Alfredo Reinado, as well as the root causes of
the crisis of 2006, can only be resolved, in our view,
through political dialogue and the common efforts of
all political parties and leaders.

We urge Timor-Leste's leaders to redouble their
efforts to address their political differences and to build
the trust needed between them and the people in order
to confront the economic and social challenges facing
the country. A meaningful role for the opposition in
this process is crucial. At the same time, those in the
opposition must respect the results of the elections and
the parliamentary majority of the current coalition. We
believe the calls for early elections that the mission
heard from former Prime Minister Alkatiri are
counterproductive, divisive and dangerous.

We noted that the overall security situation has
improved, but it is still fragile and highly dependent on
the presence of international forces to ensure security
in the country. In that context, it is essential, in our
view, to strengthen the review and reform process of
the security sector in Timor-Leste. As the mission
observed, there is a series of challenges facing the
security sector, including the need to improve relations
between the police and the military, to strengthen the
legal framework of security institutions and increase
their capacities and the need to enhance civil oversight
of the security sector in order to insure its
accountability.

Last but not least, we hope that the process of
certification of the police force will be completed as
soon as possible and that the Timorese police will start
assuming more responsibility for the security in
Timor-Leste. We also hope that the role of the UNMIT
police will be reviewed, with more focus on the
training of the national police to ensure maximum
results in that respect. We also wish to underline that
we would welcome sending a team of experts from the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations to assist in the
situation and to define ways to cope with outstanding
issues in that area, as soon as possible.

Finally, a functioning security sector is an
important prerequisite for the efficient functioning of
the justice system and institutions. Strengthening the
justice system, in particular, is a major aspect of
building a culture for the peaceful settlement of
conflicts in Timor-Leste. We note with satisfaction that
a justice system programme is in place in Timor-Leste,
which aims to improve the capacity of the courts,
prosecution and justice administration in the areas of
professional ethics, individual skills and systems and
processes. Strengthening justice is also crucial in
building respect for the rule of law, which has been
undermined by a widespread perception of a lack of
accountability. In this context we believe it is essential
to implement the recommendations of the United
Nations Independent Special Commission of Inquiry.

This is a crucial moment for Timor-Leste, and it
should seize the opportunity to build on what has
already been achieved in the areas of security and
democracy. The continued support of the United
Nations and the international community remains
critical for the further stability of the country and for
strengthening peace and democracy. In that regard, we
support the extension of the UNMIT mandate, with
possible adjustments properly reflecting current needs
and tasks which the country is facing.

