Mr. Aguilar Zinser (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation is gratified that this meeting of the
Security Council today is presided over by a Latin
American woman, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the sisterly Republic of Colombia.

On behalf of Mexico, I would like to thank the
Secretary-General for introducing his report on
protection of civilians in armed conflict (S/2002/ 1300),
which is undoubtedly a document on the basis of which
the Security Council and the United Nations in general
must develop their activities to protect human rights in
conflict situations.

We would also like to thank Mr. Kenzo Oshima
for having shared with the Security Council his
perspective on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. Our thanks go also, in particular, to the
Director-General of the International Committee of the
Red Cross (ICRC).

Norway has played a very important role in the
Security Council deliberations on the question of
civilians in armed conflict. It has focused the Council's
attention on this matter, and it has set up a structure
that we will not be able to ignore in the future. We
assure the delegation of Norway that Mexico, with
other Security Council members, will continue to stress
this item so that we can expand our actions to protect
civilians and to protect human rights in conflict
situations. Here, we welcome the presence of the
Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Norway, Mr.
Vidar Helgesen.

Mexico places great importance on the peaceful
settlement of disputes. Aware of the harmful effects of
conflicts, my country has favoured dialogue, mediation
and understanding above confrontation. Taking into
account that the majority of victims are non-combatant
civilians, my country reiterates the validity of
international humanitarian law, and in particular the
obligations of parties to conflicts.

The United Nations must continue to improve the
measures it takes within the framework of its
peacekeeping operations to protect civilians. In this
effort, the provisional road map formulated by the
Secretary-General in the report before us today and the
aide-memoire developed by the Security Council
(S/PRST/2002/6, annex) are steps in the right direction
for the Organization to be more effective in its task of
protecting human life.

We are encouraged by the comments in the
Secretary-General's report relating to strengthening
cooperation between the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO) and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA). This
should lead to the development of a final road map and
should continue with the review and updating of the
aide-memoire in the light of the experience that we
have acquired, as my country has said in the
deliberations that have taken place on this issue in the
Security Council.

With respect to access to vulnerable populations,
Mexico supports the measures proposed in the report,
since we share the opinion that the basic rights of
civilian populations cannot be subordinated to
supposed or real security threats. We note the
involvement in this effort of humanitarian
organizations, including non-governmental
organizations (NGOs), which are very often the only
presence of the international community in conflict
areas. For this reason, Mexico supports the proposal
that concrete measures be adopted in understandings
with the parties, which would enable full access by
humanitarian organizations and non-governmental
organizations during and after a conflict.

We are concerned at, and take note of, the
increasing number of attacks targeting the ICRC and
humanitarian and non-governmental organizations.
Weakening the security of such organizations makes
the conflicts even more acute and places civilian
populations in situations of far greater vulnerability.
Therefore, our Organization must adopt concrete and
specific measures to ensure the proper protection, as
well as unrestricted access to conflict areas by
humanitarian organizations, including the ICRC and
non-governmental organizations.

My country also feels that we should also make
greater use of early warning mechanisms, so that we
can address a crisis or situation of tension before it
turns into a conflict. In that connection, we would like
to highlight the fundamental role of the Security
Council pursuant to the Charter and the support that the
Secretary-General can provide on the basis of the
powers conferred on him in Article 99 of the Charter.
States and international organizations must also be
ready to cooperate with the United Nations.

The measures proposed by the Secretary-General
with regard to the separation of civilians and armed
elements are acceptable. This issue must be considered
in all conflicts examined by the Security Council.
Likewise, and in the light of the need for host countries
to protect civilians in refugee camps, we must take into
account the recommendations of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) on the protection programme and on respect
for the civilian and humanitarian nature of the right to
asylum. But these efforts must be accompanied by
measures that would bring to justice those responsible
for violations of international humanitarian law, in
accordance with national legislation and with
international law itself. In that regard, we cannot be too
emphatic or support too resolutely the concepts
expressed here by the Director General of the
International Committee of the Red Cross. Measures
aimed at confidence-building; at the disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation or
resettlement of combatants; and at consolidating the
rule of law are also important.

The creation of the International Criminal Court
represents an unprecedented advance in the fight
against impunity. That body will complement the
efforts of national jurisdictions to bring to justice those
who commit crimes against humanity. The Court's
existence is an incentive for the strengthening of
national systems, but it is also an effective mechanism
to deal with such crimes when national judicial
structures have disappeared as a result of conflicts. We
are sure that the Court will be a fundamental tool in
eradicating the culture of impunity that has
characterized the twentieth century.

Special attention should be devoted to economic
exploitation as a cause and an effect of armed conflicts.
We have taken note of the Secretary-General's
invitation to the Security Council to continue to study
measures that will make it possible to prevent the
looting of a country's resources in a conflict situation,
whether by armed groups, companies, individuals or
other States. We must continue to analyse the legal
exploitation of natural resources and other wealth, as
well as other aspects related to the commercial
exploitation of conflicts. To that end, the exercises
carried out in the cases of Liberia and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo constitute important bases that
can be developed further in the course of such studies.

In this discussion, we must consider the socio-
economic aspects of transition and the just distribution
of wealth, as well as regional economic integration and
the legitimate and transparent development of trade.
Punitive measures do not suffice. We must promote an
environment in which combatants and those who
benefit from illegal exploitation find incentives to
demobilize and to stop their illicit activities. When
socio-economic expectations are not met, political
advances are not enough to prevent the resurgence of
violence.

The increase in terrorism and the commission of
terrorist acts in armed conflicts pose a grave threat to
civilians. We energetically condemn all acts, methods
and practices of terrorism as criminal and unjustifiable
acts, regardless of their motivation, in all of their forms
and manifestations and regardless of who commits
them or whether they are committed in times of peace
or in conflict situations. Terrorists make innocent
civilians targets of their ideological or political actions
and the objects of their armed attacks.

Furthermore, and aware that States must respond
to terrorist acts while protecting and respecting the
human rights of all persons - including terrorists -
Mexico presented, within the framework of the current
General Assembly session, a draft resolution on the
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms
in the fight against terrorism, which was, fortunately,
adopted by consensus, given the fact that all States
agree on that principle. In order to fight terrorism, we
must do so armed with law and reason; to do otherwise
is to undermine the foundations of our own
civilization. Therefore, we invite the Security Council,
in particular the Counter-Terrorism Committee, to bear
that resolution in mind as it carries out its work.

When we speak of civilian victims in armed
conflict, of refugees or of internally displaced persons,
we are really speaking mostly of women, children and
the elderly, of violations or abuses, of sexual servitude
and of the forced recruitment of children. Crimes
whose victims are women and children in armed
conflicts are certainly crimes against humanity. The
Security Council is obligated, in the light of the
abundant evidence of such crimes, to include in its
actions aimed at protecting international peace and
security concrete measures and effective provisions to
protect women, children and the elderly in order to
effectively promote a gender perspective in all
peacekeeping operations that the Council authorizes.

In that regard, Mexico commends the Secretary-
General for the swift and energetic response made to
the reports of sexual exploitation and abuse by
humanitarian personnel. We support the basic
principles formulated by the Inter-Agency Standing
Committee, which represent minimum standards of
behaviour for all United Nations civilian personnel, as
well as the establishment of clear procedures to file
reports. Now, we must strengthen measures so that
other associated parties - such as civilian police and
military forces who work under United Nations
direction, as well as non-governmental
organizations- observe appropriate and scrupulous
behaviour in their dealings with civilians.
Humanitarian personnel are the ultimate repository of
confidence and hope for civilians in armed conflict;
therefore, in the case of sexual exploitation and abuse,
even one case is too much.

Mexico reaffirms its support for the adoption of
measures aimed at strengthening the protection of
civilians in armed conflict and hopes that the
Secretary-General's report (S/2002/ 1300) will lead to a
careful analysis of its recommendations - in particular
the guide to protect civilians - and encourages all
members of the international community to join their
efforts in this collective endeavour.

In conclusion, my country welcomes the
organization by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs of regional seminars on
fundamental concepts related to the protection of
civilians. We should like to express our particular and
active interest in the seminar that is being organized for
the Latin American and Caribbean region.

