Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): Let me start by
congratulating China on assuming the presidency of
the Council for this month and for convening this very
important debate.

In 1945, as the world emerged from the most
devastating war in recorded history, it was evident
that if the horrors of the past were to be put to rest,
international behaviour had to be governed, not by
the whims of a few powerful States but instead by a
set of universally applicable rules rooted in the firm
conviction that no matter how great our strength, we
should deny ourselves the license to do as we please and
work collaboratively so that our efforts would become
more than the sum of their constituent parts.

That essence of multilateralism was encapsulated
in the creation of the United Nations. During the past
seven decades, the United Nations has remained an
indispensable instrument for the promotion of our
shared goals of peace, security and development. From
the crystallization of the inalienable right of peoples
to self-determination, to its application in the struggle
against colonialism and foreign occupation; from the
ideal of the dignity and worth of an individual to the
progressive development of instruments to promote
and protect fundamental human rights, the United
Nations has left an indelible mark in Virtually all walks
of international life. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, the Paris Agreement on Climate Change
and the sustaining peace agenda are recent affirmations
of that collective approach for the common good and
our shared destiny.

Today, as we all know, multilateralism is
under assault. Driven by forces of illiberalism and
protectionism, jingoism is gaining ascendency over
reason, intolerance over acceptance and bigotry over
humanity. Consensus-building and compromise are
being viewed by some not as virtues of strength but
as signs of weakness. The exclusive pursuit of narrow
national aims is being promoted as the sole determinant
of world affairs. Long-standing legal norms are being
eroded; United Nations resolutions and its binding
decisions are flouted with impunity; and force is
threatened all too frequently. Those trends are not just
regressive; they expose the rules-based international
order to new dangers.

At a time of increasingly complex and mutually
reinforcing challenges, we must be thoughtful and
constructive in evolving our response to those new
dangers. After all, when seismic shifts triggered
by globalization, human mobility, technological
advances, terrorism and organized crime and climate
change acknowledge neither physical boundaries
nor geographical barriers, how can the international
community remain divided into silos of narrow interests
and divergent priorities, and yet hope to prevail over
common challenges?

In our interconnected world, we are all vulnerable
if some are insecure. International cooperation is
therefore imperative, and it was gratifying to hear
the ringing endorsement of multilateralism from
world leaders during the general debate of the current
session. We must now build on that momentum. The
best measure of our commitment to multilateralism
is to strengthen the role of the United Nations, for the
United Nations will be no less and can be no better than
what the membership wants the Organization to be.

A rules-based order, with the United Nations at
its core, remains an abiding and fundamental element
of my country's foreign policy. Pakistan believes that
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
which are based on the sovereign equality of States,
non-interference in internal affairs and the pacific
settlement of disputes, provide the requisite framework
to promote peaceful relations among Member States.
The provisions of Chapter VI of the Charter remain
equally critical to that end.

True multilateralism entails not only decisions
that reflect the diverse array of Views and positions
on any issue, but also decision-making bodies that are
fully imbued with the democratic spirit of our times
and representative of the aspirations of all Member
States - small, medium and large. Those ideals have
served as the foundation stone of Pakistan's perspective
for a comprehensive reform of the Security Council and
will continue to guide our efforts.

The framers of the Charter of the United Nations
were no vain idealists in seeking to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war. While swords
have not been turned into ploughshares, there is no
better vehicle than the United Nations to achieve the
goals of advancing modern civilization to a new and
higher level, assuring a life of dignity for all people and
helping to create a more just and peaceful world order.

Allow me to close with the words of my country's
founding father, Quaid-e-Azam Muhammad Ali
Jinnah, who famously said that "Pakistan will never be
found lacking in upholding the principles of the United
Nations Charter".
