Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Let me start my statement with a piece of information that I suppose is worthy of the attention of all the participants in today's meeting, especially Ms. Mueller and Ms. Fore. The day before yesterday, the authorities of the Turkish occupation cut off the potable water supply for Al-Hasakah city and the surrounding villages supplied by a plant called Alouk, knowing full well that this plant is the sole source of potable water for Al-Hasakah, which is a city located in north-eastern Syria - and not north-western Syria. Al-Hasakah and the surrounding area are populated by 600,000 people, all of whom are civilians, mostly women and children. That crime is similar to the crimes perpetrated by terrorist groups in the suburbs of Damascus in 2012, supported by Turkey and Qatar. However, those groups were eradicated by the Syrian Arab Republic. This most recent Turkish crime is therefore similar to those crimes that were perpetrated by armed terrorist gangs in Damascus in 2012, when they dumped diesel oil into the Ayn al-Fijah spring, the main source of potable water to Damascus, with a population of 8 million people. We just wanted the Council to keep this matter in mind. Four noteworthy positions are discernible under this month's Belgian presidency of the Security Council, the first of which is the endeavour by certain Member States to transform the Security Council into a NATO platform for supporting the Turkish aggression and for levelling threats against my country, in violation of the provisions of the Charter. This approach will eventually undermine the role of the Security Council, whose purpose is to maintain international peace and security. This position was aired in public during the meeting that was held on 6 February (see S/PV.8715). The second noteworthy position concerns a statement by the Permanent Representative of the Israeli occupying Power, when he said that it was necessary to physically get rid of the Palestinian President, Mr. Mahmoud Abbas, as a sine qua non of what he calls peace, which is a flagrant threat of liquidation of the President of the State of Palestine, made within the precinct of the Council Chamber. The third noteworthy position is represented by the response of the Israeli Prime Minister, Netanyahu, to a question related to the attacks launched by his air force against my country, Syria, on 14 February. He said - and, by the way, this is very important for the President of the Council and his country - that maybe those attacks were launched by the Belgian Air Force. The fourth noteworthy position finds its locus in Under-Secretary-General Lowcock, who has styled himself as the propagandist of misleading films and whose only aim is to undermine the Government of my country, in violation of the requirements of his mandate, taking advantage of the self-imposed isolation of some who have shut down their embassies in Damascus or the geographical distance of others or the sometimes inadequate knowledge of the external interventionist roles that have had such catastrophic consequences on our region for decades.The representative of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines was very right in her political analysis, notwithstanding the geographical distance between her country and mine, and the fact that her country does not have an embassy in Damascus. I invite other Council members to objectively follow her example and her logical analysis. We are not accusing Mr. Lowcock falsely. Let me mention in this regard a simple example of the very misleading approach of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, namely, that the Under- Secretary-General - and today Ms. Mueller - failed, in his briefing to the Council on 19 February (see S/PV.8727), to mention that the two humanitarian workers of the British humanitarian organization Oxfam were Wissam Hazim and Adel Al-Halabi, who were martyred a few days ago as they pursued their humanitarian work in the Dara'a province. We again pay our heartfelt condolences to their families and colleagues. These two men were Syrian citizens killed in cold blood by armed terrorist groups that consistently impede humanitarian work, the efforts of the Syrian Government and its partners, to deliver humanitarian aid to the people who need it. These groups are but terrorist organizations that Mr. Lowcock continues to depict as non-State armed opposition or non-State actors, whereas they are considered by others to be jihadist organizations. The Syrian Arab Army and its allies managed to exact a defeat on the terrorist groups in Idlib and their paymasters, thereby returning a sense of safety and jubilation to millions of Syrians in Aleppo thanks to the delivery of their city from the onslaught of wrath and terrorism. We have relaunched operations at the Aleppo international airport with the first flight in eight years. There is no doubt that the work of the Syrian Government and its allies in countering terrorism in Idlib is but a constitutional and national task. It is also a precise implementation of Security Council resolutions. Out of our eagerness to protect the security and safety of our citizens and after taking a number of initiatives, including the opening of a number of humanitarian crossings, the Syrian Government calls on the Syrian citizens who recently fled their regions and homes to return to the areas liberated from terrorism in north-western Syria. The Syrian Government stresses its commitment to guaranteeing the safety, security and protection of those citizens and ensuring all their required basic needs. My country's delegation calls on the States that have leverage over the Turkish regime and the terrorist groups affiliated with it to compel them to allow our citizens to return to their homes, as well as the | million Syrians whom the Turkish aggression had displaced from Manbij, Afrin, Tal Rifaat, Jarabulus, Ain Arab and other places. My country reiterates its call on United Nations entities to promptly provide humanitarian aid to those citizens instead of making statements and briefings that do not honestly reflect the reality on the ground and contribute only to giving cover to terrorist organizations and their sponsoring Governments. We have informed the Security Council of our disappointment in the reluctance of the World Health Organization (WHO) to import the medical consignment that is being held in Iraq, notwithstanding the authorization that was given to the WHO by the Syrian Government on 29 January, almost a month ago. The Syrian Government authorized the entry of that consignment through the Bukamal border crossing. On 22 February, my country's Government sent an official letter to the WHO Regional Director, reporting its readiness to cooperate with Iraqi authorities to transfer that aid to Syria through the Bukamal border crossing or any other legal official crossing, including airports and the ports of Tartus and Latakia. On 25 February, my country's Government also informed WHO of its approval of a one-time transfer of that aid through Erbil airport in Iraq to Al-Qamishli airport, in north-eastern Syria, provided that it would be distributed under the supervision of the Syrian Red Crescent and Syrian Government authorities and in partnership with the United Nations. Yesterday, we informed the Secretary- General, the President of the Security Council and the Member States of the Council of that approval. Regrettably and notwithstanding ll _ this, Ms. Mueller and Ms. Fore appear not to have heard about this information. They failed to inform Council members of it in their briefings today. In her briefing, Ms. Mueller mentioned the Al-Yarubiyah border crossing 11 times although, according to the relevant Security Council resolution, that crossing was closed. Nonetheless, she mentioned it 11 times. She then said that Tall Abyad crossing is the most viable and logical option. She attributed that to the Secretary- General's report (S/2020/139). That is not true because the Secretary-General's report does not say that the Tall Abyad crossing is the most logical option. As my colleague the Ambassador of the Russian Federationsaid, the report provides alternatives, based on coordination with the Syrian Government, for the delivery of aid from Damascus to anywhere in the country. That is according to the report and not as mentioned by Ms. Mueller. My country's delegation recalls that cooperation among the Syrian Government, the United Nations and its agencies, as well as our partners from 38 foreign non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and 1,400 national societies, has enabled us, during the years of the so-called crisis, to continue to deliver humanitarian aid, social support, health care and basic services to millions of Syrians, including those who live in places classified by the United Nations as not under the control of the Syrian Government. That is reiterated in paragraph 22 of the sixty-fifth report of the Secretary- General on the implementation of humanitarian resolutions, which indicates that, together the Syrian Government and the United Nations deliver food aid to more than 3.5 million people every month in areas classified as being under the control of the Government in north-eastern Syria. What does that mean? It means that aid delivery is viable in the north-east of the country from within the country's borders, with complete cooperation and coordination with the Syrian Government, far removed from any attempt to antagonize and politicize humanitarian aid and without the need for the crossings mentioned in resolution 2504 (2020), which are earmarked by the Erdogan regime to become crossings for his military machinery and aggressive troops in support of terrorism, amid total silence from the Security Council. I would like to inform the Council of the approval granted by my country to transport aid via contact lines to areas in need within Syria, provided that such aid is delivered exclusively to the Syrians who need it, so as to ensure that it will not end up in the hands of armed terrorists groups, illegitimate political organizations or proxy militias. Such aid should also be distributed under the supervision of the Syrian State, the Syrian Red Crescent and partners from relevant United Nations organizations. Yesterday, the Government of my country sent a letter to Mr. Imran Riza, United Nations Resident Coordinator for Syria, in which we informed him of our approval to transfer medical aid via land routes throughout the country, especially following the liberation of the highway between Damascus and Aleppo, as well as other international highways, from armed terrorist groups supported by the Erdogan regime. The liberation of those highways is a milestone that serves to ensure the delivery of humanitarian aid to the civilians in my country who need it. Anyone seeking to provide a different explanation, by calling for a ceasefire and negotiations with Da'esh and the Al-Nusra Front in Idlib, is either ignorant of the situation in Syria, directly supports terrorism or is responsible for the bloodshed of Syrians. Why did Western countries, starting with the United States and followed by others, not negotiate ceasefires in the past with Bin Laden, Al-Zarqawi, Al-Baghdadi, Al-Julani and their terrorist entities? If the crux of the matter is a ceasefire with terrorist entities, then why did the United States and Western countries not negotiate ceasefires with Bin Laden, Al-Baghdadi, Al-Zarqawi, Al-Julani and others? My country reiterates its categorical rejection of any Turkish or other foreign illegal presence - United States, British and French - on Syrian territory. We call on the Turkish regime to curb its aggression and unbridled support of terrorism in Syria, Libya, the Horn of Africa and other regions. We also call for an end to the Israeli acts of aggression, which are conveniently used to alleviate pressure on terrorist groups and provide support to the Turkish aggression, thus unveiling the alliance and link between the Turkish regime and the Israeli occupation of my country.
