Mr. Olhaye (Djibouti): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this meeting at
short notice, given the calamity in the Palestinian
territories and the conflagration raging there. Since the
adoption of resolution 1402 (2002) last Saturday, the
situation, instead of improving, has got out of hand to
an alarming and dangerous degree. The international
outrage and the incessant calls for restraint, ceasefire
and immediate withdrawal, have fallen on deaf ears.
Israel has expanded its war and continued its relentless
military offensive directed solely at the infrastructure
and institutions of the Palestinian Authority. In the
words of the Secretary-General, when addressing the
Council on Monday, "It would take a reckless optimist
to say that the worst is over".

I applaud the Secretary-General for his courage
and for his forthright and candid statement on the
continuing chaos and bloodshed. Indeed, resolution
1402 (2002) is the best available instrument for halting
the undisguised menace to peace and security in the
region.

As we have stated all too often, my country
condemns all attacks against civilian populations,
whether Israeli or Palestinian. But the kind of terror
inflicted upon the Palestinian leadership, people,
security infrastructure and institutions in the past few
days defied all imagination. Israel has embarked on an
unprecedented military folly that will haunt it forever.
The massive Israeli military operations point to a
widening reoccupation of all territories under
Palestinian control.

Mr. Sharon's misguided display of military might
may cripple and paralyse the infrastructure and the
functioning of the Palestinian Authority, and may also
worsen the plight of the people. But brute force will
not kill their spirit. Mr. Sharon's relentless pursuit of a
military strategy that basically seeks to undermine the
Palestinian Authority, while at the same time
demanding that it crack down on the militant groups, is
short-sighted. Such a policy is bound to engender
hopelessness and breed more violence.
Both the Palestinian and Israeli peoples have the
right to live in peace and security, with a sure future.
The current one-sided war dims that prospect and helps
only to further escalate the suffering on both sides. We
are witnessing unbridled brutal aggression. Mr. Arafat
continues to languish in prison in his besieged
headquarters. The vengeful assault on the symbol of
Palestinian nationhood will have serious consequences.
It is also a slap in the face of Arab leaders who, for the
first time in history, have offered Israel normal
relations with all Arab States in exchange for ending
the occupation of Palestinian lands and for withdrawal
from all territories occupied in the 1967 war.

One of the perplexing questions that is still
begging for an answer is this: who has the power and
influence to restrain Sharon's military machine? Given
the current escalation of the bloodshed, the
prevarication and impotence of the international
community is numbing, to say the least. Those who are
supposed to make a difference in this insane situation
are trapped between inaction, incoherence and distant
hope.

As the Secretary-General argued forcefully before
the Council on Monday, security and peace must be
addressed in parallel in the spirit of Security Council
resolutions 1397 (2002) and 1402 (2002). The
legitimate security concerns of Israel cannot be
addressed independently or in isolation, without taking
into full consideration the legitimate political
aspirations of the Palestinian people. In this context,
the readiness of the Arab world to live in peace with
Israel deserves the undivided attention of Israel. This
is, we believe, the only way out of the hatred, mistrust
and pervasive vulnerability to acts of extremism on
both sides. We hope that the Council will live up to
expectations with respect to the maintenance of peace
and security throughout the whole world, particularly
given the current circumstances in the Middle East.

