Mr. Omaar (Somalia): I wish first, on behalf of
my Government and my people, to express our
gratitude for the deep sympathy and appreciation that
all participants have shown for the Somali people in
the circumstances that currently prevail. I think that the
international community and the Somali people are in
partnership not only on the issues of Somalia but on
those related to the subregion as well.

Essentially, I believe, the Somalis have delivered
part of what they can do. On the political aspects, we
have responded - and I think we have delivered. It is
30 days since the Government was put together. It will
be another 30 days before the pledging conference for
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM).
That means that 60 days will have gone out of the 100-
day target we have set ourselves: we will be left with
only 40 days. I therefore want to reinforce the urgency
and immediacy of the situation.

Finally, I want to say that we have a balance
sheet. In our view, we have four points on the plus side
and four points on the minus side. On the plus side we
have political will; we have public momentum; we
have 3,300 joint security forces that are ready in terms
of human resources; and we have the willingness and
the receptivity of the international community and the
regional countries. Those are the four pluses.

The four points on the minus side are these: we
have the spoilers who so far reject peace and stability;
we have piracy; we have a lack of resources; and we
have the past failures to deal with, in terms of both
history and perception.

We can do nothing about the past. We are not
responsible for that, and for that reason we ask the
Council not to place us in a chicken-and-egg situation.
We are living in the present, and we need the Council's
urgent assistance to enable us to meet the targets for
the 100 days. This is a dynamic situation, yet we
believe we can establish peace and bring more people
on board and into the peace process. But we need
urgent attention, in parallel, to AMISOM. and to our
security forces.

If we can get to that benchmark, I think the next
meeting will be far more positive.

