Mr. Nazarian (Armenia): Thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this important discussion
on a topic that has gained sound public and political
acknowledgement.

ll-33lll
It is commendable that this body has continued
its practice of holding open debates on the protection
of civilians, featuring briefings by the Under-
Secretaries-General and Assistant Secretary-General,
which offer an analysis of the Council's action as
compared with previous years and also touch upon
important developments. In a lessons-learned process,
this open debate should also enable the Council to
more effectively address specific concerns related to
the protection of civilian populations.

The Council has to send a clear message to all
parties in armed conflict regarding their obligation and
condemning violations of international humanitarian
and human rights law. In this context, the Security
Council should have clearly defined goals and
priorities for its work. It is important that the Council,
while preventing conflict, be focused on the protection
of civilians within the overall process of peaceful
resolution of disputes, because only by addressing the
root causes of conflicts can sustainable peace be
achieved, which in turn will contribute to the
protection of civilians.

The frequency with which the Security Council
addresses this issue reflects the urgency of the matter
and the need for the international community to fulfil
its commitments to protecting civilians through the
implementation of provisions of international
humanitarian law. Therefore, we share the views
expressed by Council members and other speakers
calling for more systematic attention to protection, and
we believe that it should be frequently reflected in the
deliberations of the Security Council.

We strongly condemn deliberate attacks on and
the killing of civilians through the indiscriminate or
disproportionate use of force, which is a gross
violation of international humanitarian law in any
conflict in any part of the world. In this context,
increased efforts to fight impunity at the national and
international levels are essential.

It is unfortunate that, despite the existence of
international legal instruments and normative
mechanisms, innocent civilians, including women and
children, as well as international humanitarian
personnel, continue to suffer in conflict situations.
Undoubtedly, the prosecution of those responsible for
crimes committed against peaceful populations
continues to be an urgent matter. We believe that the
Security Council should further contribute to the
strengthening of the rule of law and the upholding of
international law by supporting criminal justice
mechanisms. The relevant United Nations entities and
international treaty bodies should also continue to play
their important role. The priority at this point is to
ensure the comprehensive and effective
implementation of existing norms.

Today's debate also offers an opportunity for the
Council to evaluate progress on key issues, such as the
implementation of resolution 1894 (2009), and to
indicate areas where further focus is needed, including
the enhancement of compliance with international
humanitarian law and the strengthening of
accountability for its violation. Ensuring such
accountability and enhancing compliance with
international legal obligations by parties to a conflict
should be viewed as key elements of the Council's
responsibility to maintain international peace and
security. Bettering the use of established sanctions
regimes and implementing the binding resolutions that
call upon all States to adopt national legislation for the
prosecution of individuals responsible for genocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes are important
in this context.

Armenia welcomes the French initiative to hold
this open debate. It is an opportunity to recapitulate
and reflect on the Council's past experiences in dealing
with the issue of protection and to highlight priority
aspects of the practical actions of the United Nations.

