Mr. Corr (Ireland): On behalf of my delegation, I
would also like to thank High Commissioner Lubbers
for his very comprehensive and detailed presentation
this morning, and also to commend you, Sir, for the
leadership and determination you have shown since
assuming the presidency.

Since many of the points I would have raised
have already been answered, I should like to ask just
two or three general questions, if I may.

One, which Mr. Lubbers addressed at the
beginning and conclusion of his remarks as well as in
his first response, is related to his use of the word
"paradigm" in terms of a new approach by the
international community to refugees. In terms of the
Global Consultations process, the meeting of ministers
in Geneva in December and many issues that he has
been emphasizing over recent months, he has referred
to the need for the international community, building
on the 1951 Convention and the 1967 Protocol, to look
at new challenges of modernization, as I think he put it,
on issues such as the protection of refugees within
broader migration movements; burden-sharing, of
course, which has become critical because many
Governments, as he said, are reluctant to take so many
refugees; and the integration of economic migrants,
which can be a very difficult issue.

Does Mr. Lubbers see, in general terms, an
operational set of conclusions emerging out of the
process that the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) is now engaged
in? This is, in many ways, an abstract question, but the
conclusion to those issues, of course, will become
deeply operational, depending on how the international
community and the Council look at these issues in the
future.

A second question I also wanted to ask concerns
refugees not being allowed to languish in camps, often
for decades. The High Commissioner made the point
on the repatriation of Eritrean refugees from the Sudan,
where, I think, a figure of 36,000 was mentioned. He
rightly stressed that many of those people have been in
camps since the 19605 and the 1970s. Is there a
particular new approach that can be taken? The same,
obviously, would become true of Afghanistan,
potentially; millions of people, even before 11
September, have been in camps in Iran and Pakistan.
What approach, including in the context of the
discussions with the African Union on the New
Partnership for Africa's Development, could be taken
to address the question of long-term refugees, since
often - particularly in many African countries - that
has been a problem that the international community
has tended to ignore and that often, in turn, becomes a
very destabilizing factor, sometimes years or decades
afterwards, in terms of conflict prevention?

The last question I did want to ask, picking up on
the remarks of the High Commissioner, refers to the
Great Lakes region. We had the opportunity to hear
President Buyoya earlier this week. In terms of the
numbers of internally displaced persons or refugees
who, once there is a ceasefire, may potentially be
returning in much larger numbers to Burundi, there has
been some speculation that there have been discussions
on safe havens as an interim measure or, given the
numbers involved, that a more structured approach will
be adopted. I noticed, of course, that Mr. Lubbers used
the word "voluntary" in his statement. Does he see the
particular challenge in the Great Lakes region and in
Burundi as one of the more complex over the coming
period? Since, hopefully, there will be a ceasefire
before too long, how rapid a movement of returnees
does he envisage, given the 600,000, I think, in
Tanzania alone?

These are very general questions, but, to
conclude, I would also like to express appreciation for
the detail with which he has gone into these issues. We
appreciate very much the work he is doing.

