Mr. Okitundu (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): At the outset, I should like
to say how pleased my delegation and I are to see you,
Sir, presiding over this public meeting of the Security
Council on the situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. I should also like to take this opportunity to
pay tribute to the excellent work done by the
Permanent Representative of Jamaica during her
presidency last month.

Through you, Sir, I would also like to pay a well-
deserved tribute to the outgoing members of the
Security Council, particularly our African brothers,
Tunisia and your country, Mali. I should like to express
the appreciation of my country for your tireless efforts
in the quest for peace in our region in particular - in
Angola, Burundi and my country, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

At a time when the world is welcoming the
notable progress in the Burundi peace process, much
remains to be done for Angola and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. I would therefore like to ask
our friends who are leaving the Council to continue to
champion the cause of Angola and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in all forums, in the United
Nations and elsewhere, so as to promote peace, not
only for the countries and peoples who have suffered
so greatly, but also for all the countries and peoples of
the Great Lakes region, which have been in turmoil for
more than 10 years.

Before giving my delegation's assessment of the
matter before us today, I should like to tell the Council
about the outcome of the informal inter-Congolese
political negotiations that were held from 6 to 9
December in Abuja, the capital of the Federal Republic
of Nigeria. The negotiations were mediated by
Assistant Secretary-General Mr. Ibrahima Fall;
Ambassador Mogwe and Professor Lebatt, who are
members of the national dialogue facilitation team,
were also invited as observers.

Generally speaking, the issues discussed related
to the major questions still outstanding after the Addis
Ababa meeting.

S/l'V.4437

 

The first issue, which related to the question of
inclusive participation, was initially considered in the
presence of the United Nations mediator and members
of the facilitation team, after which the matter was
discussed privately among the Congolese exclusively.
During that second, private, meeting, a compromise
emerged on the numbers, the quotas and the nature of
the participants in the inter-Congolese dialogue. It was
agreed that there would be broader representativeness
with fewer participants, and this would mean the
following: first, the number of participants in the inter-
Congolese dialogue would be reduced from 330 to 300;
secondly, each of the components - the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
Rassemblement congolais pour la democratie (RCD)-
Goma, the Mouvement de liberation congolais (MLC)
and the political opposition - was reduced from 62 to
55 representatives; thirdly, the civil society component
was strengthened and raised to 66 representatives in
order to allow the participation of religious groups and
the Mayi-Mayi resistance; fourthly, traditional chiefs
are represented by at least two representatives in each
of the three groups present in Abuja; fifthly, as for the
external political opposition, the 55 delegates are
distributed as follows: five for the outside opposition,
30 for the Gaborone political groups and 20 for other
political movements not yet involved in the inter-
Congolese dialogue. Finally, each component can bring
members of the diaspora into its delegation as it sees
fit.

The second point considered was the orderly
withdrawal of foreign forces. The Government
demonstrated that new Rwandan troops had been
deployed in Congolese territory and that there was real
difficulty in achieving a resolution through the inter-
Congolese dialogue if the occupying forces - mainly
Rwandan and Ugandan - did not withdraw from the
territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
before the conclusion of the dialogue. The occupation
tends to perpetuate itself, and the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) has confirmed that Rwandan
troops have been deployed. This is a serious hindrance
to the important partnership that the Council had so
patiently worked on with the actors in the Congolese
drama.

The Rwandan authorities, favouring force as a
way of resolving the conflict, have now become the
main obstacle to the peace process and to

democratization in the Great Lakes region. It is up to
the Council to note this and to condemn it strongly,
because strengthening the Rwandan military presence
poses the obvious risk of a widespread resumption of
warfare.

With regard to the elections, the new political
order, national sovereignty and territorial integrity, it
was decided by common consent to hold a meeting
later, when those matters would be taken up.
Significant progress was made, which will help in
future inter-Congolese negotiations, including the
inter-Congolese dialogue scheduled to take place in
South Africa.

We are very grateful to the Government of South
Africa for offering to host the forum so that we can
work towards reconciliation and national harmony, and
in general for the tireless efforts of that fraternal
country to restore peace in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and to promote the dignity of the Congolese
people. My Government welcomes the fact that the
participants at the informal negotiations concluded that
there was a need to abide by the commitments entered
into at Gaborone, including that relating to the
inclusive nature of the inter-Congolese dialogue, as
called for in Security Council resolutions and as a
fundamental principle of the Lusaka Agreement. This
should give all Congolese socio-political groups an
opportunity to be involved in the national dialogue.
The main obstacles to political negotiations, apart from
the financial obstacles, have now been lifted.

The Abuja meeting also showed once again that
when the Congolese political actors meet among
themselves without outside interference, they are
always able to understand each other and find
compromise solutions. A new meeting of experts is
scheduled for early January to prepare for a summit
between the President of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the leaders of the two rebel movements.

At the regional level, after several informal
meetings between the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of
Burundi and of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the Governments of the two countries decided to
improve bilateral relations. The Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Burundi was invited to Kinshasa to consider
the modalities for the withdrawal of Burundi troops
from Congolese territory and to discuss normalizing
diplomatic relations between the two countries.

Sll'V.4437

 

As for the matter under consideration, the
Council has before it the addendum to the report of the
Panel of Experts on the Illegal Exploitation of Natural
Resources and Other Forms of Wealth of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, activities that
violate its national sovereignty. It is important to note
that in order to define the aim of its work the Panel of
Experts saw fit to define and interpret the concept of
illegal exploitation in its report. This includes all kinds
of mining, production, marketing and exporting from
the Democratic Republic of the Congo without the
consent of the legitimate Government - in other
words, in violation of national sovereignty, mining
codes, environmental provisions, international treaty
law and customary law.

In calling into question the countries members of
the Southern African Development Community
(SADC) that came to help one of their own cope with
armed aggression, it seems to me that the addendum
inaccurately reflects the relevant facts and also seems
to depart from the definition of illegal exploitation as
set forth in paragraph 15. No army from a SADC
member country would have been brought into my
country without the consent of the legitimate
Government had the Democratic Republic of the
Congo not been attacked, suffered aggression and been
invaded.

The Government considers that condemning an
initiative that enabled it to defend its national
sovereignty amounts to depriving a State of its basic
right under Article 51 of the United Nations Charter to
resort to individual or collective self-defence to
preserve its sovereignty and territorial integrity.

In this connection, we would do well to recall
France under General Charles de Gaulle, who spoke
before, during and after the Second World War in
support of respect for the sovereignty of all States, the
preservation of their independence and the
maintenance of international peace and security. At the
time, France had enjoyed the support and assistance of
the Allies.

More recently, under President George W. Bush,
the American people is showing exemplary courage in
trying to cope, as a nation, with an attack against the
"American way of life", which the whole world
admires and envies. The United States naturally enjoys
support from many other countries in combating
terrorism. Our Government and people reiterate their
sympathy to the American Government and people and
reaffirm the commitment made by Major-General
Joseph Kabila, President of the Republic, to join the
struggle against terrorism in all of its manifestations.

I am pleased to note that the addendum confirms
the conclusions and validates all the elements of the
report that appeared earlier in document S/2001/357.
The large-scale pillaging and illegal exploitation of the
mineral resources of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo are proceeding systematically, and this is one of
the major issues in the conflict. It can be seen from the
addendum that along with the war, and in its shadow,
massive economic pillaging - as great as anything
Africa has ever suffered from - is under way. It is
now established that problems related to insecurity
along the borders and instability in the Great Lakes
region, invoked by those committing aggression
against the Democratic Republic of the Congo, cannot
justify the occupation of almost half of Congolese
territory by a coalition of armies from other countries,
whose front lines are more than 2,000 kilometres from
those countries' borders.

The danger that hangs over the effort to establish
peace in the Great Lakes region, and in establishing a
new political order in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, lies in the fact that the methods of the illegal
exploitation of the natural resources and other forms of
wealth of the Democratic Republic of the Congo have
become so sophisticated that, as the addendum notes,
the illegal economic activities of the aggressors are
now self-sustaining and involve almost no financial
burden on the countries concerned.

The Commission of National Experts set up by
the Democratic Republic of the Congo estimated
exports by Rwanda, Uganda and Burundi from 1998 to
2001 at more than $427 million in fine diamonds for
jewellery, about $800 million in coltan and more than
$24 million in cassiterite.

I note, moreover, that a number of independent
inquiries - foremost among which was that of the
British Parliament, which I welcome and for which I
am grateful - have arrived at the same conclusion
reached by the Panel of Experts in last April's report.
The British parliamentary report notes that exports,
particularly gold and coffee from Uganda, are
comparable to those from North and South Kivu,
although everyone knows that Uganda produces barely
any gold or coffee. The report also singles out Rwanda,

S/l'VA437

 

which officially acknowledges having produced 63
tons of coltan, whereas it actually exported 603 tons in
2000.

One must therefore ask: Who profits from this
crime? My Government would point first to the
military-political groups in power in Rwanda and
Uganda; businessmen in the two countries; and
criminal networks involved in money-laundering
through the traffic in drugs, diamonds, coltan and
weapons. All of these mafia-like networks promote
criminal activity in the Congolese economy and in that
of the Great Lakes region as a whole, which has
become one of the prime meeting places in Africa for
counterfeiters, arms dealers and launderers of drug
money.

I am also glad to see that, in paragraph 16, the
Panel of Experts rightly stresses another aspect of that
exploitation: human resources. The people's resistance
to the demands, pillaging and exploitation to which
they are subject leads to periodic massacres of local
populations by the invaders. It is no coincidence that
such massacres always take place in mining areas, such
as Kasika in South Kivu and Djugu, Mongbalu and
Watsa in Oriental Province. Indeed, all the information
provided by national and international human rights
organizations - the MISNA Catholic agency, Amnesty
International, Human Rights Watch, the International
Crisis Group, South Kivu youth organizations and
associations, and the Congolese Foundation for Human
Rights and Peace - confirms that the war in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is a humanitarian
disaster.

Thus, the pillaging and illegal exploitation of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo goes hand in hand
with massacres, massive population displacements and
the abuse of children and of Rwandese prisoners in
mining and timber operations. Those organizations
have established that over 3 million people have died
directly or indirectly because of the war. The
International Crisis Group has estimated the number of
displaced persons within the country at 2 million and
of those outside at 300,000. In a report to the Security
Council of 28 November 2000, Ms. McAskie, Deputy
Emergency Relief Coordinator, said that 16 million
people were threatened by famine because of the war,
representing over one third of the Congolese
population. A recent report of the World Health
Organization indicates that the incidence of HIV/AIDS
has increased significantly in recent years in the

Democratic Republic of the Congo. The reasons for
that increase include the fact that the aggressor forces
come from countries where the HIV/AIDS rate is
among the highest in sub-Saharan Africa.

Along with exploiting the natural resources and
other wealth of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Uganda military officers have stirred up ethnic
conflicts, particularly in Ituri in Orientale Province,
where the Lendus and Hemas killed each other in great
numbers between June 1999 and October 2000, causing
thousands of deaths and displacements.

Similarly, the Congolese will never forget the
frenzied, mercenary rush for profits that brought
Rwanda and Uganda to bloody confrontation in
Kisangani, in Orientale Province. These clashes were
denounced by the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Congolese people as a
whole and the international community. That was a
case without precedent in the history of international
relations. Never before had the world witnessed two
foreign armies cross their respective borders to clash
on the territory of a neighbouring country and to claim
spheres of influence in which they could exploit
resources that did not belong to them.

With respect above all to the environment and
ecology, almost all of the inquiries undertaken by the
most respected agencies have shown that all our
national parks, designated by the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization as
the collective heritage of mankind, have been
systematically devastated. They are subject to poaching
as a custom of war and to organized illegal trafficking.
The species that live there, which are unique in the
world, are often slaughtered with automatic weapons.
A report of a Congolese institute for nature
conservation notes, for instance that, of the 11,000
hippopotamuses that lived in the waters of Virunga
National Park, only 1,000 remain.

I wish to take this opportunity today to make a
solemn and urgent appeal to the international
community to support my Government's efforts to
preserve and protect our many animal species, such as
elephants, bonobos, gorillas in the eastern plains,
mountain gorillas, chimpanzees, baboons, white
rhinoceroses, okapis and Congo peacocks, all of which
are being exterminated.

I thank the Panel of Experts for having
recognized the tireless efforts made by Major General

Sll'V.4437

 

Joseph Kabila, President of our Republic, as well as his
resolve to undertake reforms, to implement sound
macroeconomic policies, to manage public affairs in a
wise and open manner and, above all, to respect the
law so that everything can be done to ensure the
country's economic recovery and reconstruction.

The efforts of the President of the Republic are
based on the following exigencies. The national
sovereignty and territorial integrity of our territory
must be defended. Lasting peace must be restored
through a negotiated solution to the war of aggression,
which has cost the Congo millions of lives over the
past three years. This is needed to end once and for all
the horrible suffering and immeasurable misery and
death that our people have been subjected to under the
aggression. Ways and means must be sought to allow
the Congolese people effectively to enjoy fundamental
freedoms and basic human rights. More efficient
management of public services must be established
through reform policies so as to ensure good
governance, full respect for human rights and popular
participation in the functioning of democratic
institutions once peace has been restored. National
human and material resources must be developed in
order to enable the country once again to become a
major political and economic player in Africa. Lastly,
dignity and pride, which are cherished by peoples
throughout the world, must be restored to the
Congolese people.

Today, with the assistance of the Bretton Woods
institutions, the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is preparing a new policy to
develop the private sector, promote national and
foreign investment, reform socio-economic sectors,
ensure transparency in management, fight corruption,
restructure our armed forces, demobilize child soldiers
and reform our judicial system. Along those lines, the
Government recently drafted a new mining code.
Consultations and negotiations will continue with our
national and foreign social and economic partners.

With respect to transparency in public
administration, the Government has begun auditing all
public enterprises. The audits have been made public
and those in positions of responsibility who have fallen
short have been punished. Furthermore, I am pleased to
inform the Council that the President of the Republic
recently ordered the establishment of an anti-
corruption commission in order to strengthen the rule
of law. The commission of national experts, which is

assisting us at this meeting, is mandated not only with
investigating the illegal exploitation of the natural
resources and other wealth of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, but also with monitoring the review of
all agreements concluded by the Government.

My Government has already indicated its
agreement with the recommendations made by the
Panel of Experts in its report and notes with great
interest the comments offered in the addendum. My
Government therefore believes that it is up to the
Security Council to draw conclusions from the relevant
recommendations of the Panel's reports so as to break
the linkage that regrettably exists between the pillaging
of resources and the continuation of the war in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

My Government also believes that if the Council
wishes to renew the mandate of the Panel of Experts, it
will be absolutely essential to strengthen significantly
its expertise to enable it to better define, mainly at a
purely technical level, the responsibilities related to the
illegal exploitation of natural resources and other
forms of wealth of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

Looking at the overall picture of restoring peace,
we must also establish a link between the cessation of
hostilities and the economic recovery of our country,
while providing a structural framework that will help
the Democratic Republic of the Congo emerge from the
current crisis.

My Government believes that at the appropriate
time the Council should follow up on the request made
to it on 3 May 2001 to take prudent preliminary steps
to place an embargo on looted products that transit
through Kigali, Bujumbura and Kampala.

Primarily, my Government would also be very
grateful to the Council if it would agree to the
implementation of all the recommendations contained
in the report of the Panel of Experts, particularly the
following: speed up the deployment of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC), because only the
total and definitive withdrawal of the aggressors can
ensure a halt to the plunder of the wealth of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo; demilitarize
Kisangani, make reparations for material damage in
that city and indemnify its people, pursuant to
resolution 1304 (2000); impose all possible measures,
in keeping with the duties and obligations entrusted to

S/l'VA437

 

the Security Council by the Charter, against any party
that rejects the demilitarization of Kisangani and the
countries that support it; freeze assets of the rebel
movements and their leaders, and of companies and
individuals involved in the illegal plundering and
exploitation of Congolese resources; request Members
of the United Nations to stop providing financial
assistance to countries that are behind the plundering
and illegal exploitation of resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo; request the International
Monetary Fund and the World Bank to suspend their
cooperation with aggressor countries if pillaging and
warfare continue; request the neighbouring countries of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and transit
countries to stop encouraging any kind of economic
and financial activities carried out in their territories
that are linked with the war in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo; support the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, because of its financial and moral losses and its
economic decline, in its legitimate right to demand
financial compensation from the countries and
individuals guilty of plundering, whether directly or
indirectly; and order legal action to be taken against
the authors and co-authors of this plundering and their
accomplices.

I cannot conclude without paying a heartfelt
tribute to Mr. Amos Namanga Ngongi, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, and all United
Nations and associated personnel for their ongoing
contribution to restoring peace to my country through
their full dedication and total self-sacrifice. I also
welcome the atmosphere of trust, mutual respect and
real cooperation between the United Nations and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, which certainly
facilitates United Nations and humanitarian operations
throughout our territory.

