Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): First, I wish to thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Haysom for his extensive briefing, and Ambassador
Seikal for his statement. We value Special Representative
Haysom's insights on the enormous security, political
and economic challenges faced by Afghanistan and
his persistent and untiring efforts to work with Afghan
partners for peace.

We are supportive of the Afghan Government's
unwavering commitment and ongoing efforts to
achieve national unity and lasting stability, as rightly
underscored by Ambassador Seikal. However, although
we commend the best efforts of the Government and
the Afghan National Defence and Security Forces, it is
troubling that the Taliban appear to be gaining ground
and sowing fear among the vulnerable and long-suffering
population. Yesterday's horrific string of attacks, for
which the Taliban has claimed responsibility, provides
an example of their continued barbarism. As such, we
are pleased that the Council swiftly agreed to condemn
the attacks and express solidarity with the people and
the Government of Afghanistan as well as with the
peoples and the Governments of Nepal and India. We
remain convinced that the Taliban and other violent
extremist and terrorist groups operating in Afghanistan
must continue to be dealt with in a comprehensive
manner. In that context, ongoing efforts to win hearts
and minds of the Afghan population must be stepped up
in order to deny the Taliban their support base.

Like many others that want to see a peaceful,
stable and prosperous Afghanistan, Malaysia places
much hope in the ability of the recently established
Quadrilateral Coordination Group on the Afghan
Peace and Reconciliation Process to successfully
convene direct peace talks between the Government
and the Taliban. Unfortunately, given the continuing
Taliban intransigence, such hopes remain unachievable.
The recent killing ofthe principal Taliban leader Mullah
Akhtar Mansour, according to some analysts, would
appear to have complicated the Group's efforts in that
regard. Against such a development, no reiteration is
required that meaningful progress towards sustainable
peace and stability can be achieved only through
a peaceful political settlement among the parties.
Let us hope that the members of the Quadrilateral
Coordination Group will continue to explore and pursue
all avenues in facilitating early direct talks between the
Government and the Taliban. In that respect, Malaysia
is pleased to note the Afghan Government's steadfast
commitment to implementing the Self-reliance through
Mutual Accountability Framework. The Afghan
Government's robust engagement and cooperation with
regional partners and the international community,
including through the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process,
is encouraging.
The NATO Warsaw Summit 2016 next month and
the upcoming Brussels conference in October, in our
view, present opportunities for partners to complement
and assist the Afghan Government's reconstruction and
development efforts. At the regional level, cooperation
in addressing security issues and countering the
threat of terrorism and extremism has thus far been
encouraging. Pursuing further collective efforts
involving the Afghan Government, regional partners
and the United Nations in developing a framework for
a regional counter-terrorism strategy within the Heart
of Asia-Istanbul Process is imperative. My delegation
further notes that the Secretary-General's report on
Afghanistan (S/2016/532) highlights, among other
issues, the increasing number of civilian casualties,
mainly attributable to anti-Government forces or
elements. It is therefore not surprising that children
continue to suffer disproportionately from the ongoing
conflict, accounting for almost one-third of all
civilian casualties.

On a positive note, Malaysia is encouraged by the
strong progress in ending recruitment of children by the
Afghan National Police. Malaysia strongly encourages
full implementation of the Action Plan and Road Map
towards Compliance, particularly by the Afghan local
police. However, the plight of the children is not over,
as non-State armed groups and violent extremist groups
continue to recruit and retain children among their
ranks through manipulation or coercion, facilitated by
poverty. In that connection, we call on all parties to the
conflict to undertake the necessary measures to uphold
the obligations to ensure the safety, security and well-
being of all children in the country.

We must emphasize that the international
community's support is especially vital to the success
of this long-term endeavour. To that end, we call for
continuing and strengthened cooperation between
the Government and the United Nations, particularly
with UNAMA and the Special Representative to the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict, as
well as among bilateral and other multilateral partners
and stakeholders.
In conclusion, Malaysia reiterates its firm support
for the reconciliation and the reintegration efforts
undertaken by the Afghan Government to provide
a secure future for all Afghans and to end violent
extremism and terrorist groups' activities.

