Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): Allow me, first of all,
to join other colleagues in expressing our sincere
condolences to the Russian Federation.
We thank Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura and
Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for their
briefings on the Syrian political and humanitarian track.
We reiterate our support for the continued diplomatic
endeavours of the Special Envoy to facilitate a peaceful
solution to the Syrian crisis. We also appreciate the
United Nations and its humanitarian partners for
continuing to provide aid to millions of Syrians under
difficult circumstances.

We have been expressing our concern about the
humanitarian consequences of a further military
escalation in Idlib and its surrounding areas. As it has
been mentioned repeatedly, there are close to 3 million
people residing in that area; and 2.1 million are already
in need of humanitarian assistance. In addition,
1.4 million are internally displaced. Therefore, a
further military escalation would endanger millions of
civilians and severely affect the ability of the United
Nations and its humanitarian partners to deliver aid,
leading to further loss of lives as well as displacement.
That is why the Secretary- General made an appeal last
week to avoid a full-scale battle in Idlib, as it would
unleash a humanitarian nightmare.

While we worry about the fate of civilians,
we also understand that there are United Nations-
listed terrorists who must be defeated with enhanced
international cooperation and coordination. Therefore,
as the Secretary-General underlined, it is vital to spare
no effort to find solutions that protect civilians in Idlib.
At such critical times, we believe it is imperative to
do everything possible to demonstrate the primacy
of diplomacy.

In that regard, we welcome that the meeting between
the Presidents of Russia and Turkey held in Sochi
resulted in an agreement to establish a demilitarized
zone. While expressing our appreciation to both
countries, we hope that their agreement will protect
civilians and avoid the worst scenario, which both
the Special Envoy and the Humanitarian Coordinator
have been warning of repeatedly. We encourage the
Astana guarantors, particularly Russia and Turkey, to
continue to work together to find a sustainable solution
to the situation. We also believe their efforts should be
supported by all States that have influence over local
actors in Syria.

As we continue to advocate for a durable solution
to the Idlib situation, it is also absolutely imperative
to support the humanitarian programmes of the United
Nations and its partners. The humanitarian tragedy in
Idlib and other parts of Syria continue to require safe,
rapid and sustained humanitarian access. As the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2018/845) mentions, all
methods of aid delivery are essential to the efficient
and effective provision of humanitarian assistance and
to ensuring a needs-based response. In that connection,
we welcome the visit of the Humanitarian Coordinator
for Syria on 28 August. We hope his meetings with the
Syrian Government and other stakeholders will bring
about tangible results that improve humanitarian access
to enable the United Nations and its humanitarian
partners to provide aid to all Syrians based on needs.

While we all have been rightly focusing on the
urgent situation in Idlib, we all also agree that both the
crisis in Idlib and the whole of Syria cannot be addressed
without a Syrian-owned and Syrian-led comprehensive
political process facilitated by the United Nations.
Hence we support the continued efforts of the Special
Envoy. We acknowledge the consultations he mentioned
having last week on the constitutional committee
with the Astana guarantors and the members of the
small group. In that regard, we underscore that all
Syrians parties and those States with influence should
support the efforts of the Special Envoy to finalize the
establishment of the constitutional committee, which is
critical to relaunching the intra-Syrian political talks.

In conclusion, there is no military solution to the
Syrian crisis. Only political solution, facilitated by the
United Nations, can meet the legitimate aspirations
of the people of Syria. As the Secretary-General
reminded us in his latest report, the only goal of the
United Nations efforts - which is to end the suffering
of Syrians - should be shared by all of us. At this very
critical time, the Council should extend its backing to
the Special Envoy as he continues his tireless efforts
to end the Syrian crisis through an inclusive political
process based on resolution 2254 (2015).

