The President (interpretation from French): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Angola, Cape Verde, Mozambique,
Namibia and Zimbabwe in which they request to be invited
to participate in the discussion of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Van Dunem
"Mbinda" (Angola) took a seat at the Council table;
Mr. Leao Monteiro (Cape Verde), Mr. Santos
(Mozambique), Mr. Andjaba (Namibia) and
Mr. Mapuranga (Zimbabwe) took the seats reserved
for them at the side of the Council Chamber.

The President (interpretation from French): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Observer
Mission in Angola, document S/ 1998/17.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/1998/62, which contains the text of a draft
resolution prepared in the course of the Council's prior
consultations.

I should like to draw members' attention to document
S/ 1998/56, which contains the text of a letter dated 21
January 1998 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council.

The first speaker on my list is the representative of
Angola, on whom I now call.

Mr. Van Dunem "Mbinda" (Angola)
(interpretation from French): First, may I, on behalf of
the Government of the Republic of Angola and on my
own behalf, extend a very warm welcome to you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of this important body
for the month of January. Through you, I would also like
to congratulate your predecessor, the representative of
Costa Rica, Ambassador Fernando Berrocal Soto, on his
successful work during the previous month.

(spoke in English)

I also take this opportunity to salute the new
members, namely, Brazil, Gabon, the Gambia, Slovenia
and Bahrain. We are sure they will be able to live up to
the confidence placed in them by the Member States in
the difficult task of helping the international community
in the search for solutions to the problems affecting
international peace and security.

As we enter the fourth year of the implementation of
the Lusaka Protocol, we can conclude that the transition
from war to a long and lasting peace in Angola, despite
being a difficult and complex task, is, after all, a goal that
can be achieved, provided that all those involved in the
peace process comply fully and in good faith with their
obligations.

We also have reasons to conclude that a cohesive
and firm stand by the international community is an
appropriate means to oppose all attempts to reverse the
path to peace and stability in Angola through the
derailment of its peace process. The adoption by the
Security Council of resolutions 1127 (1997) and 1135
(1997) has yielded results by having a positive impact on
the peace process. The overwhelming support these
resolutions have enjoyed, both from the Angolan people
and the international community at large, provides hard
evidence that the measures contained in them are capable
of persuading UNITA to meet its obligations, thus
speeding the conclusion of the remaining tasks under the
Lusaka Protocol.

Today, more than ever, we are close to this goal.
The Joint Commission recently approved the final
timetable for the implementation of the Lusaka Protocol.
We want to believe that this time UNITA will comply
fully and unconditionally, and within the new time-frame,
with the responsibilities it assumed in the Joint

 

Commission. These include, among others, UNITA's
complete demilitarization, the normalization of State
administration throughout the areas UNITA still occupies,
installation of UNITA leadership in the capital -
Luanda - and UNITA's transformation into a true political

party.

It is undeniable the peace process has made important
and substantial progress. Consequently, the risks of a return
to hostilities have been significantly reduced, and a general
climate of relative peace is still prevailing. The spirit of
national reconciliation and tolerance is gradually being
consolidated. All these achievements clearly indicate that
we are on the right track.

The Angolan Government welcomes the recent
positive developments in the peace process, particularly the
advance in the normalization of State administration.
However, this should not constitute a motive for any
relaxation of the pressure exerted upon UNITA by the
international community and by this Council in particular.
Otherwise, we will face the risk of new delays and even
setbacks. A11 Security Council resolutions and other
decisions must continue to be enforced. Restrictive and
mandatory measures, particularly those contained in the
Council's resolutions 864 (1993), 1127 (1997) and 1135
(1997) must continue to be observed by all Member States
and strictly monitored by the Committee on sanctions.

In this way, incidents such as the one that occurred
recently in the south of Angola will be prevented. As
members might have learned from the press, last 20
January our air force intercepted in Angolan airspace, over
the province of Kuando-Kubango, a DC-4 cargo aircraft
belonging to a company registered in South Africa, carrying
supplies to UNITA-controlled areas.

Following a preliminary investigation, it was disclosed
that the plane belonged to Interstate Airways, a private
company owned by Mr. Johanney Porfirio Parreira, a
national of South Africa, involved long ago in trade links
and transportation of supplies to UNITA-controlled areas,
including its headquarters.

Besides the owner of the company, the occupants of
the plane were Mr. Peter Karl Bitker, captain, a South
African national; Mr. Shuku Watu, co-pilot, a national of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo; Mr. Antoine
Sternberg, co-pilot, a German national; Mr. J efferies Nille,
flight engineer, a South African national; Mr. Vander
Willem Hans, reserve pilot, a South African national;
Mr. Steyn Johannes, civil construction worker, a South
African national; Mr. Gert Allen, civil construction
worker, a South African national; and finally,
Mr. Swanepole Rudier, civil construction worker, a South
African national.
My Government will make available, as soon as
possible, to the members of this Council further details of
this incident.

The perpetrators of this action, which violates the
Security Council resolutions on sanctions against UNITA
and is a blatant Violation of Angolan sovereignty, will be
brought to justice and punished in accordance with
Angolan law. We want to reiterate our appeal to all
Governments to continue to develop efforts to ensure full
compliance with all Security Council resolutions on
Angola, and to the Committee on sanctions to reinforce
its action. UNITA must also be pressured to abide by
those resolutions, as well as by the clauses of the Lusaka
Protocol.

Notwithstanding the difficulties of the road still
ahead, the Angolan Government remains optimistic
regarding the successful conclusion of the peace process
in the near future. The extension of the mandate of
MONUA for another three months indicates that this
optimism is also shared by the international community.

We should now concentrate part of our efforts on the
mobilization of the necessary resources for the
implementation of the final actions of the Lusaka
Protocol. In this respect, we take particular note of the
appeal made by the Secretary-General in paragraph 40 of
his report regarding the need to increase financial and
in-kind contributions to the activities associated with the
Lusaka Protocol.

I must recall that very recently my Government
made available, through the Instituto da Reintegracao
Social dos ex-Militares (IRSEM), in the province of
Huambo, 402.24 billion readjusted Kwanzas for the
demobilization of more than 1,400 members of the
UNITA military, as well as the payment of special
subsidies.

Other efforts have been made in other provinces
where the demobilization process is under way: food
rations have been delivered to the demobilized residents
in Bailundo, Lumduimbali, Alto-Hama, Cahala, Cuima
and so forth. In perspective, given the successful
experience with these actions, IRSEM. will dedicate
special attention this year to the preparation and

 

realization of agricultural and pastoral projects in the
localities with a greater concentration of demobilized
military personnel and will continue as well with the
registry of the demobilized communities and their families.
Another important initiative of social impact that is worth
noting here, is the professional reintegration of demobilized
personnel into the health and educational sectors.

As the Council is aware, as a result of decades of
armed conflict, Angola faces a serious social and
humanitarian crisis which requires the continued assistance
of the international community. The implementation of the
community rehabilitation programme approved at the
Brussels International Conference of Donors for Angola is
conducive to economic and social recovery, laying the
ground for the development of the country. To this end, the
Government would like to renew its appeal to the countries
and institutions which pledged to contribute to this
programme to honour their commitments.

I would like to express once again the gratitude of the
Angolan people and Government to all Governments, non-
governmental and international organizations for the
humanitarian aid provided to the populations and regions
most affected by the war.

In concluding, I wish to express our appreciation to
the Secretary-General, his Special Representative,
Mr. Alioune Blondin Beye, and the countries of the troika
of observers for their tireless efforts in pursuit of peace in
Angola. We wish also to thank the countries that did not
hesitate to provide troops for the United Nations peace
mission in my country.

With these few remarks on the part of my
Government, the draft resolution to be adopted today has
our support. We hope it will contribute to the rapid
conclusion of the peace process.


The President (interpretation from French): I thank
the representative of Angola for his kinds words addressed
to me.

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Mozambique, on whom I now call.


