Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): Let me commend you,
Mr. President, for taking the timely decision to convene
this debate. We support that initiative, which was
proposed by Canada, Jordan, Liechtenstein, New
Zealand and Switzerland. This debate gives us the
opportunity to discuss two specific subjects that are
crucial to our efforts to build an international order
based on peace and security and founded on
international law.

The entry into force of the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), on 1 July 2002,
was a landmark in the history of the United Nations
and a key element in the enforcement of international
law. Only 11 days afterwards, however, the Security
Council adopted resolution 1422 (2002). This is a
sensitive issue, given the resolution's possible
implications for that international treaty.

It is not the intention of the Brazilian Government
thoroughly to analyse those events and developments
here. We voiced our position in that regard at last
year's debate.

The creation of the ICC is the realization of what
was once only a dream. We now have an instrument to
ensure that the most dreadful crimes against basic
human rights will no longer remain unpunished. The
adoption of resolution 1422 (2002) stemmed from a
concern that that instrument might be misused. Some
States fear that the aims of the ICC could be distorted
and that this could lead to politically motivated
accusations against their nationals. Brazil is
nevertheless firmly convinced that those concerns have
already been addressed by the Rome Statute. In View of
that, it seems clear that the ICC provides all the
necessary checks and balances to prevent possible
abuses and politically motivated misuse of its
jurisdiction. Thus, efforts to secure broad immunities
from the potential jurisdiction of the Court are, in our
View, unnecessary.

For reasons already stated, Brazil is concerned
about proposals and initiatives that seek to reinterpret
or review the Rome Statute, in violation of the practice
of international law and of the Vienna Convention on
the Law of Treaties. The Statute is an international
treaty that contains specific procedures for amendment
that should be observed. The Brazilian Government is
ready to work towards alternative satisfactory solutions
that are legally sound and that preserve the integrity of
the Statute in both its letter and its spirit.

Brazil is concerned at the possible renewal of
resolution 1422 (2002) exempting peacekeepers from
the jurisdiction of the ICC, as we believe that
peacekeeping operations and the institution of the
International Criminal Court are two important pillars
in realizing the goals of the United Nations. We must
ensure that both instruments work in a coherent and
mutually reinforcing manner. The maintenance of
international peace and security and the repression of
serious crimes cannot be viewed as conflicting
objectives.

We believe that the success of the ICC depends
upon the continuing support it receives from its States
parties and from the international community as a
whole. Public opinion has on several occasions
demonstrated that it clearly stands behind the
objectives of the ICC and the denial of safe havens to
impunity.

Initiatives aimed at extending the exemptions of
certain categories of individuals from ICC jurisdiction
must not be carried out at the expense of the
effectiveness of the historic achievement represented
by the entry into force of the Rome Statute, which
represents a major step towards preventing continuing
impunity for the worst sorts of crimes. Efforts that may
have the effect of dismantling such an achievement do
not serve the cause of justice.

