Mr. Nkoloi (Botswana): We congratulate Lithuania
on its assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of May. We wish you every
success in carrying out your mandate, Madam.

We would like to commend the Secretary-General,

the High Commissioner for Human Rights and the
President of the Cote d'Ivoire chapter of the West Africa
Action Network on Small Arms for their briefings. We
thank the Secretary-General for his report on small
arms and light weapons issued on 27 April (S/2015/289),
which serves as the basis for our discussion today.
We take due note of the recommendations contained
therein.

Botswana welcomes today's open debate, in the
hope that it will lead to concrete recommendations that
will significantly contribute to an improvement in the
state of human security at the regional, subregional and
international levels. Discussions on this subject matter
are vital if we are to debate key related issues and better
facilitate responses to the challenges posed by the illicit
movement of small arms and light weapons. In that
context, we reiterate the importance of implementing
the provisions of the United Nations Programme of
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects, resolution 2117 (2013), adopted by the Security
Council in September 2013, and all other resolutions
adopted under this agenda item.

The achievement of peace and security is of
paramount importance to Botswana, and my delegation
believes that the ability of States to maintain safety
and stability is a precondition for the achievement of
sustained economic and social growth. As pointed out
in the report of the Secretary-General,

"Countries suffering from sustained levels of
armed conflict or violence are also those furthest
from reaching their Millennium Development Goal
targets." (S/2015/289, para. 31)

In that light, we believe that sustainable development
is possible only when the environment is free of crime
and violence. It is for that reason that we remain deeply
concerned about the uncontrolled manufacture, transfer
and circulation of small arms and light weapons across
the world, including in my own region, Africa.

There is no doubt that the very presence of those
weapons creates tensions in communities that often
result in eruptions of conflict in one form or another;
innocent civilians, especially women and children,
often fall victim to torture, rape and other forms
of sexual exploitation. What is disheartening is the
fact that the perpetrators of those crimes continue to
undermine international humanitarian law and human
rights law through their violations of the rights of
innocent people, and they are seldom held accountable
for those violations.

Like all countries, Botswana is also experiencing
problems related to the illicit circulation of small
arms, which has led to an increase in criminal activity
involving the use of such weapons. The problem is
exacerbated by long porous borders, particularly in
Southern Africa. We believe that the destruction of
surplus, seized, collected, confiscated and forfeited
weapons and ammunition is a starting point for reducing
the weapons stockpiles available for illicit circulation,
thereby reducing the burden of managing unnecessary
stockpiles.
The highly destabilizing effect of such weapons
compels us, as responsible members ofthe international
community, to exercise great vigilance with a view to
ending their illegal trade. In an effort to address that
phenomenon, Botswana has entered into bilateral
framework agreements with neighbouring countries,
through which we cooperate on issues of cross-border
crime, regional security and information exchange. I am
pleased to note that the joint cooperation agreements
among our law enforcement agencies have proved
critical to promoting regional stability and providing
for the security of our citizens.

The Security Council's deployment of peacekeeping
operations and special political missions in war-torn
countries around the world is truly commendable. The
expansion of those missions in the last decade shows
just how instrumental they are in the maintenance
of international peace and security. Strengthening
military and police capabilities on the ground is also
vital for a rapid response when conflicts break out.

I would like to conclude by assuring the Council
of Botswana's continued cooperation as we continue
to take stock of the status of the implementation
of programmes and to identify new challenges and
solutions so as to close the gaps that exist in arms
control. Peace and security, and ensuring that levels of
crime remain low, especially gun-related crime, remain
critical. There is no way that our peoples can enjoy
a better quality of life if they live in a world that is
riddled with violent crime and where small arms and
light weapons are easily available. Let us all unite and
work together to realize a vision of a safer world, for
our own sake and for that of future generations.

