The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Canada, Germany, Netherlands,
Nigeria and Sierra Leone, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Kanu
(Sierra Leone) took a seat at the Council table;
the representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.

The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend invitations under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Justice George
Gelaga King, President of the Special Court for Sierra
Leone, and Mr. Stephen Rapp, Prosecutor of the
Special Court for Sierra Leone.

It is so decided.

I invite Justice King and Mr. Rapp to take seats at
the Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

I wish to draw the attention of the members to
photocopies of a future document (S/2007/338),
containing a letter dated 7 June 2007 from the
representative of Canada, transmitting, in that State's
capacity as Chair of the Management Committee of the
Special Court for Sierra Leone, the Court's completion
strategy, a summary of the completion strategy and a
summary of the Court's completion budget.
I would like to welcome the presence of the
Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Asha-Rose Migiro, at
this meeting.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by the President and the Prosecutor of the
Special Court for Sierra Leone.

I now give the floor to Justice George Gelaga
King, President of the Special Court for Sierra Leone.

Justice King: I would like to begin by expressing
my sincere appreciation to the Security Council for the
decision to hold a debate on the Special Court for
Sierra Leone. It is a great honour for me, as President
of the Special Court for Sierra Leone, to have this
opportunity to brief Council members on the
achievements of the Court and the challenges facing it.

This is a crucial stage in the life of the Special
Court. While the Court is undertaking an
unprecedented level of judicial activity, it is already
beginning to wind down its overall operations in
Freetown.

In my remarks, I will update the Council on the
status of the legal proceedings at the Special Court and
its completion strategy. I will then talk about the
impact of the Court on Sierra Leone and its efforts to
leave a lasting legacy. Finally, I will describe areas
where support of the international community is
required to ensure that the Court successfully
concludes its mandate.

Four trials of nine individuals are currently
before the Special Court for Sierra Leone. Three of
these trials are taking place in Freetown, and one -
the trial of Mr. Charles Taylor, ex-President of the
Republic of Liberia - is being held in The Hague. The
trials of alleged members of the Civil Defense Forces
(CDF) and the Revolutionary United Front (RUF) are
before Trial Chamber I. The CDF trial has concluded,
and a judgement is expected in July 2007. In the RUF
trial, the defense is currently presenting its case. The
trials of alleged members of the Armed Forces
Revolutionary Council (AFRC) and of Mr. Charles
Taylor are before Trial Chamber II. In the AFRC trial,
a judgement is expected on 20 June. The trial of
Mr. Taylor opened with the Prosecutor's statement on
Monday, 4 June, in The Hague.

According to the updated completion strategy,
which was distributed to the members of the Council,
the Special Court for Sierra Leone will conclude all
07-37400
judicial activity in Freetown and in The Hague by the
end of 2009.

As I have already indicated, two of the trials
being conducted in Freetown - the AFRC and the
CDF trials - are now concluded and judgements will
be delivered in the coming weeks. A third trial, the
RUF trial, is scheduled to conclude by December 2007,
and a judgement is expected by June 2008. Once a
judgement has been delivered in the RUF trial, Trial
Chamber I will have concluded its assignments and
become functus officio.

With regard to the trial of Mr. Taylor, the
projection is that trial proceedings will last until
November 2008 and that a judgement on the merits
and, if applicable, on sentencing will be issued in June
2009.

Possible appeals may start in Freetown in July
2008. Any appeals proceedings are expected to last
approximately six months for each case and to be
concluded in the ARFC, CDF and RUF cases by
December 2008. It is expected that the Appeals
Chamber will complete a possible appeal in the Taylor
case by December 2009.

One indictee, Mr. Johnny Paul Koroma, is still at
large. If he is apprehended between now and the
completion date of December 2009, the completion
strategy and the budget of the Court will have to be
revisited.

Mr. President, while it is never possible to fully
predict the duration of legal proceedings, let me
reassure you of the Special Court's commitment to
achieving the milestones set forth in the completion
strategy and to continuing to review ways to increase
efficiency.

The importance of the Special Court for Sierra
Leone, however, goes beyond the completion of its
legal proceedings. As President of the Special Court
and as a Sierra Leonean, I hold the firm belief that the
establishment of the Court represents a major
contribution to long-term peace and security in Sierra
Leone and the subregion. The Court has contributed
greatly to the efforts being made in Sierra Leone to
resurrect the rule of law and to end impunity.

The Special Court has made its trials and other
activities a part of Sierra Leone's national discourse
and heritage. The Outreach Section of the Court,
through radio programmes, video screenings, town hall
07-37400

meetings and training sessions, has had great success in
engaging all sectors of Sierra Leone society. The
Outreach Section is now taking steps to ensure that
although the trial of Mr. Taylor is taking place in The
Hague, the whole of the trial process will be brought to
everyone in Sierra Leone and will be made accessible
throughout the West African region, particularly in
Liberia and beyond.

In addition, it should come as no surprise that, as
the Court approaches the end of its mandate, legacy
issues are one of its top priorities. The Court is
continuing to transfer expertise to Sierra Leoneans
through a number of programmes, including training
on courtroom interpretation, witness protection and
detention standards. The Special Court is also
exploring ways to ensure that its buildings, archives
and records will be preserved for Sierra Leone's
children's children. Potential uses of the Court's
physical site after completion of its mandate are being
explored in conjunction with the Government of Sierra
Leone.

The Special Court has benefited on numerous
occasions from the support of the Security Council. I
would like to express particular gratitude for the
Council's adoption of resolution 1688 (2006), which
noted my intention to authorize Trial Chamber II to
exercise its functions away from the seat of the Special
Court and requested all States to cooperate in the
transfer of Mr. Charles Taylor to the Netherlands, and
its adoption of resolution 1626 (2005), which extended
the mandate of the United Nations Mission in Liberia
to include the protection of the Court's premises by a
contingent of Mongolian troops.

To complete its mandate, the Special Court
continues to require the support of the Security Council
and all Member States. In this regard, I wish to make
three appeals.

First, the Special Court requires secure funding.
The Court has recently finalized a completion budget
that outlines its financial requirements from 1 July
2007 to 31 December 2009. The total budget amount is
$89 million. Available funds will be exhausted by
November 2007. That is of grave and imminent
concern. If the Special Court is to adhere to its
completion strategy, it is imperative and vital that there
be adequate financial support.

Secondly, the Court seeks the cooperation of the
international community in negotiating and concluding
3
additional agreements for the enforcement of potential
sentences and the relocation of witnesses. Sufficient
agreements must be in place as soon as possible to
avoid delays in the completion of the work of the
Court.

Thirdly, I encourage States to support the Court's
legacy projects and its consideration of relevant
residual issues.

Let me conclude by once again expressing my
gratitude to the Security Council and the Deputy
Secretary-General for the support that the Special
Court has received from the United Nations since its
inception. I would be remiss in my duty if I failed to
record a special word of thanks to the Management
Committee of the Special Court and the United Nations
Office of Legal Affairs for the invaluable help and
advice the Special Court has received from them at all
times.


The President (spoke in French): I give the floor
to Mr. Stephen Rapp, Prosecutor of the Special Court
for Sierra Leone.


