Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): Let me begin by
thanking the Ambassador of Indonesia for his briefing
and for his work since assuming the Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004).

The 1540 (2004) Committee is an importance
cornerstone of the international non-proliferation
architecture. As such, it is a key part of the rules-based
international system. The Committee plays a vital role
in helping States to prevent the proliferation of nuclear,
chemical and biological weapons to non-State actors,
thereby strengthening our collective efforts to deter and
eradicate the use of such weapons. We need only look at
instances in recent years where chemical weapons have
been used by groups such as Da'esh in Iraq and Syria to

realize what is at stake. We cannot stand by and allow
the unconscionable use of such weapons to take place.
The United Kingdom therefore is and will remain a
strong supporter of the work of the Committee. We
are pleased that this year's programme of work has
been adopted swiftly and see two key priorities for the
Committee's work this year under the leadership of the
Indonesian Ambassador.

The first priority is the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004). With the assistance of the Committee,
all States should work to ensure that their legislation,
national control frameworks and mechanisms for
both internal and international cooperation are up to
date and fit for purpose. It is particularly important
that States with specific circumstances, such as being
nexus points in global supply chains, take extra care
to ensure that they are implementing resolution 1540
(2004) effectively. As the Ambassador of Indonesia
mentioned this morning, developing voluntary
national action plans and assigning national points
of contact are practical steps that all States can take.
We commend such steps to all States Members of the
United Nations today. We also join the United States in
urging all States that have not yet voluntarily reported
their implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) to the
Committee to do so as quickly and as practically as
possible. In an interconnected world, a chain is only
as strong as its weakest link and the responsibility lies
with all of us.

Looking ahead, we recognize that the next
comprehensive review of the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) will take place in 2021. The
United Kingdom stands ready to do all it can to make
sure that that process is thorough and effective and that it
leads to practical outcomes in deterring and preventing
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.

A second priority should be assistance to States. I
am once again grateful that the Ambassador of Indonesia
highlighted the issue in his remarks this morning. The
effective implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) is
not straightforward, however vital it may be. I welcome
the work already being done by the Committee to
facilitate the provision of assistance to States that have
requested it, including by helping coordinate it with
other States and international organizations that have
the capacity to provide it. The United Kingdom stands
ready to provide legal and regulatory expertise, as
well as broader support, to States looking to meet their
obligations and strengthen their national frameworks. In
that regard, the work of Working Group II, coordinated

by France, is particularly important, and I want to take
this opportunity to thank France, as well as Peru, Cote
d'Ivoire and the United States, coordinating the other
Working Groups, for their diligent efforts. I would also
like to take this opportunity to recognize the vital work
being done by the Group of Experts, coordinated by
Mr. Raphael Prenat. The United Kingdom notes with
concern the financial situation that Ambassador Djani
highlighted and will be following the issue very closely.

The work of the 1540 Committee focuses on
preventing the use of weapons of mass destruction
by non-State actors. However, I should not conclude
without also touching briefly, as my colleague from
Equatorial Guinea did, on the use of weapons of mass
destruction by State actors, because when we see
States using chemical weapons in flagrant breach of
international law, there are proliferation consequences.
The use of such weapons by an organization as craven
as Da'esh is unconscionable, as is Government use of
chemical weapons against its own people, as in the case
of Syria, or against another State, as happened on the
streets of Salisbury in the United Kingdom, just over a
year ago.

The rules-based international order has been
essential to the security and safety of the international
community for more than 70 years. If we are to continue
to enjoy that security and safety, it must remain our
collective duty to uphold that international order and
prevent the heinous use of such weapons, whoever
uses them.

