Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I wish to thank you personally, Sir, for having called the two minutes of silence on Haiti and the Niger before the meeting. On this occasion, I would like to convey to the Ambassador of the Niger the condolences of the Government and the people of Germany for the heavy loss his country has suffered. I would like to welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia, Claudia Blum de Barberi, for several reasons. First, she is of German descent, so we are very happy to have her here. Secondly, her presence here, like that of her predecessors, really signifies that the Colombian Government is fully supportive of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace. As our British colleague just said, we welcome the President's announcement regarding the extension of the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia until the end of its mandate is a very welcome signal because the Colombian peace agreement continues to be a source of inspiration for all those people engaged in seeking to resolve complex conflict. On a further positive note, I think the recent local and regional elections were a positive sign. The high rate of participation and the participation of the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del Comtn (FARC) for the first time as a political party was a very importantsignal of the gradual advance towards a more inclusive and democratic Colombia. Moreover, during the recent demonstrations and mobilization, many young people in Colombia have called for the preservation and full implementation of the of the peace agreement, so I would encourage the new Government, through the Minister for Foreign Affairs, to continue working towards common solutions in the spirit of inclusive and respectful dialogue. I found the example of the bridge that was built, as mentioned by Carlos Ruiz Massieu, to be excellent; more such examples would be welcome. The international community will continue to assist Colombia. It is great to have unity in the Security Council. We should preserve that. All of us who participated remember very fondly the Security Council mission to Colombia, where we all demonstrated our support for the peace agreement. The United Nations there, as we witnessed, continues to play a key role. At this stage, I would like to commend Carlos Ruiz for his work, the work of his people and the work of the United Nations agencies on the ground. Germany supports the Secretary-General's call to make more use of the tripartite arrangements among the Government, the United Nations and the FARC to promote dialogue and foster confidence-building. With regard to the implementation of the agreement - and basically everything is in the agreement; it just needs to be implemented - I would like to just briefly mention what are the three key points from our perspective. First, we strongly welcome the adoption of the reintegration road map. It is now very important now that it be implemented and that we find more clarity on education, health, economic reintegration, housing, community-based reintegration and _ psychosocial assistance. In this respect, I would like to echo what Carlos said regarding the inclusion of women as key and the inclusion of the 9,000 Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo fighters living outside the former territorial areas for training and reintegration. The communities are ready to include them, but those communities need support. Secondly, with regard to the security road map, this is perhaps the saddest development. Last year was the most violent year for former combatants, with 173 victims. Social leaders, human rights defenders, indigenous leaders and women's rights defenders continue to face grave risks and I therefore welcome the fact that the National Commission on Security Guarantees met for the first time, after some time. I would really encourage the Commission to continue its work and to work hard on dismantling criminal organizations and their support networks, which are basically responsible for the deaths of social leaders. The presence of the State must be extended. My final point relates to support for the institutions of the peace agreement. When Council members were in Bogota, we met with representatives of these institutions. I am still very impressed by the quality and commitment of those people. We see the two Commissions and the National Reintegration Council as key to overcoming the deeply entrenched legacy of conflict in the country. They will lead to true reconciliation. In this context, it remains key that the Commissions remain independent and have the proper funding and functioning. The only thing to be overcome is the uncertainty with regard to the legal status of former combatants. I am aware that that is a heavy task, and would like to echo what Kelly Craft said earlier. In addition to that task, there is that of housing hundreds of thousands of refugees from Venezuela. I would also like to commend Colombia on what its people and Government are doing in that regard.
