Mr. Belinga-Eboutou (Cameroon) (spoke in French): Allow me to thank you, Mr. President, for
taking the timely initiative of organizing this public
debate of the Security Council on the fight against
terrorism and in particular on the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001) of 28 September 2001 on this
matter. We are especially appreciative of the format
and the structure chosen to involve the non-members of
the Council in the debate. We believe that this formula
deserves to be considered as a possible model.
I wish to express our deep appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his enlightening statement,
which highlighted the links between terrorism and
transnational crime. That statement also had the merit
of emphasizing the need for consistent and coordinated
action.

I wish to associate myself with the unanimous
tribute paid to our colleague the Ambassador of
Mexico, who has placed at our disposal his vast legal
knowledge and long experience. Ambassador Navarrete
presided with particular skill and tact over the
sanctions Committee on Sierra Leone.
Mr. Ambassador, our warm wishes for success go with
you.

I now wish to pay a well-deserved and heartfelt
tribute to Sir Jeremy Greenstock, Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom, for the
remarkable work the Committee has been able to
accomplish in less than four months under his wise and
able leadership. I also wish to thank him for the
information he provided us this morning concerning
the laudable efforts made in the context of the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001).

We have learned that guidelines for the
submission of the reports under paragraph 6 of
resolution 1373 (2001) have been prepared. A list of
national contact points in the fight against terrorism
has also been drawn up. Finally, a group of experts has
been established to help the Committee in its work.
Furthermore, we are particularly reassured by the
significant number of States that, in keeping with the
relevant provisions of resolution 1373 (2001), have
made their reports to the Committee concerning the
measures they have taken or plan to take in pursuance
of that resolution. Undoubtedly, that is a further sign of
the international community's renewed determination
to stand united against this scourge of modern times -
terrorism - and to relentlessly pursue its perpetrators
and their accomplices.

The rapid and resolute response of the
international community to the attacks on the United
States on 11 September is particularly significant. It
means that the world will not allow itself to be taken
hostage by terrorists, their accomplices and their
instigators.

The global character of terrorism and its evident
links with transnational crime necessarily mean, as was
recalled this morning by the Secretary-General, that
there must be a global and concerted response by the
international community in fighting this phenomenon.
All States, therefore, have the duty to make frank and
constructive contributions to international efforts to
combat terrorism.

With respect to Cameroon, President Paul Biya
has vigorously expressed the indignation of the people
of Cameroon at the attacks of 11 September and has
affirmed our country's resolve to take an active part in
the fight against this scourge. The message that the
President addressed to the diplomatic corps at the
traditional New Year's ceremony was a message
devoted entirely to this subject, a further strong sign of
Cameroon's unequivocal commitment.

As stated by the President of the Republic, for
Cameroon nothing can justify terrorist acts that, by
definition, can affect only the innocent. Terrorism is
intolerable, and it must be combated in all its forms.
The unacceptable practices, the fear, the hatred and the
intolerance that it fosters constitute both a source of
major concern and a grave threat to international peace
and security. Cameroon believes, as our head of State
has said, that in order to put an end to terrorism we
must also bring peace to the international context by
overcoming situations of injustice that serve as a
breeding ground from which intolerance springs and
that can serve as an easy pretext.

Cameroon has taken the necessary steps for the
implementation in its territory of the measures
contained in Security Council resolution 1373 (2001).
At the internal level, appropriate legislation making it
possible to combat terrorist activities has been adopted.
Measures have been taken by the security services to
prevent our territory from serving as a theatre for
terrorist acts or activities linked to terrorism. Finally, a
focal point has been designated in the office of the
President of the Republic.

At the international level, Cameroon has acceded
to the majority of the counter-terrorist legal
instruments and has participated at the African regional
level in the development of conventions and strategies
to combat this scourge within the framework of the
Organization of African Unity.

Cameroon intends to continue to give the
Counter-Terrorism Committee all necessary support,
especially by participating actively in its work. We
lend our unreserved support to the programme of work
that has been presented to us by the Chairman of the
Committee, and we reiterate to him our full satisfaction
with the manner in which he has thus far conducted the
Committee's work, in a spirit of complete transparency,
especially through regular briefings, and we encourage
him to continue in this way.

In the consideration of the question of terrorism
by the General Assembly at its fifty-sixth session,
Cameroon stressed the need for assistance to
developing countries in order to strengthen their
national and regional capacity to combat terrorism. We
welcome paragraph 4 of the programme of action. Our
concerns have been taken especially into account, and
we look forward to these offers of assistance and will
be particularly pleased to hear from the Chairman of
the Committee about what the Committee can and
intends to do to strengthen national and regional
capacities, especially in organizing training and
information seminars.

I would like to say a few words about the legal
instruments for combating terrorism. The suppression
of terrorism is a particularly fertile field of
international law, but the existing conventions, for the
most part, pertain to specific categories of terrorist
acts. Thus they cannot constitute an appropriate
response likely to enhance the effectiveness of
international cooperation. This is all the more so in that
some continue to take advantage of legal lacunae in
order to commit terrorist acts. This is why we would
suggest that the Council encourage the Ad Hoc
Committee on terrorism that will soon be meeting in
New York to complete urgently the development of a
comprehensive convention on terrorism. We likewise
believe that this Ad Hoc Committee should be invited
to complete the draft international convention for the
suppression of acts of nuclear terrorism.

It remains for me to express our gratitude to our
colleagues for the congratulations and kind words
addressed to Cameroon upon its accession to the
Council.

