Mr. Cabral (Guinea-Bissau) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to take
the floor today after the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Joseph Mutaboba, and the
Ambassador of Brazil, who spoke in her capacity as
Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission.
The Special Representative of the Secretary-
General stated earlier that the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2009/169) is the thirty-fourth of its kind,
which shows just how long the Council has been
considering the situation in my country. It has been a
rather extended period of time, given that the United
Nations Office was created nearly 10 years ago, which
I believe evinces the Council members' confirmed
interest in my country. Unfortunately, however, it also
shows how long the situation in my country has
dragged on.

Today, I take the floor with a heavy heart
because, as the Secretary-General says in his report and
as his Special Representative, Mr. Mutaboba, reiterated
earlier, tragic events have occurred in my country. The
unfortunate assassinations of the President of the
Republic and the General Chief of Staff of the Armed
Forces were two tragic events compounding the evil
that has, as I said earlier, plagued the daily life of my
fellow citizens for quite some time.

Unfortunately, we face a tragic situation. But I
want to assure the Council that, whatever the current
circumstances might be, no one should conclude that
Guinea-Bissau is a lost cause - that, despite all the
efforts of the international community, we are not
achieving the hoped-for results. In fact, we in Guinea-
Bissau are aware of the need to ensure that the
country's credibility is restored. We are mindful of the
need to reconcile with one another, to establish
dialogue as a means of communication, to ensure
harmony among all sectors of the population - all
ethnic groups, all the components of our nation.

That is why I should like to insist here that,
despite what has happened, despite the brutality that
has occurred, the people of Guinea-Bissau are not a
violent people. Quite to the contrary, the people of
Guinea-Bissau are a peaceful people who love peace
and are striving to ensure that peace becomes a lasting
reality in our country. Thus, I should like to ask, as the
Secretary-General did in his report (S/2009/169), that
these people not be abandoned, because the people of
Guinea-Bissau deserve to be supported in this national
reconciliation effort so that they can find their way
back to the path of peace and political stability and can
lay the foundations for sustainable development. We
need development; we do not need conflict. We need
the international community to help us face major
challenges. Most of those challenges are described in
the Secretary-General's report, and the Special
Representative made more specific reference to some
of our most essential priorities.

It is imperative that the people of Guinea-Bissau
reconcile with one another. The international
community and the Security Council must have a
positive and immediate impact. It is essential that the
Council help us, that the international community help
us to create a favourable atmosphere for the
forthcoming elections, to be held on 28 June, in the
wake of the President's assassination.

Despite the tragic nature of the events that have
occurred in my country, and despite certain difficulties
in harmonizing positions, the political parties have
lived up to their responsibilities. They met to take a
consensual decision on the date of 28 June. It is
essential that the international community help us to
organize those elections. We want them to be credible
and transparent and to be an opportunity for the
citizens of Guinea-Bissau to decisively choose the
person they want.

I should like to add that it is vital that the
international community help us initiate and complete
the reform of our defence and security forces. That is
an element essential to peacebuilding in Guinea-
Bissau. We must acknowledge that the conditions in
which my country's soldiers - my fellow citizens -
live are utterly regrettable. I believe that the United
Nations missions that have gone to Guinea-Bissau can
attest to that. It is not a question of creating conditions
that are more perfect than those that are most essential for
any person's everyday life; it is just a question of ensuring
that we, too, can create minimum living conditions in
the barracks so that the soldiers, who are an integral
part of society and normal citizens, can reclaim the
dignity that is indispensable to any human being. When
one thinks of those living in barracks that do not even
have a roof, at the mercy of the weather * and the rainy
season will begin soon in Guinea-Bissau - I believe
that one can understand the state of mind of my
countrymen in the barracks.

I believe we all agree that these reforms must
take place as swiftly as possible. We have made that
decision: the authorities, parliament and, in particular,
the army have decided to play a critical role in this
reform of the defence and security forces. So I should
just like to say that there is a national consensus in this
area, but we need the financial wherewithal to
implement plans that we have already established in
order to create the structures essential to this reform
that we are all earnestly calling for.

Furthermore, not only do we need to create the
conditions essential for organizing the elections; at the
same time, the Government needs to meet the daily
needs of the population. I ask the Council not to focus
only on the preparation of future elections: first the
elections, and then we will see. I hope that, if possible,
the authorities of Guinea-Bissau, the people of Guinea-
Bissau and the international community can, in parallel
and at the same time, also deal with obligations in
other areas. As the Special Representative has
indicated, the minimum conditions for normal life in
Guinea-Bissau must be created.

In other words, hope must be restored to the
people of Guinea-Bissau. This must be said: "Despite
what has happened in your country, we have
confidence in you, provided that you make the effort
necessary to reconcile with one another and to
establish a constructive dialogue among yourselves and
for yourselves". I can assure the Council that the
people of Guinea-Bissau are prepared to take that step,
to make every effort and every sacrifice necessary to
ensure that this credibility that we need will be
restored, that lasting peace will be established in our
country once and for all.

Once again, I should like to say that we are
indebted to the international community for all the
messages of solidarity and compassion that have been
expressed to us by the President of the Council, the
Secretary-General, the African Union, the European
Union, the Economic Community of West African
States, the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries and all others who are concerned about what
is happening in Guinea-Bissau, in a unanimous
demonstration of human solidarity. Here and now, I
should like to thank all those who have demonstrated
their unfailing solidarity towards a people in need, the
people of Guinea-Bissau.

Finally, I should like to say that we in Guinea-
Bissau will continue to create the conditions necessary
for this dialogue of which I have spoken, in order to
ensure that the rule of law can prevail so that
unfortunate incidents such as those just referred to by
the Special Representative - which could call into
question the rule of law and respect for the law - do
not recur and all those doubts can be dispelled. But to
do that, we need functional and credible justice, which
means that here too we need the international
community's help to ensure credible justice for those
who are to be judged and to ensure that the people of
Guinea-Bissau will be confident in their justice system
and can turn to it in the knowledge that it will be
prepared not only to hear them but also to render
justice under conditions that respect international law.
As I said before, we shall continue to strive to attain a
democratic State based on the rule of law, in which all
citizens will be seen, inclusively, as stakeholders in the
conduct of national affairs.

I reiterate that we are mindful of our obligations.
I recently spoke with our Prime Minister; he asked me
to tell the Council that we are mindful of the
challenges we must face and that we are mindful that
we in Guinea-Bissau bear primary responsibility for
what happens in our country. We are ready to take up
these challenges. We need the Council's understanding,
solidarity and support in order to continue the task we
have undertaken, so that, in spite of the obstacles, we
will be able to move forward to build a democratic
country and ensure that Guinea-Bissau can recover its
credibility and respectability on the international scene.

I repeat - because it is important to do so - that
the people of Guinea-Bissau are not a violent people.
They are a peace-loving people and deserve the
Council's close attention. I am grateful for the
sustained attention that the Council has always devoted
to my people and my country.

