Mr. Rendon Barnica (Honduras) (interpretation from Spanish): Mr. President, my delegation would like
to congratulate you most sincerely on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for this month and
on the excellent and effective work you have done. We
would also like to thank your predecessor, the Permanent

 

Representative of Botswana, for his excellent performance
in February.

My delegation would like to thank the Secretary-
General for the report submitted pursuant to resolution 947
(1994) of 30 September 1994.

The events which have occurred in Croatia, and which
have heightened tensions in that country in recent months,
are a source of concern for the international community in
general and for the Government of Honduras in particular,
because they show that, far from cooperating with the
United Nations in the quest for an overall negotiated
settlement of the conflict which would guarantee Croatia's
sovereignty and territorial integrity, the parties have
persisted, through mutual suspicion and mistrust, in
thwarting the advances made in the peace process in the
past year.

The Cease-Fire Agreement and the Economic
Agreement in Croatia, which should have enhanced trust
and achieved reconciliation, have been affected by the
parties' lack of will to begin serious political negotiations.
This lack of progress has been accompanied by other
factors: the decision of the Government of Croatia last
January to withdraw its support for the United Nations
Protection Force (UNPROFOR), a decision that was not
reconsidered until 12 March last; the declaration of a state
of immediate war alert by the Knin Serb Assembly; the
military mobilization of the parties towards the interior of
the zone of separation in anticipation of the termination of
UNPROFOR's functions; the military alliances of the
Krajina and Bosnian Serb armies on the one hand, and of
the Government of Croatia and the Federation of Bosnia
and Herzegovina on the other; and the postponement of
negotiations and of all means of implementation of the
Economic Agreement. These are all facts that increase
military tension and uncertainty between the parties and
make us wonder whether the parties are really interested in
finding a peaceful solution to the conflict.

It has been said many times here that United Nations
peace-keeping operations can function only with the full
consent and cooperation of the parties. Similarly, it has
been stated that these operations are provisional
arrangements or mechanisms to help establish lasting peace
on the basis of agreement between the parties; they are not
intended to impose solutions, nor are they empowered to do
so.

Over the past three years, UNPROFOR has
contributed to the cessation of the hostilities in Croatia and

 

has played an important role in protecting minorities in
the United Nations Protected Areas. Along with the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, it continues to assist in facilitating the
voluntary return of displaced persons to their homes, in
the transportation and distribution of humanitarian aid and
assistance to UNHCR, and in the protection of refugees
in the Bihac enclave and the Banja Luka area. However,
these UNPROFOR activities do not yet enjoy the
necessary cooperation of the parties. There is a lack of
cooperation with the military units in the Separation Zone.
The restrictions on the movements of the military
observers in tactically important areas have been
tightened. The Serbs are blocking the passage of
humanitarian relief convoys and supplies through the
Protected Areas. United Nations security personnel are
being put in danger. Finally, there is no evidence of real
cooperation to ensure that UNPROFOR's presence will be
productive.

There has at least been a recognition that a total
withdrawal from Croatia by all peace-keeping forces
would have negative implications for peace and security,
not only in Croatia but throughout the region. It has been
said that keeping a reduced force in Croatia will limit the
risk of conflict and make it possible to continue the
economic agreement and initiate political negotiations, but
that will depend on the mandate.

In this connection, my delegation concurs with the
Secretary-General's recommendation that the mandate and
functions of the new Force will have to include support
for the implementation of the cease-fire agreement of
29 March 1994 and the economic agreement of 2
December 1994, as well as the implementation of any
elements of the current United Nations peace-keeping
plan for Croatia which the parties may deem relevant. My
delegation acknowledges the efforts of the United States
authorities and the Secretary-General's Special Envoy,
Mr. Thorvald Stoltenberg, in obtaining this outcome and
in trying to define the role and functions of the new Force
with the Government of Croatia and the Krajina Serb
authorities.

We also share the Secretary-General's belief that the
only possible course towards a lasting peace in Croatia is
a three-stage process of negotiation that includes the
cessation of hostilities, economic normalization and
political negotiation. In this regard, we emphasize the
work of the Special Representative, Mr. Yasushi Akashi,
and the Co-Chairmen of the International Conference on
the Former Yugoslavia towards the resumption of the

 

implementation of the economic agreement and the
submission by the Ambassadors of the "Zagreb-4" group of
the draft agreement on Krajina, Slavonia, Southern Baranja
and Western Sirrnium as a basis for political negotiation
between the Government of Croatia and the Serb
authorities.

Because the peace-keeping operation in Croatia has
such important functions, my delegation will support the
draft resolution creating the United Nations Confidence
Restoration Operation in Croatia (UNCRO) for a period
ending 30 November 1995.

The same lack of will, lack of confidence and
suspicion that typify the parties in Croatia are apparent in
the critical situation today in the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, where most of the provisions of the cease-fire
agreement of 23 December 1994 have been ignored. My
delegation regrets the fact that there is no real willingness
to comply with the provisions of the agreement on a
complete cessation of hostilities in order to consolidate the
cease-fire and the situation on the ground. In his report, the
Secretary-General notes that, in general, in Bosnia and
Herzegovina the practices of "ethnic cleansing" in the
region of Banja Luka, the humanitarian and security crisis
in Bihac, and the armed attacks against civilians and
airplanes in Sarajevo continue; that UNPROFOR, UNHCR
and other international organizations enjoy no freedom of
movement; that there is a lack of cooperation on the part of
the Bosnian Government with the joint commissions; that
localized offensives and preparations for war are being
made by the parties to the conflict; that access roads to the
airport of Sarajevo continue to be blocked; and that there
has been a lack of progress in the exchange of prisoners of
war. In short, there has been a gradual deterioration of the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We also regret the
lack of interest in extending the cessation-of-hostilities
agreement and that, because of the conditions imposed by
one side or the other, the ensuing impasse has begun to
aggravate the security situation in Sarajevo.

The Government of Honduras is concerned by the fact
that both parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina are preparing
for a resumption of hostilities and that the efforts of
UNPROFOR to achieve a cease-fire in Bihac have not been
successful. We also believe that the Krajina Serbs'
continued hindrance of UNPROFOR and UNHCR in their
distribution of humanitarian aid and assistance to the Bihac
enclave is deplorable.

We feel nevertheless that these facts should not
obscure the important role which the Protection Force has

 

played in support of the peace process, particularly in the
promotion of relations between the Bosnian and Croatian
sides of the Federation. My delegation considers that the
presence of a United Nations operation in the Republic of
Bosnia and Herzegovina is necessary to prevent and
contain hostilities, create conditions for a political
settlement, establish peace and encourage reconciliation
between the parties just as necessary as closing the border
between the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) and those parts of the Republic of Bosnia
and Herzegovina controlled by the Bosnian Serb forces.
In this regard, we express our gratitude to the authorities
of Belgrade for their cooperation with the Co-Chairmen
of the Steering Committee of the International Conference
on the Former Yugoslavia, which periodically issues
confirmations of compliance with the commitment on
sealing the border. For these reasons, my delegation will
support the draft resolution before the Council extending
the mandate of UNPROFOR in the Republic of Bosnia
and Herzegovina for an additional period to end on
30 November 1995.

With regard to the situation of The Former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, my delegation believes that while
the important work of the Secretary-General's Special
Envoy, his Special Representative and UNPROFOR has,
by acting preventively, lessened the tensions between the
various ethnic groups that arose from the parliamentary
and presidential elections of 1994 and the announcement
of this year's census, the fragile state of the country's
economy, together with the lack of recognition of its
borders by the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro), are potential elements for internal
destabilization that are threatening the system of
government and may lead to confrontation. That is why
my delegation believes that greater international assistance
should be provided for that country's economy, and why
we support the Secretary-General's suggestion that a joint
border commission should begin its work to establish a
clearly defined international border between The Former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro).

Given the important role of UNPROFOR in peace-
keeping, in facilitating the reconciliation process and in
promoting respect for human rights and a general
decrease in tensions in other areas of the former
Yugoslavia, my delegation will support the decision to
replace UNPROFOR with the United Nations Preventive
Deployment Force (UNPREDEP), with the mandate
recommended by the Secretary-General in his report, to
end on 30 November 1995.

 

Lastly, we wish to express our satisfaction on the
assurances given this morning by the Permanent
Representative of The Former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia that his Government will cooperate fully with
UNPREDEP.

