Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): Having come this far in the month, we
are pleased with the excellent way in which you and
your team are steering the work of the presidency,
Mr. President. We congratulate you and encourage you
to maintain that momentum throughout the month. We
also thank Special Coordinator Mladenov and his team
for his detailed and informative briefing.

The Israeli-Palestinian conflict continues to head
in the wrong direction, as we saw from the incidents
that occurred last week, which is very worrying.
Following the extreme violence in May, in which four
Israelis and 25 Palestinians lost their lives, a ceasefire
agreement was signed between Israel and Hamas, under
the joint auspices of the United Nations and Egypt.
Although no one was killed in last Thursday's cross-
border attack, it violated the spirit of that agreement
and demonstrates the mutual distrust and deeply
rooted spirit of confrontation that prevail on both sides
of the conflict, endangering the lives of Israeli and
Palestinian civilians and undermining the efforts of the
international community.

My delegation recognizes the right of Israel
to defend its population from acts of insurgency
and therefore to adopt measures necessary for that,
but such measures should always fall within the
existing framework of international law, in particular
international humanitarian law. No retaliation for
Islamist militia action in Gaza should have an impact
on the local civilian population. We deplore the fact
that dozens of Palestinian civilians were injured
last Friday during the March of Return along the
fence separating Gaza and the occupied Palestinian
territories. Whenever demonstrations are peaceful the
people's human rights must be respected by the Israeli
security forces. Palestinians have the right to demand
the return of their loved ones, and the protests are the
only political tool through which any citizen can freely
exercise that right. In that regard, we urge the Islamist
militias not to interfere in these demonstrations for
their own purposes as insurgents.

We have to reiterate the concerns we have raised
previously about the ongoing incidents that arise from
the fact that Palestinians and settlers are living side by
side in the occupied Palestinian territories. In places
such as Hebron we are seeing these incidents more
and more often, and ensuring protection by the Israeli
occupation forces is now more essential than ever,
as they must guard the rights of the citizens of both
sides equally.

Despite the continued efforts of the international
community, the humanitarian situation in Gaza remains
critical. Widespread insecurity, the shortage of jobs,
the inadequacy of basic services and a lack of food and
drinking water all constrict the lives of Gaza's 2 million
inhabitants, more than half of whom depend on the
humanitarian support of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA). In view of the situation, my delegation
appeals to the Government of Israel to revise its
blockade policy, which is damaging the local economy,
while also urging the international community to
advance the intra-Palestinian reconciliation process,
which is essential if the Palestinian Authority is to
return to Gaza, and encouraging international donors to
provide UNRWA with more financial support in order
to prevent the collapse of its humanitarian services,
which have been suffering financially since last year
and which a majority of Palestinians in Gaza depend on.

Before concluding, I urge Israeli and Palestinian
politicians to try to find ways to reach a definitive
political solution to their differences and to work
together to consider any initiative that could enable
them to find that solution, bearing in mind that no
result can be accepted by the parties unless they can
reach a consensus on it.

Finally, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
continues to align itselfwith the purposes and principles
of the Security Council concerning the settlement of
conflicts, and we hope that any outcome for the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict will be based on these principles.

