Ms. King (Australia): I congratulate you,
Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the
Council. I would also like to thank the Permanent
Representative of Azerbaijan for his successful
presidency in October.

I also thank the High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Mr. Inzko, for his report (S/2013/646, annex). We support the important work done by his
Office to implement the Dayton Peace Agreement,
strengthen the rule of law, monitor compliance with
the rulings of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia, facilitate reforms to ensure the
economic prosperity of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and
monitor the safe return of displaced people.

Australia fully supports the territorial integrity
and sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We call
on those political leaders in the Republika Srpska who
have made corrosive political declarations or used
inflammatory rhetoric to work constructively for the
good of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and to fully respect
its sovereignty and territorial integrity. We also call on
all political actors in Bosnia and Herzegovina to work
productively to reach the compromises necessary to
achieve the five conditions and two objectives set by the
Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council
for the closure ofthe Office of the High Representative.

Mr. Inzko's report provided yet again a frank
depiction of the protracted political difficulties in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, which continue to hinder
further political, economic and social development
there. We note the concern conveyed in his report that the
State-level Parliamentary Assembly has not been able
to fully adopt a single new law this year. It is regrettable
that the citizens of Mostar continue to be denied the
democratic right to elect their local representatives,
since the 2010 ruling of the Constitutional Court of
Bosnia and Herzegovina on the city's electoral system
has not been implemented. It was disappointing that the
political leaders ofBosnia and Herzegovina were unable
to craft a timely solution to the citizens' identification
number issue in the early summer, although we note
that in recent days progress has been made to resolve
that issue. As Mr. Inzko said, the protests in the summer
over that issue reflected widespread disillusionment
with poor governance and clearly indicated that the
citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina were demanding
results from their political leaders.

We acknowledge recent positive developments. The
holding of the 2013 census of population, households
and dwellings in Bosnia and Herzegovina was a
significant step, given that it was the first census
taken since 1991. Its results will provide essential
information for the purposes of economic and social
planning and the delivery of services to the people.
The easing - albeit partial - of the political crisis in
the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina and recent
encouraging economic data are also positive

Mr. Inzko has reported that during the period under
review, Bosnia and Herzegovina failed to make concrete
progress on European Union and NATO integration.
We are concerned that the lack of momentum contrasts
starkly when considered against the progress made by
Bosnia and Herzegovina's neighbours. We hope that
Bosnia and Herzegovina will embrace the new era of
political compromise and constructive engagement
emerging in the Western Balkans region.

Amending the country's constitution to implement
the judgment of the European Court of Human Rights
in the Sejdie-Finci case obviously remains a threshold
issue on the path towards European integration. We
encourage Bosnia and Herzegovina's leaders to make
progress in that regard.

We acknowledge that the security situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina has remained stable over the
reporting period, and that is important. We recognize
the valuable work being done by the European Union-led
peacekeeping force (EUFOR) and NATO missions,
including in improving the country's management and
disposal of surplus arms and ammunition. EUFOR
should not stay in Bosnia and Herzegovina forever, but
at this stage it remains an essential component of the
efforts to ensure stability, confidence and security in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Our hope remains that the political leaders of
Bosnia and Herzegovina will take further decisive
action to overcome their political differences and work
towards a more stable, peaceful and prosperous future
for the people of their country.

