Mr. Verbeke (Belgium) (spoke in French): First
of all I wish to thank Prosecutor Moreno-Ocampo for
his brieflng, which has moved us and cannot leave us
indifferent. I wish to reiterate the importance that
Belgium attributes to the key role of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) in combating impunity and
suppressing crimes of genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes.

My country has had the opportunity on several
occasions to express its firm support for the Court, in
particular through its Prime Minister Guy Verhofstadt
during the Security Council debate at the level of heads
of State and Government in September, under the
French presidency (see S/PV.5749). The Prime
Minister expressed very clearly the feeling of horror
and revulsion caused by crimes committed in Uganda
and called for the immediate arrest of Mr. Joseph Kony
and other individuals against whom the Court has
issued arrest warrants.

As regards the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, my delegation is delighted with
the excellent cooperation between the authorities of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Court
which has lead to the transfer of Mr. Thomas Lubanga
and Mr. Germain Katanga to The Hague.

With regard to the situation in the Central African
Republic, which is currently the subject of an inquiry
of the Office of the Prosecutor, we are following that
situation very carefully.
07-6267

The situation we are discussing this morning, that
of Darfur, is different from previous situations
mentioned since it was referred to the Prosecutor by
this Security Council in resolution 1593 (2005). The
question here is not therefore to know if we support the
International Criminal Court in general terms. The
question concerns respect for a resolution of the
Security Council - adopted under Chapter VII of the
Charter - which unambiguously stipulates that

"the Government of Sudan and all other parties to
the conflict in Darfur shall cooperate fully with
and provide any necessary assistance to the Court
and the Prosecutor". (resolution 1593 (2005),
para. 2)

From the report before us, it would seem not only
that the Government of the Sudan is failing to
cooperate with the Prosecutor as required by the
Security Council, but also that, since the issuance of
arrest warrants by the Court's Pre-Trial Chamber
against Mr. Ahmad Harun and Mr. Ali Kushayb, the
signs of official support for those two persons have
continued.

This blatant refusal to cooperate shows great
contempt not only for alleged victims of crimes against
humanity and war crimes, but also for decisions taken
by the Security Council on behalf of the international
community. That is why my delegation, like others, is
in favour of a clear reminder by the Council of the
terms of resolution 1593 (2005) and the obligations set
out therein, not only so that justice can be done, but
also so that due respect for the Council can be recalled.

As the Council recalled in the presidential
statement adopted on 24 October 2007
(S/PRST/2007/41), on the situation in the Sudan, "due
process must take its course". Clearly, the requirement
of justice is a requirement in and of itself, but we are
convinced that it is also a factor for peace and stability
that is part of a larger process. In the activities of the
International Criminal Court related to the Sudan, it is
not only the fight against impunity for past crimes that
is at stake. The report of Prosecutor Moreno-Ocampo
reminds us how worrisome the violence in Darfur is
today and that, at this very moment, crimes falling
under the Court's jurisdiction are being committed in
the region on a large scale and in a systematic and
deliberate manner. We shall continue to follow very
closely the developments in the situation and the
activities of the Office of the Prosecutor in that regard.
9

In Darfur, the search for a comprehensive
solution involves a four-pronged approach: political,
military, humanitarian and judicial. We regard the
elements of such a fourfold approach as
complementary.

Finally, I should like to stress that we are also
paying close attention to other parts of Prosecutor
Moreno-Ocampo's report, particularly its description
of the impact of the situation in Chad and the Central
African Republic.

