Mr. Fedotov: Thank you, Mr. President, for inviting
me to address the Security Council. I am pleased to
have the opportunity to brief the Council on the latest
activities of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC) designed to interrupt the flow of
drugs and crime in the region.

The recent report of the Secretary-General on
the situation in Afghanistan and its implications
for international peace and security (S/2012/462)
specifically recognizes the threat of drugs and crime.
Indeed, Afghanistan produces around 90 per cent of the
world's opiates, and the southern part of the country is
the world's largest opium-producing region.

Total global opium production amounted to around
7,000 tons in 2011. In Afghanistan, opium production
increased from 3,600 tons in 2010 to 5,800 tons in
2011. The country's poppy-free provinces may also be
falling for the second year running, down from 18 to
15. UNODC estimates that trafficking in opiates is a
$68-billion business for the criminals. These drugs are
responsible for the deaths of tens of thousands of people
throughout the world every year, but Afghanistan also
suffers from the highest rates of opiate prevalence in
the world, as well as HIV/AIDS. Drug trafficking also
undermines stability in the region, fuels organized
crime and corruption, increases drug consumption and
spreads HIV/AIDS.

As we move towards 2014, we cannot allow avacuum
to form that would further encourage the production
of opium. That view was affirmed by my own recent
visit to Afghanistan and Tajikistan. When I met with
President Karzai, I stressed the need for the Afghan
Government, at every level, to express its commitment
to addressing the drug problem as a national priority.
The President agreed to that. My visit to opium poppy
fields in Badakhshan province showed that eradication
efforts must be more vigorously supported by alternative
development programmes.

Afghan counter-narcotics authorities are
demonstrating their own commitment to combating
poppy cultivation, but much more needs to be done. As
of 19 June, a total of 11,000 hectares ofpoppy fields had
been eradicated. That figure represents a 173 per cent
increase compared to 2011. However it represents less
than 10 per cent of total poppy cultivation area. Food
zones, such as in Helmand province, are contributing to
the decline in poppy cultivation in some areas, but more
funds are needed to support such projects. Landowners
are now being targeted by a new law that criminalizes
the use of their land for poppy cultivation. We now
look forward to meaningful implementation of that law.
There are also signs that a plant disease may blight this
year's crop, as it did in 2010. But plant disease offers
no solution to the problem of Afghan's opiates, and
stockpiles may well exist. Therefore, we cannot afford
to take our foot off the accelerator.

At the political level, we are building momentum
through the Paris Pact initiative, while developing
integrated regional programmes. UNODC'S $ll7-million
country programme for Afghanistan was launched in
May. The programme is closely linked to the Regional
Programme for Afghanistan and Neighbouring
Countries. Together, those programmes form part
of UNODC's overall strategy to provide a coherent
field response to drug trafficking, as well as closer
cooperation among regional and international actors.
Strengthened border controls are also an essential
element of the strategy. Both programmes are connected
to such bodies as the Triangular Initiative, the Central
Asian Regional Information and Coordination Centre
and Operation TARCET, which targets the precursor
chemicals necessary to produce opium and heroin.

There are also new initiatives that are linked
to the Regional Programme. The Criminal Assets
Southern Hub initiative will target criminal profits by
offering advice to national authorities. The Southern
Trafficking Operational Plan will couple alternative
livelihoods, while also maximizing law enforcement
and interdiction efforts. The Maritime Regional
Security Initiative will address the movement of
trafficking into the sea, in particular between Iran and
Pakistan. In May, we started the Regional Programme
for South-Eastern Europe, which complements those
activities by concentrating on Afghan heroin flowing
through Central and West Asia and then on through the
Balkans.
UNODC is also helping to create international and
inter-agency partnerships. One example is the United
Nations task force on transnational organized crime and
drug trafficking, established by the Secretary-General
in 2011. In Dushanbe on 1 June, I co-chaired the first
regional meeting of the task force in Central Asia.

Today's thematic debate is timely. We stand
midway between another key set of milestones in the
international community's journey to support and assist
Afghanistan. There are many challenges in Afghanistan,
but I would encourage Member States to do everything
possible to communicate the message that illicit drugs
and crime are capable of undermining attempts to
promote economic and social development in the
country. Our work is in the interests of Afghanistan and
the victims ofillicit drugs, but it is also in the common
interests of the international community.

