Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): Ijoin my colleagues in
thanking Mr. Khalikov for the briefing that he has
given on behalf of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs. It is also good that a
representative of the Government of the Sudan is
present to give us the Sudan's point of view.

The humanitarian situation in the Sudan is clearly
very grave, given many years of strife and conflict, a
difficult terrain, an environment with an already weak
social infrastructure; and a situation that has been
further complicated by the recent indictment of
President Al-Bashir. That has obviously focused his
and his Government's attention more on the issue of
the indictment and hence less on the humanitarian
crisis facing the country.

While that is going on, the situation has been
further worsened by the recent expulsion of the
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) that were
heavily involved in humanitarian work in the Sudan. It
is true that, because of the many years of strife, many
have been crowded into camps. When many people are
crowded into camps, the chances of the spread of
disease increase and hence mortality among children,
in particular, and among other vulnerable groups
heavily increases. It is therefore no wonder that we are
now seeing more deaths from meningitis, malnutrition,
dehydration and simple diseases that would have
otherwise been treated if we had reasonable medical
services on the ground.

I do not share the View of my colleague from the
Sudan that because only 13 NGOs have been
expelled- and that therefore only 7 per cent of the
NGO community has been affected - it is a negligible
matter. What we know is that the NGOs affected are
well known, big international organizations whose
capacity and effectiveness have been very well tested
in many trying situations. Thus, the fact that only 13
may have been expelled does not mean that their
contribution is small. In fact, we have received
information that the expulsion may have affected 50 to
60 per cent of the humanitarian work that is going on.

Because of that difficult situation, I call on the
Government of the Sudan, in the interests of its own
people, who have suffered many, many years of war
and deprivation, to take urgent action to review the
decision to expel those humanitarian agencies in order
to ensure that the people who are in the camps, who are
on the ground and who are suffering have access to
water, food and basic health services.

I agree that we will have a more comprehensive
discussion of this matter next week. Nevertheless, the
principle of being kept regularly informed of the
humanitarian situation in the Sudan is welcome, and I
would like to call on my colleagues in the Sudan and
the Government of the Sudan to be responsive to the
concerns of the international community, which are
also the concerns of the people of the Sudan.

