Mr. Amorim (Brazil): Afghanistan has been
afflicted by the scourge of war for almost 20 years.
During this period the image of peace seemed to appear
on the horizon many times but proved to be just a mirage.

A crossroads of civilizations, Afghanistan has seen
many would-be conquerors. In their long history, the
Afghans have always shown a deep attachment to their
freedom and a profound distaste for foreign interference
in their affairs. Afghanistan is thus key to the peace and
stability of a region of unique strategic importance to the
rest of the world.

In the draft resolution we are about to adopt, the
Security Council reaffirms its commitment to the
sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and

 

national unity of Afghanistan, as well as its respect for its
cultural and historical heritage.

The preservation of the extraordinary diversity which
characterizes Afghanistan, and which is reflected in the
various expressions of Islamic and other faiths and in a
mosaic of ethnic and linguistic communities with close
links with other peoples of South and Central Asia, is a
necessary condition for a durable peace.

The United Nations has had an important role in
helping the Afghan people in this period of conflict. The
Organization has acted in an impartial way in the fulfilment
of its political mandate, promoting the dialogue among the
six neighbours and other interested countries. The United
Nations, in cooperation with other organizations, has been
instrumental in the provision of much-needed humanitarian
assistance.

In order to allow for the return of normalcy to
Afghanistan, it is necessary that the Afghan parties re-
initiate a process of political negotiation. Both the
Government of President Rabbani and the Taliban
authorities have a responsibility to work in that direction.
It is also necessary that human rights be respected,
including the rights of girls and women.

All outside interference in the internal affairs of
Afghanistan should cease immediately, particularly the
presence of foreign military personnel.
The return of the United Nations, in conditions of
security, should facilitate the investigation into the alleged
massacres. This would be an important step in establishing
the facts and bringing justice to that country. Afghanistan
should also join the efforts of the international community
to combat terrorism and drug trafficking.

No political movement, no matter how much territory
it controls, will gain international respectability as long as
it is perceived as harbouring terrorist activities. It is also
necessary that those in a position of authority ensure the
observance of international law, in particular their
obligations under the Vienna Conventions on Diplomatic
and Consular Relations and the Geneva Conventions. The
officers of the Consulate-General of Iran, who are being
held hostage, should be freed immediately.

We should like also to refer in particular to paragraph
6 of the draft resolution, which condemns the attacks on the
United Nations personnel in the Taliban-held territories of
Afghanistan, including the killing of two Afghan staff
members of the World Food Programme and of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in
Jalalabad, and of the Military Adviser to the United
Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan in Kabul.

The draft resolution we have before us, in favour of
which Brazil will vote, represents a call from the
international community to the Afghans to renounce any
form of violence and settle their differences through
negotiation.

