Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): 1 thank Mr. Jeffrey
Feltman for his briefing on this alarming issue, and the
United States of America, Japan and the Republic of
Korea for initiating today's Security Council briefing.
The open format of our meeting is important, as it
leaves no doubt as to what the North Korean regime
will hear from every member of the Security Council.
We need to express our attitude to their policies loudly
and clearly.

Ukraine is deeply concerned about the conduct
of yet another nuclear test by the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea, which represents a threat to
international peace and security and constitutes
a flagrant breach of the non-proliferation regime,
including universal norms prohibiting nuclear testing.
In that regard, I would like to recall the statement issued
today by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Ukraine:

"In conjunction with Pyongyang's aggressive
ballistic missile programme, it now poses a real
threat not only to neighbouring countries, but
also to the entire international community. As the
country that voluntarily renounced its third-largest
nuclear arsenal along with the strategic means of
its delivery, Ukraine regards Pyongyang's recent
actions as a conscious, reckless and dangerous
provocation. It is most deplorable that the North
Korean leadership has once again defied - bluntly
and cynically - numerous United Nations Security
Council resolutions.

"Ukraine calls on Pyongyang to refrain from
any demonstration of force, cease all nuclear tests
without delay and restart a constructive dialogue,
without preconditions, in order to ensure the
complete, irreversible and verifiable renunciation
of its nuclear and missile programmes. Ukraine
stands ready to join other members of the
international community, including as a current
non-permanent member of the Security Council,
in taking stronger and more decisive measures to
curb future nuclear and missile threats. In order to
strengthen the nuclear non-proliferation regime,
we call upon the Security Council to undertake an
in-depth investigation into the development of the
North Korean nuclear and missile programmes, in
order to expose any possible foreign assistance to
Pyongyang in this area."

There are some points that the Ukrainian delegation
would like to highlight in that regard. Pyongyang's
policy has proved to be very persistent and clear in
ignoring international law and the numerous calls to halt
its illegal activity. That leaves no hope for compliance
by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea with
existing norms and prohibitions. Moreover, Pyongyang's
aggressive rhetoric is aimed at legitimizing such acts
by blaming other States for raising the tensions in the
region. That is absolutely unacceptable.

Needless to say, the Council should use
every instrument at its disposal to ensure the full
implementation of its resolutions. At the same time,
we cannot but recognize that we urgently need even
more robust measures to respond comprehensively and
effectively to the growing nuclear threat on the Korean
peninsula. Ukraine remains ready for constructive
work with all delegations on this issue in order to ensure
positive changes in the current situation and to move
closer to the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.

