The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Australia, Belgium, Burundi, Canada, Ireland, Japan, South
Africa, Uganda and the United Republic of Tanzania, in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nsanze
(Burundi) took a seat at the Council table; Mr. Rowe
(Australia), Mr. Wouters (Belgium), Mr. Karsgaard
(Canada), Mr. Murphy (Ireland), Mr. Konishi (Japan),
Mr. Jele (South Africa), Mr. Mukasa-Ssali (Uganda)
and Mr. Nkurlu (United Republic of Tanzania) took
the seats reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on the situation in Burundi,
document S/ 1996/660.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following other documents: S/ 1996/628,
note by the Secretary-General circulating a letter dated 5
August 1996 from the Secretary-General of the
Organization of African Unity addressed to the Secretary-
General; S/ 1996/682, letter dated 25 July 1996 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of the Security
Council, transmitting the final report of the International
Commission of Inquiry for Burundi; S/l996/620, letter
 

dated 2 August 1996 from the Permanent Representative
of the United Republic of Tanzania to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General; S/l996/651, letter
dated 7 August 1996 from the Charge d'affaires ad
interim of the Permanent Mission of Kenya to the United
Nations addressed to the Secretary-General; S/ 1996/673,
letter dated 19 August 1996 from the Charge d'affaires
ad interim of the Permanent Mission of Ireland to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General; and
S/l996/690, letter dated 25 August 1996 from the
Permanent Representative of Burundi to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council.

The first speaker is the representative of Burundi, on
whom I now call.


