The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.

I join members of the Council in thanking our
briefers for their varied, multidimensional briefings.
Undoubtedly, the Security Council is in dire need of
such a comprehensive vision, and it must undertake
an in-depth analysis to identify the root causes of the
conflicts we are dealing with.

The valuable briefings we heard have clearly
shown that the compound and interlinked nature of
the challenges confronting the Sahel region creates a
complicated reality that requires solutions based on a
comprehensive approach, with multiple instruments
that deal with all the threats with the same level of
attention. In confronting these varied challenges,
international, regional and national efforts must be
concerted and coordinated so as to prevent criminal and
terrorist armed groups from exploiting any weaknesses
in the region.

Egypt believes that the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel can be the appropriate political
framework for coordinating and mobilizing all efforts
to deal with the challenges effectively. The effective
implementation of the Strategy will produce a
qualitative shift in the reality of the region. Therefore,
Egypt agreed with the Secretary-General's proposal in
January of this year to merge the Office of the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Sahel with the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
(UNOWAS) in order to maximize the logistical and
human resources available and to find the means to
achieve a true qualitative leap in the implementation
of the Strategy, while concentrating on improving the
national capacities of Sahel States.

We therefore believe that the review of the Strategy
is of utmost importance in order to identify what
progress has been achieved and the shortcomings in
its implementation. We must identify the obstacles to
implementation, both nationally and regionally. We also
believe that future efforts to implement the Strategy
must be sufficiently flexible to adapt to variables and
escalating challenges in the African Sahel, especially
the challenges related to climate change, environmental
deterioration and the spread of terrorist ideologies and
organized crime throughout the region.

It is important to mobilize international attention
to increase awareness of these new threats in the Sahel.
We must encourage international and regional partners
to invest in building national and local capacities to
mitigate environmental crises and to ensure more
sustainable local communities. Therefore, Egypt calls
for UNOWAS to ensure that future reports provide a
vision for the implementation of the Strategy in the
Sahel, including figures, statistics and time frames
for the implementation of programmes and activities.
How did the Office respond to national priorities and
the needs of the peoples of the region? That would
help the Security Council be aware of the level of
implementation and its shortcomings.

Resolution 2282 (2016), on the review of the
United Nations Peacebuilding Architecture, adopted
on 27 April, was an excellent addition to the efforts
to implement the United Nations Integrated Strategy
for the Sahel. The direction for the Security Council
and the General Assembly in that resolution gives
priority to the establishment of a comprehensive
political framework for efforts to achieve sustainable
peace in which political, security, economic and social
dimensions are taken into account. Indeed, we believe
the Peacebuilding Commission must serve as the
political forum for achieving synergy among the United
Nations efforts.

Egypt is prepared to cooperate with the peoples
and Governments of the Sahel through the programmes
implemented by the Egyptian Agency of Partnership
for Development, which builds national capacities in
various fields based on the principles of partnership
and national ownership.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to Mr. Buyoya.

