Mr. Roscoe (United Kingdom): Let me begin by thanking Special Representative of the Secretary- General Swan for his briefing and welcoming Ambassador Madeira and also thanking him for his comprehensive briefing, as well as Ambassador Osman. On behalf of the United Kingdom, I want to first express my condolences to the families and friends of those killed in the recent Al-Shabaab attack on the Elite hotel in Mogadishu. I want also to reaffirm our solidarity with all Somalis in the face of such attacks. Deplorably, those attacks, despite coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and the Secretary-General's call for a ceasefire, continue to undermine peace and security in Somalia. We condemn those attacks, and we pay tribute to the ongoing commitment and sacrifices of troop- contributing countries to the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the efforts of the Somali security forces to counter Al-Shabaab. As we have heard today, Somalia is at a critical juncture on its journey towards a long-term political settlement and the peace, security and_ stability that will enable. Somali leaders and international partners have committed to supporting and advancing democracy in Somalia. With the deadline for elections fast approaching, an agreement on a way forward is urgently needed. A timely and inclusive way forward is also critical - a way forward that respects the principles and commitments agreed to in the Mutual Accountability Framework, including at least a 30 per cent quota for woman parliamentarians. That agreement should represent clear progress from the 2016 election model, moving Somalia away from clan-based selection processes to direct elections, and enable as many citizens to vote as possible, as set out in the provisional Federal Constitution. We therefore welcome the ongoing consultations between leaders of the Federal Government and the federal member states at Dhuusamarreeb. We have always been clear that the electoral model will require broad-based support among all Somali stakeholders. To that end, we regret - as Special Representative Swan and Ambassador Madeira both said - that President Deni of Puntland and President Madobe of Jubaland have not yet joined the talks. We call for them to attend as a matter of urgency. It is vital that all stakeholders - the Federal Government, federal member states, Parliament, the National Independent Electoral Commission and the joint parliamentary committee - work together in a spirit of compromise to reach agreement and avoid unilateral or provocative acts that would undermine the hard-won stability in Somalia and the partnership with the international community. We stand ready to support agreed outcomes that strengthen inclusive politics and include a significant element of direct voting. Turning to the human rights situation, we too share the concerns expressed today by the United Nations and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General about the bill regarding sexual-intercourse crimes. It was encouraging to see so many Somalis speak out against it. We urge the Parliament to give first reading to the original sexual offences bill submitted by the Cabinet. Any bill passed by the Somali Parliament must reflect its international obligations and commitments on the protection of children, women and girls. I want also to express our deep concern about attacks on the freedom of expression and against journalists and media workers in Somalia. Media freedom is a vital component of our democratic society, and the media has a vital role to play in Somalia. We call for journalists and media workers to be able to perform their work freely and safely. Somalia faces a protracted climate- and conflict- induced humanitarian crisis. That crisis has been exacerbated by the global COVID-19 pandemic, floods and locust infestation. We call on the international community to provide more funding for the humanitarian response and to step up efforts to build resilience and mitigate the long-term effects of climate change. The United Kingdom gave $420 million to Somalia in the past financial year and is now working to support the COVID-19 response. It is vital that the Federal Government and the federal member states facilitate the delivery of relief aid to all those in need, and ensure the safety of aid workers in line with international humanitarian law. I return to the security situation in Somalia. The country has made important progress in recent years, but the security situation, as we have heard, remains difficult. Next year's deadline for transition of greater responsibility to the Somali security authorities presents both a challenge and an opportunity. Itis vital that all those that are invested in supporting AMISOM and building Somalia's security forces now work together to agree to a future of international support for the security of Somalia. Without that, we risk wasting the progress and sacrifices made to date. A United Nations-led independent assessment on post-2021 security should offer the forum for such discussions, and I urge all partners to engage proactively with it. In conclusion, I want to emphasize three points. First, I want to reiterate our call, which the Security Council has made many times, for the Federal Government and all federal member states to reach a decisive and inclusive agreement on elections, soon. Secondly, I want to underline the importance of the Council, the United Nations, the African Union and the wider international community continuing to support Somalia to achieve progress and political and security reform. Finally, I want to stress the importance of a united response in supporting Somalia in its fight against COVID-19 and protracted humanitarian crises. Through the determination of the its people and the support of the international community, Somalia has come a long way. We should not lose sight of that. We stand ready to lend our support to navigate this next stage and to help Somalia realize its goal of peace and security.
