The President: I now shall make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of the United States.

I want to thank the Secretary-General for his
participation and leadership on this issue, as well as my
fellow Council members for today's discussion of an
issue at the very top of our agenda and for their
agreement to the presidential statement that I will read
out shortly.

When it comes to the urgent nuclear threats we
have discussed today, including nuclear terrorism, the
Security Council must embrace its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. As President Obama stated three
years ago this month in Prague, the explosion of a
single nuclear weapon would have catastrophic
consequences for our global safety, our security, our
society, our economy and even our very survival. We
all share an interest in preventing and containing
nuclear threats. During the Security Council's historic
September 2009 summit on non-proliferation and
nuclear security (see S/PV.6191), heads of State
reaffirmed that shared interest by adopting the
landmark resolution 1887 (2009), which resolved, in its
first preambular paragraph, to "seek a safer world for
all and to create the conditions for a world without
nuclear weapons".

Resolution 1887 (2009) was the Council's first
comprehensive action on those issues since the
mid-1990s. Building on the momentum of the 2009
summit, the Security Council and the world have made
significant progress. In a historic first, the 2010
Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons resulted in a
final document that included a comprehensive Action
Plan, adopted by consensus, on the steps to strengthen
all three pillars of the Treaty.

There is no denying that the Treaty remains the
cornerstone of the nuclear non-proliferation regime and
the foundation for the pursuit of nuclear disarmament
and the peaceful use of nuclear energy. As President
Obama said in Seoul last month,
"we've upheld the basic bargain of the NPT.
Countries with nuclear weapons, like the United
States and Russia, will move towards
disarmament. Countries without nuclear weapons
will not acquire them. And all countries can have
access to peaceful nuclear energy."

The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
has continued to play an essential role in implementing
safeguards and promoting the safe, secure and peaceful
use of nuclear energy. The combination of an NPT
safeguards agreement and an additional protocol is
widely recognized as the standard for strengthened
IAEA safeguards.

To date, 115 States, including the United States of
America, have brought into force an additional
protocol granting to the IAEA expanded rights of
access to information and sites. We continue to seek
partners in the effort to expand and accelerate IAEA
activities in order to strengthen the Agency's ability to
detect and deter undeclared nuclear activities.

In 2011, the Security Council adopted resolution
1977 (2011), which extended the mandate of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) for an unprecedented 10 years. The 1540
Committee's work to help States prevent the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction to
non-State actors is a crucial part of the international
non-proliferation regime. The United States fully
supports 1540 implementation efforts and made a
voluntary contribution of $3 million last year to
promote the work.

Finally, the 2010 Nuclear Security Summit, held
in Washington, DC, was followed by a second summit
last month. More than 50 heads of State met in Seoul
and reaffirmed their commitment to combat nuclear
terrorism and increase nuclear security. The actions and
commitments undertaken by participating States are
being translated into tangible steps to protect against
nuclear terrorism.

The United States is also strengthening global
non-proliferation and disarmament efforts. The 2010
United States Nuclear Posture Review outlined our
approach to reducing the role of nuclear weapons and
pursuing the goal of a world without such weapons.
Through the Posture Review we announced that the
United States will not use or threaten to use nuclear
weapons against non-nuclear-weapon States that are
party to the NPT and in compliance with their nuclear
non-proliferation obligations. We also emphasized our
collective interest in ensuring that the record of more
than six decades of nuclear non-use continues forever.

The New START agreement between the United
States and the Russian Federation, which entered into
force on 5 February 2011, is being implemented
successfully. The Treaty illustrates yet again the strong
commitment of the United States to meeting its
disarmament obligations. When the Treaty is fully
implemented, the deployed strategic nuclear forces of
the United States and Russia will reach their lowest
level since the 19505. The rigorous provisions of the
New START agreement testify to the importance of
transparency and effective verification in providing
predictability and stability in international relations.

Continuing the process of engagement by the five
permanent members of the Security Council (P-5)
established through the 2009 London and 2011 Paris
P-5 conferences, the United States will host a P-S
conference in Washington, DC, later this year to
continue discussions on verification, transparency and
confidence-building measures. The P-S process now
under way expands the long-standing United States-
Russia nuclear disarmament dialogue into an ongoing
process of P-S engagement on issues related to nuclear
disarmament, consistent with our obligations under
article VI of the NPT and our commitments under the
2010 NPT Action Plan.

The entry into force of the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty is also an essential step
towards a world without nuclear weapons. The United
States remains committed to working towards our
ratification of the Treaty and its entry into force. We
continue to maintain our voluntary moratorium on
nuclear explosive testing, which went into effect two
decades ago. We call upon all States to refrain from
nuclear explosive testing.

Despite those many multilateral and national
efforts, much work remains to be done. We must
continue to strengthen global nuclear non-proliferation,
disarmament and security efforts. We cannot let our
guard down.

Certain countries continue to pursue nuclear-
weapon capabilities, in violation of Security Council
resolutions and contrary to the clearly expressed will of
the international community. The dangers we face and
the price of complacency remain much too high. We
cannot, for example, allow the NPT to be weakened by

tolerating non-compliance with its requirements or
violations of international safeguards agreements. The
implications of any case of non-compliance, whether
by North Korea or Iran, concern more than just the
offending country and its neighbours. Every violation
of the NPT has the potential, if left unchecked, to erode
confidence in the global nuclear non-proliferation
regime. We cannot, and we will not, let that happen.

Beginning negotiations on a fissile material cut-
off treaty is the next logical step in nuclear arms
control. It is therefore a great disappointment that, due
to one country, the Conference on Disarmament has
been unable to agree to move forward. The Conference
should agree to commence negotiations without further
delay.

We must also sharpen our commitment to nuclear
safety and security. The terrible accident at the
Fukushima plant last year was a reminder of our shared
vulnerability as much of the world looks increasingly
to nuclear power to fuel economic growth and
development.

The choice safely to develop and maintain
nuclear power is, and should remain, a national one.
However, we will continue strongly to support
international efforts, led primarily by the IAEA, to
facilitate better nuclear safety training and cooperation
and to improve accident response capacities. The
United States believes that it has a moral responsibility
to lead and act now, in cooperation with members of
the Council and the international community, to seek
the peace and security of a world without nuclear
weapons. Today's meeting and draft presidential
statement mark a milestone on that path. As President
Obama remarked in Seoul last month, "no one nation
can do this alone."

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

After consultations among members of the
Council, I have been authorized to make the following
statement on their behalf:

"The Security Council reaffirms that
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, and
their means of delivery, constitutes a threat to
international peace and security.

"The Security Council remains gravely
concerned about the threat of terrorism, and the
risk that non-State actors may acquire, develop,
traffic in or use weapons of mass destruction and
their means of delivery.

"The Security Council reaffirms the need
for all Member States to comply fully with their
obligations and fulfil their commitments in
relation to arms control, disarmament and
non-proliferation in all its aspects of all weapons
of mass destruction and their means of delivery.

"The Security Council reaffirms its support
for the multilateral treaties whose aim it is to
eliminate or prevent the proliferation of nuclear,
chemical or biological weapons and the
importance for all States Parties to those treaties
to implement them fully in order to promote
international stability.

"The Security Council reaffirms resolution
1540 (2004), which affirms that States shall take
effective measures to prevent non-State actors
from acquiring weapons of mass destruction and
their means of delivery and to establish domestic
controls to prevent proliferation of nuclear,
chemical or biological weapons, their means of
delivery and related materials, recognizes States'
progress in implementing resolution 1540 (2004),
endorses the work carried out by the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004),
and, in that regard, recalls resolution 1977
(2011), which extends the mandate of the 1540
Committee for 10 years.

"The Security Council recognizes the
importance of the 2012 and 2010 Nuclear
Security Summits, the 2012 and 2010 Nuclear
Security Summit communiques and the 2010
Nuclear Security Summit work plan.

"The Security Council welcomes the
commitments made by Nuclear Security Summit
participants to take national actions, as
appropriate, to increase nuclear security
domestically and to work through bilateral and
multilateral mechanisms, in particular the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), to
improve nuclear security and encourages all
States to take national actions to this end.
"The Security Council reaffirms, in this
context, its relevant resolutions, in particular

resolution 1887 (2009).

"The Security Council recalls that effective
IAEA safeguards are essential to prevent nuclear
proliferation and to facilitate cooperation in the
field of peaceful uses of nuclear energy, and
renews its call on all States to cooperate fully
with the IAEA.

"The Security Council affirms the essential
responsibility and central role of the IAEA in
strengthening the international nuclear security
framework and also supports the IAEA Nuclear
Security Plan for 2010-2013.

"The Security Council welcomes the
adoption of the IAEA Action Plan on Nuclear
Safety, recalls the IAEA June 2011 ministerial
conference on nuclear safety and the September
2011 United Nations high-level meeting on
nuclear safety and security convened by the
Secretary-General and values various
international initiatives and efforts to that end.

"The Security Council stresses the
importance of international efforts to establish
self-sustaining nuclear security support centres
and the IAEA's plan to establish the international
network for nuclear security training and support
centres.

"The Security Council welcomes the
additional ratifications of the 2005 Amendment to
the Convention on the Physical Protection of
Nuclear Material and the recent adherences to the
International Convention for the Suppression of
Acts of Nuclear Terrorism.

"The Security Council emphasizes the
importance of the progress made by the Global
Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism.

"The Security Council recognizes the
progress made by the Global Partnership against
the Spread of Weapons and Materials of Mass
Destruction and values its extension beyond
2012.

"The Security Council encourages States to
participate in the IAEA illicit trafficking database
programme.
"The Security Council appreciates the
efforts of the International Criminal Police
Organization in the field of countering illicit
nuclear trafficking, including through the
establishment of its radiological and nuclear
terrorism prevention unit.

"The Security Council takes note of
international efforts towards preventing the
financing of proliferation-related activities and
takes note of the work of the Financial Action
Task Force.

"The Security Council welcomes the
establishment of the European Union chemical,
biological, radiological and nuclear risk
mitigation centres of excellence.

"The Security Council calls upon States that
have not yet done so to submit a first report on
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), and
encourages all States to provide, when
appropriate or upon the request of the 1540
Committee, additional implementation
information.

"The Security Council calls upon all States
Parties to the Convention on the Physical
Protection of Nuclear Material to ratify the
Amendment to the Convention as soon as
possible and encourages them to act in
accordance with the objectives and purposes of
the Amendment until such time as it enters into
force, and also encourages all States that have not
yet done so to adhere to the Convention and
adopt its Amendment as soon as possible.

"The Security Council encourages all States
that have not yet done so to become party to the
International Convention for the Suppression of
Acts of Nuclear Terrorism and encourages
discussions among States parties to consider
measures to effectively implement the
Convention.

"The Security Council underlines the
importance for States to share best practices with a
view to improved nuclear security practices to
reduce the risk of nuclear terrorism, with the aim
of securing all vulnerable nuclear material from
such risks, encourages all States to implement the
IAEA's most current recommendations on physical
protection of nuclear material and nuclear facilities
12-29927

the

(INFCIRC/225/Rev.5), encourages efforts to
secure radioactive sources, and calls for States to
support the IAEA Nuclear Security Plan for 2010-
2013 and to make voluntary contributions to the
Nuclear Security Fund.

"The Security Council calls upon all States
parties to improve their national capabilities to
detect, deter and disrupt illicit trafficking in
nuclear materials throughout their territories, in
accordance with their national authorities and
legislation and consistent with international law,
including relevant international legal obligations,
and calls upon those States in the position to do
so to work to enhance international partnerships
and capacity-building in this regard.

"The Security Council, in this regard,
encourages States to take all appropriate national
measures in accordance with their national
authorities and legislation and consistent with
international law, to strengthen export controls, to
control access to intangible transfers of
technology and to information that could be used
for weapons of mass destruction and their means
of delivery, to prevent proliferation financing and
shipments and to secure sensitive materials.

"The Security Council encourages all States
to manage responsibly and minimize to the
greatest extent that is technically and
economically feasible the use of highly enriched
uranium for civilian purposes, including by
working to convert to the use of low-enriched
uranium fuels and targets research reactors and
radioisotope production processes taking into
account the need for assured supplies of medical
isotopes."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2012/14.

There are no more names inscribed on the list of

speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.10pm.
