Mr. Sobral Duarte (Brazil): I thank the Presisdent
and the Malaysian presidency for convening this
important debate. I am also grateful to Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Leila Zerrougi
and UNICEF Executive Director Anthony Lake for
their leadership and their briefings.
In 1996, following the Graca Machel report (see A/51/306), the Security Council created the mandate
of the Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict, based on the realization that children were
the primary victims of armed conflict. Twenty years
after the Machel report, the international community's
engagement has resulted in a strong framework and
concrete tools to engage with parties to conflict and
address the violations committed against children,
yet armed conflicts continue to have a horrific impact
on children, who are denied even the most basic of
human rights.

Brazil reiterates its strongest condemnation of the
recruitment and use of children, as well as all other
violations and abuses, including killing, maiming, rape,
other forms of sexual violence, attacks against schools
and hospitals, abduction and the denial of humanitarian
access. According to the latest report of the Secretary-
General (S/2016/360), this year's casualties amount to
1,509 children, the highest number of children killed or
wounded in a six-month period since counting began in
2009. That is a cruel reminder of the disproportionate
impact of war on children and of the urgent need to
protect them.

Thousands of children around the world are
associated with armed forces and armed groups.
Boys and girls are not only used in combat, but also
in support roles or for sexual purposes. Once released
from armed forces or armed groups, many suffer from
severe psychological disorders. Providing reintegration
opportunities is not only a moral and legal obligation,
but also an important building block in sustaining peace.

The Secretary-General's report also highlighted
the prevalence of armed groups that perpetrate extreme
violence. Those groups have committed atrocities
against children and tested the response capacity of
national authorities and the international community.
While recognizing the challenges that States face in
addressing the threats posed by such armed groups,
responses that do not comply with international law risk
inflicting further harm on civilians and helping the very
groups that Governments seek to combat. We reiterate
our concern with regard to the alarming reports that
certain parties that committed violations against girls
and boys in the context of war may have been omitted
from the annex of the Secretary-General's report.

We commend the efforts and results achieved so
far by the Children, Not Soldiers campaign launched
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict and UNICEF. We also
commend Chad for having put in place all the measures
foreseen in the initiative and encourage other countries
facing the problem of the recruitment and the use of
children by Government forces to follow suit. The
momentum generated by the campaign has also created
opportunities for engagement with non-State armed
groups. The commitment of the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia - Eje'rcito del Pueblo
to ending the recruitment of children in Colombia is a
case in point.

Conflicts have also led to an increasing number of
refugees and internally displaced persons, almost half
of whom are children. Obligations of States of origin,
transit and destination must not be disregarded on
the grounds of national security. As mentioned in the
Secretary-General's report, accountability for violence
against children remains too rare, even in countries that
have criminalized their recruitment. The protection of
children from serious crimes goes hand in hand with
tackling impunity and ensuring that the perpetrators
are held accountable. In that regard, the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the Involvement of Children in Armed Conflict
has played a crucial role. Brazil is proud to be one of
its signatories.

The right of children to education is not respected
in conflict settings where schools are destroyed and
teachers killed. The impact of such attacks on education
has long-term consequences. The mitralization of
education institutions also has devastating effects.
Detention on national security grounds is another
problem affecting thousands of children in today's
conflicts. It is worrisome that children allegedly
associated with armed groups are increasingly treated
as security threats rather than as victims, particularly
in the context of counter-terrorism operations.

Conflict prevention remains the most ethical and
effective approach to shielding all civilians, including
children, from the plight of war. The Peacebuilding
Commission can play a constructive role in promoting
policies in countries emerging from conflict to foster
social cohesion and render children and youth less
vulnerable to recruitment and abuse, including by
terrorist groups. Children must not be deprived of
their childhood and future. Brazil continues to be fully
committed to that endeavour.

