Mr. Petritsch: I know that time is running short,
but I believe that it is very important to try to answer
the questions that were put to me, because the
questions and issues raised indicate the great interest of
the Security Council and its continued commitment to
supporting the peace implementation process in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. That is not a small matter; it is a lot.
It means a lot to me as the High Representative there,
as well as to the citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
who really count on the Council.

A whole array of pertinent issues have been
raised. Let me start with the Russian Federation, whose
representative raised three questions. First, there is the
question of the defence doctrine. I can assure the
Council that solid progress has been made on getting
the Presidency to agree on a common defence policy.
All the contentious issues were agreed upon at the
recent 7 March meeting, with the exception of the
status of the Croat component in the Federation army. I
believe that final agreement will now have to await the
selection of the new member of the Presidency, which
will take place in due course. I am quite confident that
very soon thereafter we will have a common defence
policy paper agreed upon by all three ethnic
communities - by all three constituent peoples.

The next question related to cantonization. The
Russian representative quoted me as saying that I had
found the proposal interesting. Yes, I find it interesting
in academic terms, but there is no time and no space, as
I have repeatedly stated publicly in interviews; now we
need to follow, and fully implement, Dayton. There are
means - to which I will come back later -by which
to make progress within the Dayton Accords and based
upon the Dayton Accords. Basically there is the
Constitutional Court, which serves as such an
instrument. The constitutional commissions which I
established are of an interim nature; they need to come
up with proposals, in both entities, on how to improve
the two constitutions, and on how to put in place
Constitutional Court decisions.

I very much appreciated the statement made by
the representative of France. His Foreign Minister,
Mr. Vedrine, on 9 March, was the first to visit the
newly established authorities in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. That visit was very well received, and I
would like to encourage other Governments to
demonstrate support for the new Governments, both at
the State level and at entity level. What was so
important about the visit of Mr. Vedrine was the fact
that he referred to the urgency of economic reform.
That is really centre-stage in my programme and in the
Government programme. The European Union road
map shows the way towards the "Europeanization" of
Bosnia and Herzegovina - another of the key words
that I would like to use in this context. I am convinced,
together with the European Union, that the next year
and a half will be a window of opportunity for starting
genuine reform that will be truly embraced by the local
Government and not just by the international
community.

With reference to the Srebrenica issue, I very
much appreciated the statement by the representative of
Bangladesh. I can give the Council a progress report.
In the interim, I have established a board, including the
United Nations, to oversee the implementation of plans
for the cemetery and the memorial. However, in
parallel I have asked the international agencies on the
ground to come up with a Srebrenica action plan,
because I believe that it is very important to put to rest
the victims of the Srebrenica tragedy. But at the same
time, we should also prepare for the future and support
reconstruction-in a physical sense as well as in a
social sense for the people of Srebrenica. I am
convinced that the Srebrenica action plan will in fact
do its job, in terms of accelerated return and economic
revival.

I very much appreciate the support of the
Stabilization Force (SFOR) in particular, in providing
the necessary security environment, as well as the
United Nations mission, for providing the financial
means needed to put the multi-ethnic police in
Srebrenica in place.

With regard to the question on the conclusion of
the United Nations mission, I must say that Jacques
Klein has assured me that he will be able to keep to the
timetable. So I am quite confident that the remaining
tasks of the United Nations will be properly
implemented. In addition to the changing role of
United Nations engagement there, the role of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) is changing - the most recent elections were
the last ones where the OSCE was fully in charge. As
indicated by the presidency of the European Union, I
have been asked by the European Union to look into
the streamlining of the international presence in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, and, of course, I intend to do so in
accordance with my mandate and in close consultation
with the steering board. I will, of course, cooperate
very closely with the United Nations Mission in Bosnia
and Herzegovina (UNMIBH) and the OSCE in this.

My contacts with Belgrade are, in fact, very
close. I very much appreciate what the representative
of Yugoslavia said. We have close relations with
Belgrade, and we are working together very closely, in
particular in conjunction with the Special Parallel
Relationship Agreement. My office was able to secure
a leading role for the Office of the High Representative
in the further implementation of, as well as in
negotiations in regard to the annexes for, the Special
Parallel Relationship Agreement.

The representative of the United States described
the priorities which I set, and which I have been
following since I took on this job one and a half years
ago: refugee return, strengthening the State-level
institutions and, above all, as the driving force behind
them, economic reform. We now realize how important
these priorities are; over time, they have even increased
in relevance. I believe that we need to continue to
follow this three-pronged approach.

Of course, in general I must say that I am taking
what I would call a dual approach: on the one hand, I
am reaching out to try to convince the local leadership
to implement what Dayton is asking them to do; and on
the other hand, of course, - and if necessary - I will
continue to act decisively in order to ensure that the
Dayton Accords are being implemented.

When it comes to the issue of ownership, it was
very helpful when the representative of China pointed
out that there is a certain tendency towards
dependency. Early on, I called this the "dependency
syndrome", which we must be aware of: the local
authorities depend too much on the international
community. That was the reason why I put forward the
concept of ownership, which is basically building
awareness. This is a process; it will not happen
overnight. Indeed, it is not happening overnight. But
the new Government has, I believe, moved decisively
closer to embracing my idea of ownership.

Again, as I have said, I will, wherever necessary,
continue to act very decisively, because I know that
time is running out. The patience of the international
community is running out, and there are other problems
throughout the globe that the Security Council needs to
address.

With regard to refugee return, a non-
governmental organization from the United States -
Human Rights Watch - pointed out that last year
refugee return in Bosnia and Herzegovina produced a
"breakthrough". I am very much appreciative of this
report, because it points out the progress that has been
made without obfuscating the fact that there are still
many, many issues that need to be addressed.

With regard to the Special Parallel Relationship
Agreement, which I have already touched upon and
which was also addressed by the United States
representative, I can assure him that there is going to
be continued international engagement and
involvement. I have managed in my talks and
negotiations with President Kostunica, first and
foremost, to secure that, in the preamble to this
Agreement, the State of Bosnia and Herzegovina is
mentioned very prominently, so that, by signing on to
the Special Parallel Relations Agreement, both the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the entity of the
Republika Srpska are also signing up to the idea of the
integrity and sovereignty of the State - to the idea that
there is a State of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and not just
two entities. I consider this extremely important, and
we will, of course, continue to monitor the
negotiations. I have also reserved the right to be the
final authority in this context when it comes to the
implementation of the Special Parallel Relationship
Agreement.

Of course, we also attach priority to the early
passing of the election law. Again, that is one of the
recurring issues. Another issue of specific importance
was raised by the representative of Tunisia 4 that of
demining. I can assure him that I raised this issue just
two days ago during my last steering board meeting at
the political director level. I asked the steering board
political directors to go back to their individual capitals
and support what I put forward there: continued
support for funding demining in Bosnia and
Herzegovina - a very important prerequisite for
stabilizing and normalizing the country.

The United Kingdom also raised a few issues. I
have in part already answered some of them. One of
the questions related to what more can be done to get
the refugees back. That question was also raised by
Jamaica. Of course, now, with the new governments,
domestic efforts need to be reinforced. For a couple of
months, we have had a refugee Ministry at the State
level. We have a new Minister there now from a
moderate Croat party, and I expect efforts to be
redoubled at the domestic level. Naturally, we will only
be successful eventually with refugee return if we
manage the economic revitalization of the country. It is
one thing to return; it is another thing to find a job in
the area that has been returned to. It is also a question
of education - a question that was raised here, and I
very much appreciate that, too. It is a matter of
security. Again, SFOR plays a crucial role in this
context, and it will need to continue to do so.

The questions and problems relating to refugee
return are different now. Up until 1999, the question
was, "Is there going to be refugee return at all into
minority areas, in particular into areas like the
Republika Srpska?" Now the question is only, "How
fast?". This needs our full support - our full political
and economic support and, of course, financial support
for those brave returnees who dare to return.

The Croat representative here in the Council also
raised the question of the regional aspect of refugee
returns. I believe this is a very important issue, and that
the Stability Pact is working in this regard. I would
very much like to encourage Croatia and Yugoslavia to
cooperate fully with the Stability Pact. We in the Office
of the High Representative are in very close contact
with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), which is one of
the leading, driving forces in the area of refugee
returns.

However, there is one problem with regard to
Croat refugees. The representative of Croatia rightly
addressed the issue of the poor results in returns of
Croats to the Republika Srpska. Unfortunately, I must
say that a few of the many Croat villages and houses
that the international community has restored are still
uninhabited because the Croats who lived there simply
do not want to go back home. This is for several
reasons, all of them probably legitimate ones.
Nevertheless, I believe that if the international
community reaches out and makes an extra effort, then
we can also expect the host countries to make an extra
effort to motivate and encourage returns as well. I
consider this particularly important in the case of
Croats.

The next question, from the United Kingdom, had
to do with whether there is an outreach effort, so to
speak, with regard to the Croats. The answer is, very
much so. This is because my strategy is a two-pronged
one. On the one hand, we need decisive and tough
action to be taken on my part because I simply cannot
allow the President of a country to breach the
Constitution to try to establish illegal institutions. That
is something that simply cannot be tolerated. This is an
exercise in the establishment of the rule of law, and
there cannot be any compromise here. On the other
hand, we are trying to reach out wherever possible
because the Croat people 4 one of the three
constituent peoples - are part and parcel of the idea of
a State of Bosnia and Herzegovina. There is no State of
Bosnia and Herzegovina without the Croats.

But that also has to be recognized by the Bosnian
Croat leadership. I can assure the Council that the
Croats who are now in the Government are all very
much appreciative with regard to the idea of a multi-
ethnic Bosnia and Herzegovina. We now have a Croat
Prime Minister in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We have a
Croat President in the Federation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, where most of the Croats live. We have
many ministers, of course. We have a Minister for
Refugees who is of Croat origin, as well as many more.
So the Croats are equally represented in the new,
reformed Governments. They are not members of the
Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ).

This is what a democratic party needs to take into
consideration: change is possible in a democracy. This
is what the voters decide. That is the real cause of the
turmoil in the HDZ; because, for the first time in 10
years, they are excluded from Governments. By the
way, they are excluded in the same manner as are the
two other parties in the Republika Srpska, including
the Democratic Action Party (SDA). They are excluded
from governing or holding the posts of Prime Minister
or those of any other minister. That needs to be
accepted by parties. This is also something of a novel
situation confronting nationalist parties.

The HDZ has chosen the path of confrontation,
which is naturally not acceptable in a democracy. Of
course, there are other reasons why the HDZ feels so
much pressure now. As the representative of Croatia
has expressed, the new Croatian Government has
completely stopped supporting the HDZ politically and
financially. We need to continue to support the Croat
people, but we need to make it clear to them that they
are not represented solely by the HDZ. There are many
other opportunities and possibilities to be represented,
the most important being the Governments of the
Federation and the State. They, in turn, also have the
greatest responsibility in inviting the Croat community
to take part in the political processes in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

Going back to the Special Parallel Relationship
Agreement, I think it is also important to point out that
I have succeeded in having some of the issues included
in that Agreement taken out because they need to be
regulated at the State level. I very much encouraged
President Kostunica to establish State-to-State relations
and to have the pertinent agreements made at the State
level, and he promised to do so. For example, the dual
citizenship issue was taken out of the Special Parallel
Agreement by me. This issue will now be handled at
the State level.

I also appreciate very much the United
Kingdom's support for the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, as well as its
continued focus on this issue. I consider this to be one
of the most basic and important of issues. There is
never going to be reconciliation in the area unless
justice is done. That is something that we need to keep
in mind constantly.

The next very important question, which was
raised by the representatives of Ireland and Bosnia and
Herzegovina, has to do with the State Border Service. I
appreciate very much that Ambassador Zivalj has
placed so much emphasis on the State Border Service.
As the Council knows, I had to impose this law at the
beginning of last year after it was put forward in the
New York Declaration by the Presidents but,
unfortunately, not followed up by the tripartite
Presidency. The United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH) is now implementing it in a
very professional way. I appreciate very much the
efforts being made in this regard.

However, we also need to keep in mind that the
functioning of viable State institutions needs to be seen
in the wider context of what a country can afford. I
believe we need to see to it that the local budgets are
eventually able to finance the State Border Service. We
are therefore working very closely with the local
authorities to come up with realistic budgetary figures
so that the State Border Service will move forward as
expected. At the same time, I do not think we currently
need a Mercedes in Bosnia and Herzegovina; I think a
Volkswagen is good enough in order to establish an
efficient and very professional State Border Service in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

I think I have already answered the first question
asked by Singapore. My interpretation is that the Croat
rebellion is now really more of a dying gasp than
anything else. Nevertheless, we need to be very
vigilant when it comes to such issues. Unfortunately, in
Bosnia and Herzegovina the idea of the rule of law and
fully embracing the Constitution is not very
widespread. We need to enforce and reinforce
awareness of the rule of law as the basis of every State
and community. This idea very much needs to be
promoted. I have already spoken about the parties that
are now out of power and the fact that Croatia no
longer supports the activities of the HDZ.

With regard to whether the Dayton Agreement
should be modified or rectified, I would like to indicate
again that the Dayton Accords will remain the basis for
peace implementation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. I
know that the Dayton Accords are not perfect-this
has been mentioned here. It is a living document. There
are two institutions that can improve the situation. The
first is the High Representative as the final authority in
the implementation of the Dayton Accords; I am using
my powers to the utmost in order to make progress, but
that, of course, needs to be within the framework of the
Dayton Accords. The second and more important one
in the long run is the Constitutional Court, and it has
already acted. In unison with the Constitutional Court,
I have implemented, as an interim measure, the fact
that all three constituent peoples are now constituent
throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina.

To again touch upon the Croat side, Croats for the
first time are now a constituent people, along with the
Bosniacs and of course the Serbs, in Republika Srpska.
Since I issued the decision on 11 January, Croats and
Bosniacs have the veto right in Republika Srpska. They
can oppose and veto any legislation that goes against
their vital interest. This is the way forward for Bosnia
and Herzegovina. This is the way that I see the
improvement - or rather the evolution - of the
Dayton Accords.

Regarding the elections in the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia and ripple effects, there were indeed
generally very positive effects, because now, for the
first time, we have in Belgrade an interlocutor-we
have a partner again. But, on the other hand, in the
short-run in a way it had some problematic aspects -
this very quick move to establish the Agreement on
Special Parallel Relations is one such indicator.
However, in general I must say that I am quite
optimistic that Belgrade, in the medium-term, will
become as responsible a partner in the Dayton
implementation as Croatia already is.

Let me move on to the next question. Colombia
asked where the real support for the nationalists comes
from. We need to keep in mind that-talking again
about the Dayton Accords - the nationalist parties
were left in place in Dayton. Even worse, they were
able to legitimize their existence through elections
under Dayton. We needed a long time -up until the
last elections, almost five years -to get, through the
democratic process of elections, the three nationalist
parties into some sort of a minority situation. Again, it
was already pointed out that it is a very thin majority
that exists at the State level and at the Federation level
in regard to moderate parties. Nevertheless, for the first
time now, we have a realistic opportunity that moderate
politics will succeed in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Let me just refer to the President and to Ukraine
in regard to the Ukrainian minority in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, which is the fourth largest group in the
country. Let me assure you that when implementing the
constitutional commission and the Constitutional Court
decision, I took the liberty to include as the fourth
group "the others." So, for the first time now, the
minorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina, be it Ukrainians
or Roma or others, have a say in both entities, are
represented in the constitutional commissions and will
have a say in the future permanent establishment of
this body.

I can also assure you that economic sanctions
against the Croats were never envisioned. We are
moving against individuals, as I have indicated time
and again, and not against the Croat people. I deeply
believe that the majority of the Croats, who are decent
people, want to cooperate. But of course, as long as the
leadership is such, it is indeed quite difficult. I am,
however, quite confident that this will change over
time. This will change now also with the new
Governments in place.

I very much appreciate the statement by Sweden
on behalf of the European Union. I fully agree and very
much appreciate the support of my work in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The European Union naturally is one of
the most important partners there.

I have already made reference to the last two
speakers and would commend the excellent analysis by
the representative of Croatia. I believe that the
Constitutional Court decision will in fact do the trick
for the smallest community, the Croats. The legitimate
fears that exist are indeed legitimate, inasmuch as we
are looking into how to reach out and how to resolve
the issues that are of real concern to the Croat people. I
can assure you that I will find a way to accommodate
the legitimate concerns of the Croat people. I have
already established a dialogue with Croat
representatives, including moderate HDZ
representatives. Only three days after I had to dismiss
President Jelavic and three of the Vice Presidents of the
HDZ, the two remaining Vice Presidents asked for a
meeting, and we actually had a quite constructive first
meeting about the issues that concern the Croat
community. Again, I am quite confident that we will be
able to find a way out.

Lastly, the representative of Croatia raised the
issue of accession to the Council of Europe. Let me
assure you that I am quite confident that Bosnia and
Herzegovina will manage to join the Council of Europe
in the course of this year. We are working very closely
in order to fulfil the last remaining preconditions set
forth by the Council of Europe. Incidentally, right now
there is a delegation from the Council of Europe
travelling in Bosnia and Herzegovina in order to make
a last assessment of the situation there.

As I am coming to a close, let me say how much I
appreciate the interest that you have demonstrated in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and in my work there. I very
much appreciate all the support that was expressed and
am looking forward to my next report here with,
hopefully, even better results and better information
from the ground in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

