Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation was compelled
to abstain in the voting on resolution 2498 (2019),
extending the sanctions against Somalia. We agree
that the situation in that country in the Horn of Africa
remains tumultuous. We took an active part in the
efforts to identify and clarify the provisions of the
Somali arms embargo. We hope that this and other
measures provided for in the resolution will help to
normalize the situation and eradicate the terrorist threat
posed principally by Al-Shabaab.

However, we remain concerned about some of
the resolution's wording. Specifically, we believe that
including language on Djibouti and Eritrea in the text
ofa Security Council document on the Somali sanctions
regime is not justified. We would like to point out that
last year we in the Council lifted restrictions on Eritrea.
The situation of the relations between Asmara and
Djibouti does not pose a threat to international peace
and security, and the settlement of outstanding issues
between those two countries is a matter of bilateral
diplomacy. We also regret the fact that the sponsor
sought to overburden the document with human rights
requirements. We want to emphasize once again that
these issues do not come under the direct purview of
either the Security Council or the Committee pursuant
to resolution 751 (1992) concerning Somalia. There is a
specific body for discussing them, and that is the Human
Rights Council. We once again call for respecting the
division of labour in the United Nations.

In conclusion, I would like to express our significant
concerns about the artificially created time pressure in
the process of drafting the resolution. The result was
that Council members were put in the difficult position
of having to agree on an important text in a big hurry,
while racing against the clock, despite the fact that it
had undergone serious, substantive changes compared
with last year's. My delegation made every effort to
save the situation and preserve the consensus in support
of the document, which is so essential for our Somali
friends. We deeply regret that our suggestions were not
heeded, and we hope that our British colleagues will
draw the necessary conclusions so that the situation is
not repeated.

