Mr. Chkheidze (Georgia): First of all, Sir, I should
like to extend our sincere congratulations to you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
this month and to wish you success in your activities. We
would also express our gratitude to the previous President
of the Security Council, the Permanent Representative of
Rwanda, for his efforts directed at the cost-effective work
of the Council.

It is an honour and great pleasure for us to see here
present the new members of the Security Council. We
believe that their contribution to the work of the Council
will be important and valuable.

On behalf of the Government of the Republic of
Georgia and in the personal name of its Head of State,
Mr. Eduard Shevardnadze, allow me to express our
deepest appreciation to the United Nations, to its Security
Council and especially to the Secretary-General,
Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, and his Special Envoy,
Ambassador Edouard Brunner, for the attention and
goodwill they have accorded to the process under way in
my country.

The resolutions on Georgia adopted by the Security
Council and the recent Visit of the Secretary-General to
the region have made clear to the world community the
importance that the family of nations attaches to the
comprehensive settlement of the protracted conflict in
Abkhazia.

I should like to express my sincere gratitude to the
members of the group of countries known as 'Friends of
Georgia' and to the Russian Federation, as facilitator, for
their efforts to bring about a peaceful settlement of the
dispute.

I should also like to underscore the joint activities
being carried out by the United Nations Observer Mission
in Georgia (UNOMIG) and the peace-keeping forces of
the Commonwealth of Independent States to monitor the
cease-fire and ensure the safe return of thousands of
homeless, which is being organized by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.

It has been more than a year now since negotiations
began in Geneva. My Government remains fully
committed to the peace process initiated by the United
Nations and has complied with all the documents adopted
by the Security Council and the Quadripartite
Commission.

Bearing in mind the importance of reaching a
negotiated settlement of the dispute, Georgia is fully
cooperating with the United Nations and has taken
realistic, practical steps to reach a compromise.

 

In a futile attempt to accelerate the peace process, in
September 1994 Georgia's Head of State Visited the zone
of conflict and negotiated with the leader of the Abkhaz
side. Unfortunately, the Abkhaz leadership is constantly
violating Security Council resolutions and seeking to evade,
ignore and negotiate away its obligations. Its intransigence
reached its pinnacle when the separatists unilaterally
adopted a new constitution on 26 November 1994 and
declared Abkhazia a subject of international law, thus
damaging the peace process almost beyond repair. We are
gratified that the Security Council immediately condemned
this unilateral decision and once again reaffirmed the
territorial integrity of Georgia.

As I mentioned earlier, a year has passed since the
negotiations opened in Geneva, but no arrangements have
yet been made for the return of the more than 250,000
refugees and displaced persons to their homes. The Abkhaz
side is doing its utmost to prevent the return of those who
have been forcibly expelled, even terrorizing the few still
remaining in the Gali and other districts of Abkhazia. The
decision of the Security Council that the refugees and
displaced persons should be allowed to return to their
homes is being effectively disregarded and ignored.

Although the Security Council has condemned any
attempt to change the demographic composition of
Abkhazia, the region is still being settled with people of so-
called Abkhaz origin - in fact mercenaries, who, as a
reward, are given the houses of Georgians free of charge.

The current plight of the refugees, who are scattered
throughout Georgia, is ruinously affecting its already
devastated economy. Despite intensive humanitarian
assistance from the international community, Georgia is
experiencing, in the face of the cold winter, severe
shortages of food, fuel and medicine.

Speaking of the present situation in Georgia, I would
presume to remind the Security Council of the prediction
that Mr. Eduard Shevardnadze made in his speech before
the forty-seventh session of the General Assembly. He
warned at that time against the danger of aggressive
separatism under the guise of the ideals of
self-determination, and he urged the international
community to take all necessary measures to keep at bay
this new trend, running counter to the purposes and
principles of the United Nations and jeopardizing the lives
of thousands of innocent people.

My President also expressed the fear that in the
Caucasus

'as nowhere else is the danger so great that the

existing internal conflicts will merge with the ones

in neighbouring States and grow into regional or

even continental wars fought along national or

religious lines'. (Ofiicial Records of the General Assembly, F arty-seventh Session, Plenary Meetings, 12th meeting, p. 28-30)

Unfortunately, in the light of current events this
ominous prediction is becoming ever more realistic and
imminent.

Under the circumstances, the Government of the
Republic of Georgia would welcome a decision by the
Security Council to extend the mandate of the United
Nations Observer Mission in Georgia, for we believe that
the United Nations presence in the region will greatly
contribute to its stability and to the peace process as a
whole.

