Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): We thank your
delegation, Mr. President, for organizing today's
important debate. We also thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his briefing to the Council. We also wish
to thank Mr. Guterres, Deputy Prime Minister of
Timor-Leste, for sharing his country's experiences on
institution-building. We also pay tribute to our
colleague Peter Wittig for his outstanding leadership as
Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission in the past
year, as well as thank him for his statement today.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
to be delivered later by the representative of
Bangladesh on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

It is certainly true that conflict frustrates not only
the emotional and physical aspects of people's lives,
but also the economic and social infrastructure of
countries, which is the subject of today's debate. By
way of further underscoring and addressing the
challenges before us, my delegation will focus on four
broad issues.

The first issue is the importance of national
ownership and local capacities. As has already been
mentioned by those who spoke before me today,
national ownership of peacebuilding efforts is at the
core of creating sustainable institutions in the
immediate aftermath of conflict. Although people in
post-conflict situations may not be able to articulate
their short-, medium- and even long-term priorities, we
believe that they can and should be given the
opportunity to at least identify them. The international
community has the obligation to build upon and advise
countries based on priorities that they themselves have
identified. Careful identification of those priorities is in
most cases a critical determinant for the success or
failure of peacebuilding efforts. National actors can be

11-2l268
very accurate in identifying the root causes of the
conflict.

National capacities at the human and institutional
level are important in sustaining peacebuilding efforts.
Consequently, the timing of developing these
capacities becomes critical in the medium to long term
when the attention of the international community on a
particular country has waned. In particular, capacity-
and institution-building are a foundation for efforts to
avert dependency and achieve sustainable peace.

South Africa emphasizes the importance of
building local capacities and the provision of training,
especially targeting women, in order to enhance
existing capacities at the national level, as they are
usually willing to participate in the rebuilding of their
homes, communities and countries. In this context,
South Africa has played a significant part in post-
conflict capacity- and institution-building in Africa
through multilateral, bilateral and trilateral
mechanisms, in such countries as Burundi, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Sierra Leone,
among others. On behalf of the African Union (AU),
South Africa continues to lead the committee on post-
conflict reconstruction and development in the Sudan,
whose role is expected to become even more critical in
the post-referendum phase, especially in Southern
Sudan.

Secondly, with regard to the question of
coherence, coordination and partnership, South Africa
strongly supports the call for greater coherence,
coordination and interaction among various United
Nations organs and agencies. The United Nations must
deliver as one. Other actors, such as the international
financial institutions, regional and subregional
organizations and donors, also need to work in a
coherent and coordinated manner in support of national
authorities to address national institution- and
capacity-building priorities in post-conflict countries.
These priorities include the creation and revival of
institutions for the reform of the security sector,
strengthening the rule of law, ensuring demobilization,
demilitarization and reintegration, and economic
recovery.

South Africa is encouraged by the progress made
by the Peacebuilding Commission in strengthening its
partnerships with regional organizations, in particular
the efforts to institutionalize its relationship with the
African Union. One of the principles underpinning the
AU's post-conflict reconstruction and development
programme is capacity-building for sustainability.
Since regional and subregional organizations are in
close proximity to post-conflict situations, it seems
natural and logical to us that the United Nations should
work in partnership with these organizations if it is to
maximize the impact of its peacebuilding interventions.

While acknowledging the improvement in the
relationship between the Security Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission, we believe that more has
to be done. Perhaps we could consider flexibility in our
working methods, in order to allow the Commission to
effectively play its role in advising the Council on
institution-building in post-conflict situations. The
growing number of peacekeeping operations,
integrated peacebuilding and special political missions
with considerable peacebuilding tasks provides an
opportunity for the Security Council to make optimal
use of the Commission's advice. Specifically, in
consultation with the Commission, we encourage the
Council to incorporate peacebuilding tasks related to
institution-building into all of its peacekeeping
mandates. Peacekeeping and peacebuilding should be
mutually reinforcing in the pursuit of lasting peace for
countries in conflict.

Concerning the question of mobilizing resources,
as our French colleague has already mentioned,
institution- and capacity-building in post-conflict
countries require a substantial injection of resources. In
this regard, we believe that timely, sustainable and
predictable financing remains a crucial ingredient in
realizing peacebuilding objectives. We therefore
emphasize the need for the United Nations to consider
utilizing sustainable mechanisms, including assessed
contributions, as a means of kick-starting peacebuilding
activities in countries emerging from conflict,
especially for early institution-building efforts.

In conclusion, South Africa welcomes the
adoption of the draft presidential statement before us
on post-conflict peace- and institution-building. South
Africa appreciates United Nations efforts, through its
multifarious organs and agencies, towards making the
world a better place to live. We also look forward to
the report on the review of international civilian
capacities early this year.

