Mr. Klein (United States of America): I want to
thank all the briefers for their very informative and
comprehensive briefings today and for highlighting
the work that their organizations are doing on this
important topic.

The United States recognizes Ukraine for drawing
attention to the importance of protecting critical
infrastructure. The challenges for most people is that
critical infrastructure is both everywhere and nowhere.
We do not think about the bridges and the tunnels that
allow us to get to work every day. We do not think about
the radars, satellites and radios that allow aeroplanes
to move safely across the sky. We do not think about
the network of power plants, substations and high-
voltage lines that keep the lights on. We do not think
about the server rooms and fibre-optic cables that get
our e-mails to where they need to be. Therefore, when
we talk about protecting critical infrastructure at the
Security Council, we are really talking about nothing
less than protecting what underpins our daily lives in
the modern era.

It is not an issue that each of us can combat in
isolation, and that is why the United States supported
resolution 2341 (2017), adopted by the Council just
moments ago. Part of the reason, of course, is that the
consequences of an attack on critical infrastructure
could go far beyond one country's borders. Pipelines
carrying vital supplies of oil and gas span thousands
of miles. A catastrophe at a chemical or nuclear plant
could sicken people across continents. One could
go on and on, but the point is that protecting critical
infrastructure can help keep us all safe. Another
reason, however, to cooperate is that the threat to
critical infrastructure can be transnational. That is
especially true of cyberthreats whereby malicious
actors can reach across borders to cause havoc. We can
therefore surely agree on the importance of this issue
and its international dimensions. The question then
becomes how Member States can act to reduce the risk
of a devastating terrorist attack.

In the United States, private companies own most
of the country's critical infrastructure, and that is why
protecting it is a shared responsibility among various
levels of Government, companies and individual
citizens. It has to be a collaborative effort. In fact,
anyone in the Chamber who has ridden a New York
City subway has certainly seen all the signs reminding
passengers: "If you see something, say something".
That is part of the strategy. Every bit of extra vigilance
can help. The United States Government, especially
the Department of Homeland Security, is constantly
working on public-private partnerships that strengthen
the resilience of our communities. The United States
believes that the United Nations counter-terrorism
bodies and its agencies can be helpful. They can collect
information on how Member States can address critical
infrastructure and disseminate best practices for
keeping these institutions safe.

Today's resolution also recalls that the States
Members of the United Nations must ensure that
terrorist attacks are criminal offences, including those
intended to destroy or disable critical infrastructure.
That is important partly for deterrence, but also to
make sure that perpetrators of such attacks cannot
escape prosecution. Member States must strengthen
partnerships to share information about potential
threats and ensure that their law enforcement and other
relevant agencies can work together to prevent attacks
before they happen. As the Minister said, forewarned
is forearmed.

This is a new area of cooperation for the Security
Council to discuss, and so there is still much that we
still need to define, including the role of the United
Nations in helping Member States cooperate. But
the resolution today should be an impetus to develop
concrete ways for Governments to share the lessons
they have learned and to collaborate in keeping critical
infrastructure running safely in the background of our
daily lives, where it should be.

