Mr. Skraeic' (Croatia): Allow me to start, like
other colleagues, by thanking Under-Secretary-General
Pascoe and Assistant Secretary-General Mulet for their
briefings.

This is the third time that we have met in this
Chamber in as many days on the situation in Georgia.
My delegation has expressed and continues to express
its grave concerns at recent developments in that
country. The situation in the conflict zone in South
Ossetia, Georgia, seems to be getting worse; reports
indicate that heavy fighting between Georgian and
Russian armed forces continues unabated. All of that
has culminated in the Georgian parliament's
declaration of a state of war.
Croatia is also extremely concerned by the
introduction of large numbers of Russian troops into
the conflict area of South Ossetia, Georgia, and now
into the Abkhazia region of Georgia. Let me be clear:
Croatia fully supports and respects the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of Georgia and sees the
Violation of its borders as totally unacceptable.

In that regard, and as we have stated on previous
occasions in this Chamber, we understand that the
Russian Federation takes seriously its obligations as a
peacekeeper in Georgia's region of South Ossetia, and
we welcome that fact. However, we feel strongly that
its actions in the past days go far beyond the role of a
peacekeeper as foreseen in the 1992 armistice
agreement among Georgian, Russian and South
Ossetian leaders.

Moreover, Croatia is very concerned about the
escalation of the conflict and its widening to other
areas of Georgia not connected with the situation in
South Ossetia. We feel strongly that a country
purporting to act as a peacekeeper in one region of
another sovereign State should not be using its military
to target military and civilian targets in another,
completely unrelated region of the same sovereign
State, whatever the reasoning. We are extremely
concerned by the fact that efforts to de-escalate the
conflict through direct diplomatic links between
Georgia and Russia or between the authorities of the
separatist regions in Georgia are not making any real
progress.

Croatia calls once again on all sides to
immediately and unconditionally agree to a ceasefire
and to refrain from further acts of provocation. We
believe that it would be very difficult to have a return
to the situation of 6 August, before the hostilities
began, and a restoration of the status quo ante during
that time if a ceasefire cannot be agreed to. Both
Georgia and Russia need to withdraw their forces
following the establishment of a ceasefire and then to
re-engage in diplomatic and political efforts to resolve
outstanding issues.

We welcome the Georgian decision to withdraw
its forces from South Ossetia and hope that that signals
the start of talks among Georgian, South Ossetian and
Russian authorities. At the same time, we are disturbed
by reports that the retreating Georgian troops are being
fired upon. Russia needs to be a credible partner in this
process. It should not be leveraging its position to the

detriment of any of the parties within Georgia and, in
particular, should not dictate the outcome of talks
between Georgian and South Ossetian authorities or
between Georgian and Abkhazian authorities.

We welcome the joint mission of the European
Union and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) that went to Georgia
yesterday and sincerely hope that through its efforts it
will be able to broker a much-needed ceasefire and
return to negotiations. We especially support the
ongoing role and activities of the OSCE in the South
Ossetian region of Georgia as an impartial mediator,
and we believe that the offer of the use of its good
offices should be taken up by all sides to the conflict.

Finally, my delegation deplores the most recent
actions taken by the de facto authorities of Georgia's
Abkhazia region in the Upper Kodori Valley vis-a-vis
the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia
(UNOMIG) and the shelling of Georgian villages.
Those authorities should not be exacerbating an
already fragile situation elsewhere in the country by
pre-empting the use of force. We hope that the
authorities of the Abkhaz region of Georgia will refrain
from further hostile acts and will allow UNOMIG to
return to that region, in line with resolutions of the
Security Council and existing agreements.

One more thing: my delegation too will be ready
to support action by the Council as proposed by the
delegations of France and the United Kingdom.

