Mr. Molefe (South Africa): I would like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, and the delegation
of Cote d'Ivoire for assuming the presidency of the
Security Council and thank you for organizing this
debate on cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations and the role of
States, regional arrangements and the United Nations
in the prevention of conflicts.

Allow me to start with a quote from former
Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali from An
Agendafor Peace, his report to the General Assembly on
preventive diplomacy, peacemaking and peacekeeping,
published on 17 June 1992. With regard to a new era of
opportunity for regional arrangements, he stated that

"regional action as a matter of decentralization,
delegation and cooperation with United Nations
efforts could not only lighten the burden of the
Council but also contribute to a deeper sense of
participation, consensus and democratization in
international affairs." (S/2411], para. 64).

South Africa has always prioritized an enhanced
strategic partnership between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations in conflict
prevention and resolution. In its previous terms on
the Security Council, South Africa championed
the landmark decision on strengthening strategic
cooperation between the Security Council and the
African Union Peace and Security Council in resolution
2033 (2012), adopted during South Africa's presidency
of the Council and building on the South African-
sponsored resolution 1809 (2008).

Since then, South Africa has been consistent in
its efforts to deepen cooperation between the African
Union (AU) and the United Nations. Those resolutions
and the subsequent efforts to draw on the comparative
advantages of regional organizations in the context
of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations
build on the principle of subsidiarity, which allows the
Security Council to be more effective and efficient
in the pursuit of its central mandate. Therefore, as
an incoming non-permanent member of the Security
Council, South Africa will continue to work together
with the three non-permanent Security Council
members from Africa and other Council members to
strengthen that cooperation.

Furthermore, South Africa firmly supports the
Secretary-General's call for a surge in diplomacy and
conflict prevention, which gains much from greater
cooperation with regional organizations. South
Africa's own commitment to mediation and conflict
prevention is well known, and we have responded, in
that regard, to assist in resolving conflicts in countries
such as Burundi, the Sudan, South Sudan, Lesotho,
Madagascar and the Democratic Republic of the Congo
by employing a wide variety of diplomatic tools to help
stabilize the situation in those countries. Those have
included mediation, good offices, troop deployment
and direct technical and financial assistance.

However, due to the lack of support for and focus on
peacebuilding, as well as the lack of sustained attention
on post-conflict economies, we often see those efforts
undone by the continuation of instability and conflict.
That shows a failure to consolidate peace gains and an
inability to learn from past inaction. It also highlights
the importance of addressing conflict in the broader
sense by dealing with the root causes ofinstability, based
on the understanding that peace, stability, development
and human rights are interdependent. South Africa
believes that regional organizations are best placed to
implement actions that prevent instability and conflict.

For that reason, South Africa welcomes the positive
developments in the signing of two agreements - the
Joint Framework for the Implementation of Agenda 2063
and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
the Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for
an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security - which

form the platform for renewed cooperation between the
two organizations.

However, we believe that more work needs to be done
to facilitate joint visits, as well as regular consultations
between the AU Peace and Security Council and the
United Nations Security Council, to guarantee greater
coherence and convergence of strategic direction. That
will also enhance the conflict-prevention and early
warning systems of the two organizations. It is also
critical to enhance cooperation between the AU post-
conflict reconstruction and development mechanisms
and the United Nations Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC). South Africa believes that there is a need for
a strong focus and strengthened support for the PBC,
which can no longer be seen as an afterthought,
but should take centre stage, with a more proactive
approach of the Security Council on conflict prevention
and resolution.

Cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union is an excellent example of the potential
of cooperation with regional organizations. Over the
years, African Union member States have demonstrated
their willingness and intent to lead the way in preventing
and resolving conflicts on the African continent. Those
efforts should be enhanced in order to maximize the
gains that have been made so far.

The AU has undertaken peace operations in Somalia
and Darfur, and has been first respondent in cases such
as Mali and the Central African Republic, risking much
and often paying the ultimate price in terms of the lives
of African troops. However, the continent continues to
face the challenge of a lack of predictable funding for
its peace operations. While Africans risk their lives in
efforts to take responsibility for peace and security on
the continent, which is a large part of the mandate of
the Security Council, Africa is not being afforded the
sustained, predictable and flexible funding for African
Union-led peace operations.

Therefore, while we welcome resolutions 1809
(2008), 2320 (2016) and 2378 (2017), which allude to
the need of addressing that lack of financial support,
we call for unanimous Council support for the draft
resolution, presented by the African members on the
Council, that seeks to address the issue of financing
for AU-led peace operations. Africa has demonstrated
its political will and committed human resources
and lives to silencing the guns on the continent, but
needs assistance to enhance some of its capacities and
capabilities in order to adequately respond to conflicts.

With the African Standby Force having been
declared fully operational, the AU has demonstrated
that it is capable and ready to address its own security
challenges within the continent. The AU Commission
in 2016 also developed a five-year work plan for the
period 2016-2020 for the African Standby Force, and
thus far command-post training and exercises to boost
the military, police and civilian components of the
African Standby Force have been carried out.

It is also vital that the Council realize the importance
of the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and the
agenda of enhancing the role of women in peace and
security, not only as peacekeepers but as mediators in
conflict. South Africa believes that the involvement of
women in the peaceful resolution of conflict and the
protection of women and children as vulnerable groups
will prove crucial in achieving sustainable peace
and development.

Allow me to conclude by recalling the political
declaration adopted at the Nelson Mandela Peace
Summit, which was adopted during the high-level week
in September, in which world leaders acknowledged
"the incontrovertible truth that conflict is in all ways
more costly than preventive diplomacy" (resolution 73/1, para. 14) and expressed their full support for
the work of the United Nations. They also agreed to
"strive to support peace processes, conflict prevention
and resolution efforts, peacebuilding and post-conflict
reconstruction and development" (ibid). We trust that
today's debate will work towards achieving those goals
through enhanced cooperation between the United
Nations and the AU.

