Mr. Wibisono (Indonesia): The Security Council is
meeting today at a critical juncture in the situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Our deliberations will have
significant and far-reaching ramifications for progress
towards the implementation of the Peace Agreement
reached in Dayton, Ohio. In this respect, the Secretary-
General's report of 13 December provides a firm basis on
which to address the issues contained in the draft
resolution before us today.

My delegation attaches great importance to the
resolution of the conflict in the former Yugoslavia,
because it has inflicted enormous suffering and carnage
on all who have fallen into its path, including thousands
of defenceless women and children. Indeed, few have
been spared the unrelenting physical and emotional pain
that has left profound scars on the people of that region.

The signing of the Peace Agreement in Paris on
14 December offers the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Serbia and Croatia real hope that they will
be able to put behind them the worst conflict in Europe

 

since the Second World War. The continuation of the
conflict would not only adversely affect the people of the
countries of the former Yugoslavia, but also bring
instability to the region.

My delegation is of the view that the draft resolution
before us today provides a valuable framework for the
process of reconciliation to begin and for facilitating the
framework for peace in the region. This draft resolution
also encompasses important elements of further progress
towards mutual recognition among the concerned parties in
the former Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, which
is the key element for providing peace and prosperity in the
former Yugoslavia.

Peace and reconciliation in the former Yugoslavia
would be elusive without the commitment of the parties,
particularly in their relationships with one another, as set
forth in operative paragraph 10 of the draft resolution, and
without the urgently needed sustained efforts of the
international community to provide assistance for
programmes of reconstruction that address both the
immediate and long-term needs of the country.

In this regard, my delegation believes it essential to
create an atmosphere conducive to the pursuit of arms
control, thus sustaining a climate that promotes sustainable
development and prosperity. This will also require the
neighbouring countries to bear the responsibility to
cooperate in the implementation of these measures and to
extend all assistance towards that end.

This draft resolution envisages the eventual conclusion
and termination of the mandate of the United Nations
Protection Force (UNPROFOR). We should therefore like
to pay tribute to all the women and men of UNPROFOR
who have dedicated their talents and untiring efforts to the
relentless pursuit of peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina over
the past four years, particularly those who have made the
ultimate sacrifice. As a troop-contributing nation, Indonesia
is proud to have lent its support to the cause of peace.

The nearly four years of hostilities have created more
than 2 million refugees and displaced persons, while
crippling the country's economic infrastructure. In this
regard, my delegation supports the observations of the
Secretary-General in his report that we need to focus on the
problems and concerns of repatriation and the relief of
refugees and displaced persons, as well as those pertaining
to the promotion of human rights. We believe that these are
areas in which the United Nations can continue to play a

 

vital and indispensable role, thereby bolstering the peace
process.

My delegation believes, moreover, that a
considerable and sustained effort must be directed towards
the rehabilitation and reconstruction of the country's
economic infrastructure. We therefore strongly urge the
international community to provide assistance for
programmes of reconstruction that address both the
immediate and long-term needs of the country.

In our view, the credibility of this Peace Agreement
will be greatly impacted by the level of cooperation
which the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia receives. The Indonesian delegation wishes to
stress the importance of the provisions contained in
paragraphs 4 and 5 of this draft resolution and reaffirms
the call for all parties to comply with requests for
assistance.

Having carefully examined the draft resolution
before us today, we conclude that it provides the people
of Bosnia and Herzegovina with the opportunity to end
long years of bloodshed and strife that have torn at the
very fabric of their country. While my delegation is
cognizant of the fact that numerous circumstances will
impact the future fate of the peace process, we
nevertheless reiterate that the two critical conditions
contained in the Secretary-General's report for enhancing
the peace process should be met. In this regard, the
Security Council should remain actively seized of this
crisis. My delegation also attaches great significance to its
comprehensiveness and views it as an important conduit
for providing an environment that is conducive to the
peaceful resolution of this tragic war.

In view of the foregoing, my delegation, after careful
deliberation and reflection, will vote in favour of the draft
resolution before us today.

