Mr. Delattre (France) (Spoke in French): As the
penholder, France welcomes the unanimous adoption
of resolution 2454 (2019), which renews the sanctions
regime on the Central African Republic. In a context
characterized by the holding of direct dialogue in
Khartoum between the Government of the Central
African Republic and armed groups under the auspices
of the African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation
in the Central African Republic, the resolution
demonstrates the consensus and the great importance
that the Security Council attaches to the situation in
the Central African Republic, and we welcome that. I
would like to emphasize two points with regard to the
resolution that the Council has just adopted. It sends a
clear message to our Central African partners, which
rightly expect a great deal of the Council.

First, the resolution shows a real openness on the
part of the Security Council to the request expressed
by the authorities of the Central African Republic
regarding the arms embargo. Their message was clearly
heard. The Security Council undertakes to establish no
later than 30 April a specific, operational road map that
within a few months could lead to an easing of the arms
embargo. That openness is based first on the need for the
authorities of the Central African Republic to re-equip
and train their defence and security forces so that they
can contribute to the security of all citizens in the
Central African Republic. That openness is also based
on the acknowledgement of genuine progress made by
the Central African authorities in three areas: reform
of the security sector; the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR) process of former members of
the armed groups; and the management of weapons and
ammunition. Lastly, that openness is realistic, since the
Security Council acknowledges that there is still some
progress to be made by the Central African authorities
in the short term.

As a sign of the Security Council's strong
commitment, the resolution also establishes a clear
timeline by requesting that a report of the Secretary-
General be submitted by 31 July in order to take
stock of the progress made by the Central African
authorities in the three areas that I have just mentioned,
that is, in terms of security sector reform, DDR and
the management of weapons and ammunition. The
resolution also stipulates that following that report, the
Security Council will meet by 30 September to decide
on the possibility of easing the arms embargo.

Ultimately, the resolution therefore clearly paves
the way for a change in the arms embargo regime
by the summer of 2019. Of course, by 30 June, the
Central African authorities should report to the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2127
(2013) concerning the Central African Republic on the
progress achieved. The Central African authorities can
also continue to enjoy exemptions to the arms embargo.
Lastly, they can continue to benefit from the support
of their partners to strengthen the capacities of their
defence and security forces.

We have always affirmed that, in the case of the
Central African Republic, the sanctions have never
been seen as an end in themselves but always as a
way to contribute to our common goal, namely, the
stabilization and restoration of lasting peace in the
Central African Republic.

With the unanimous adoption of the resolution, the
Security Council is sending a broader message. First,
we are sending a clear message of support to President
Faustin Archange Touadera in his efforts to promote
peace and reconciliation among all Central Africans
and of solidarity with the people of the Central African
Republic, who are the primary victims of the ongoing
violence perpetrated by the armed groups. It is also a
strong message of support for the African Initiative
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic, for we all know that the solution to the Central
African crisis can only be political. In that context, we
welcome the talks being held in Khartoum under the
auspices of the African Union with a view to promoting
peace between the Government of the Central African
Republic and armed groups. They are absolutely crucial
to the peace process, and we hope that they will lead to
tangible results.

Before I conclude, since this is the last open
meeting of the Security Council for January, I would
like to warmly thank and congratulate you and your
entire team, Mr. President, for the excellent work that
you have done throughout your presidency.

