Mr. Terence (Burundi) (interpretation from French):
At the beginning of my statement, I requested the honour
of stating the position of Burundi since it was not possible
for me to obtain an exact interpretation of what has become
paragraph 8 (a). Since draft resolution S/ 1996/56 relates to
Burundi, my Government has the right to ask the sponsors
of the text what its exact meaning is so that Burundi will
know what it is dealing with. In Burundi's view,
paragraph 8 (a) may be somewhat confusing and
susceptible to various interpretations. Since the Security
Council is supporting all the State institutions established
by the Convention of Government - and, thus, is
supporting first and foremost the Government - it would
be contradictory to threaten an arms embargo while that
Government is making superhuman efforts to restore peace
and security.

On the other hand, the Security Council would be
acting consistently not only by threatening but by
immediately decreeing a ban on the delivery of all illegal
weapons to those who disturb peace and security and all
fanatical adherents of violence. Treating the Government on
an equal footing with such persons and penalizing it for its
determination to neutralize outlaws would be to turn the
world on its head and to anger and further traumatize the
defenders of peace; it would also lead precisely to
outcomes that we seek to prevent. For the sake of its own
credibility, the Security Council should refrain from
behaving like a kind of bogeyman and avoid adopting
measures that would violate Burundi's national sovereignty
and the United Nations Charter.

For all of these reasons, my Government appeals to
the Security Council to amend the disputed paragraph. If it
does not do so, Burundi will oppose it and feel itself in no
way bound by the subparagraph in question. We feel that
there is a strange paradox here. In this draft resolution, the
Security Council remains silent on the needs for which my
Government requested the assistance of the United
Nations system and the international community. These
needs are listed in the letter of 18 January 1996 that I
addressed to the President of the Security Council on
behalf of my Government.

It is true that the draft resolution focuses on
reactivating the dialogue between the various political
partners. My Government welcomes that deeming it to be
a positive approach. I therefore reiterate my
Government's appeal for an interpretation of paragraph 8
(a) on the

"ban on the supply of all arms and related materiel
to Burundi". (S/J 996/56, para. 8 (a ))

We stress that phrase in particular because it would be
strange to treat a lawful Government, one endeavouring
to establish peace and security, on the same footing as the
perpetrators of the violence that is threatening the peace.

