We continue to fully support the efforts of Special Representative of the Secretary-General Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert and the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq in support of the people and the Government of Iraq. Germany welcomes the formation of the new Government, led by Prime Minister Mustafa Al-Kadhimi. We hope that the Government-formation process will be concluded swiftly, including the appointments of women to cabinet positions. Since October 2019, peaceful protesters in Iraq have raised, and continue to raise, serious and legitimate demands, addressed to Iraq's political leaders and parliamentary actors. We have taken note that the declared priorities of Prime Minister Al-Kadhimi's Government, and indeed the initial measures announced by his cabinet, reflect those demands. Those priorities include preparation of early elections, addressing the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and the economic crisis, concentrating State control over arms, adopting the federal budget for 2020, conducting a national dialogue, investigating violence against protesters, safeguarding Iraqi sovereignty, continuing the fight against corruption and securing the return of internally displaced persons. We call on the new Government and all Iraqi political leaders to take swift and effective action with a view to implementing these urgently required reforms in order to meet the legitimate needs and demands of the Iraqi people, to regain public trust and to improve the lives of Iraqi citizens. We join the Secretary-General in his call for a political process in which women, youth and all of Iraq's diverse communities, including ethnic, religious and other minorities, can actively participate. The implementation of substantive reforms has become even more urgent in light of the COVID-19 pandemic and mounting political, economic, security, social and health challenges. Germany, as one of Iraq's leading donors, stands ready to continue its substantial support to Iraq and to work closely together with the new Iraqi Government in addressing these challenges and building a prosperous and stable Iraq. In this context, we remain concerned about the difficulties facing national and international non-governmental organizations (NGOs) since December 2019, which affect their critical work on humanitarian, stabilization and development efforts. The absence of an efficient access procedure for NGOs is also now, regrettably, affecting the response to COVID-19. We remain deeply concerned by reports of arrests and violence against protesters, civil society activists, human-rights defenders and journalists. In response to popular protests, serious human-rights violations and abuses against peaceful protesters have occurred. Systematic attempts to threaten and prevent people from exercising their fundamental right to peaceful assembly and their freedom of expression are unacceptable. The Iraqi Government has an obligation to protect all peaceful protesters, civil-society activists and human-rights defenders and their fundamental rights. We welcome Prime Minister Al-Kadhimi's personal commitment to that effect. All incidents in which excessive use of force by security forces or other armed groups have resulted in the death or injury of protesters, as well as all other acts of violence, including those against security forces, and unlawful detention should be investigated independently and transparently. Accountability for all crimes committed remains of utmost importance. In this respect, we are encouraged by the initial steps of the Al-Kadhimi Government to release detainees arrested during the protests and push forward with investigations. We are also concerned by reports of increased levels of domestic violence during the current COVID-19 curfew and call on the Iraqi Government to take concrete steps to ensure that victims of domestic violence have access to appropriate protection and that the perpetrators of domestic violence are held accountable. We welcome the continued dialogue between Baghdad and Erbil and encourage both sides to resolve all outstanding issues, including those related to natural resources, revenue-sharing and security arrangements. We remain concerned by the impact of regional tensions on Iraq and call for continued de-escalation and restraint by all regional and international players. Iraq should neither be dragged into nor become an arena for a regional confrontation. Instead, Iraq should be able to enjoy amicable relations with all its neighbours and partners. We condemn the repeated rocket attacks in Iraq on coalition troops countering the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. Such attacks are unacceptable and put the successes achieved in the fight against the Islamic State at risk. It is crucial that cooperation between the Government of Iraq and its international partners in the fight against terrorism be continued. Otherwise, Iraq and the international community will face a high risk of the resurgence of the so-called Islamic State in Iraq and in the region.
