Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We would like, as always, to
thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for his useful and
comprehensive briefing on the most recent developments
concerning the Middle East and Palestine. We have
always benefited from his briefings. We were pleased
and honoured to have had His Excellency President
Mahmoud Abbas with us this morning. We thank him
for having been at this meeting and for sharing with
us his thoughts and vision on the very critical issue at
hand. We also thank Ambassador Danny Danon for
having been at this meeting and for sharing with us the
Israeli perspective.

We are very concerned about the lack of progress
in the Israel-Palestinian peace process. The most
recent developments have once again brought the
Israeli-Palestinian dispute back to the fore, thereby
underscoring the urgency of renewed commitment to
the peace process without any further delay. It is also
our conviction that there is also a need for honest and
transparent readiness on the part of all those with the
capacity to make a difference to help the two parties
move towards mutual accommodation.

Of course, we are deeply concerned by the dire
humanitarian situation in Gaza. The lack of funding
for critical facilities has left many Palestinians without
life-saving health, water and sanitation services. There
is need for the mobilization of international support to
avert a humanitarian disaster. All those who responded
to the urgent appeal must be commended, but there is
still a shortfall in funding and more needs to be done to
ensure that Palestinians have access to life-saving basic
services. It is our earnest hope that humanitarian needs
will be protected from any temptation to politicize them.

What could be looked at together with this is the
need to enable the Palestinian Authority to exercise full
control over Gaza based on the Cairo agreement. We
believe progress on this issue will not only improve the
economic and humanitarian situation, but also advance
Palestinian unity, which hopefully could provide
impetus for the peace process, which now remains
dormant. Although the signing of the Cairo agreement
was very welcomed, not much progress has been
made in terms of its implementation. That, coupled
with access restrictions, continues to exacerbate the
humanitarian situation. In that connection, we note the
trilateral meeting held recently between the Special
Coordinator, the Palestinian Prime Minister and the
Israeli coordinator and the discussion held, among
others, on facilitating critical humanitarian solutions
and revitalizing the economy in Gaza.

Ethiopia's position on the Israeli-Palestinian
dispute has always been unambiguous, as well as
very transparent. As much as we support the right of
Israel to exist in peace and security, we also support
the inalienable right of the Palestinian people to self-
determination and the right of Palestine to exist as a free
and independent State. That is also the position of the
African Union, whose decision we have a responsibility
to respect. Accordingly, Ethiopia fully supports the
goal of two States living side by side in peace and
security as the only viable option for resolving the
Israeli-Palestinian dispute. We believe that is not only
in the best interests of both Israel and Palestine, but it
will also significantly advance peace and security in
the Middle East region.

However, it seems to us self-evident that lately
moves have been made and actions have been taken
that might not contribute to making progress towards a
resolution of the outstanding issues on the basis of the
two-State formula. Those steps are not only increasing
frustration and mistrust, but are also undermining the
very viability of the two-State solution. Removing those
long-standing obstacles is imperative in order to create
the necessary conditions for progress in negotiations
between the two parties to achieve a comprehensive,
just and lasting solution on the basis of mutual trust and
a spirit of compromise that ensures Israel's security and
Palestinian aspirations for statehood. That is what the
situation calls for, and it is also in the best interests of
the two parties as well as the international community
as a whole.

Many have said that there is no plan B to the
two-State solution. The Secretary-General repeated
the same thing today. That cannot be contested. That
is why we supported the call for the intensification
and acceleration of international and regional efforts
aimed at achieving a comprehensive, lasting and just
solution. In that regard, we welcome the holding of
the extraordinary session of the international donor
group for Palestine, the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee,
which met in Brussels last month, bringing together the
Israelis and the Palestinians, as well as all other relevant
partners for the first time in a while to discuss measures
to speed up efforts that can underpin a negotiated two-
State solution.

The resumption of negotiations requires the full
support of all partners, and all should play their part
for any meaningful progress to be achieved. In that
context, it is incumbent upon the Council to discharge
its responsibilities and support such efforts for the sake
of peace between the Israelis and the Palestinians and
peace in the broader Middle East region. No doubt, at
the end ofthe day the responsibility for making progress
toward lasting peace and mutual accommodation based
onjustice and fair play falls on the two parties.

