Mr. Spatafora (Italy): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union and the acceding and
aligned countries.

The European Union presidency and member
States express their strong condemnation of the
decision in principle by Israel to expel the Chairman of
the Palestinian Authority and rally their support for the
Security Council call on the Government of Israel,
made on 12 September, not to implement it. The
European Union has already clearly voiced its
opposition to any forceful action against the duly
elected President of the Palestinian Authority and has
urged the Israeli Authorities to refrain from any such
action. The European Union believes that the Israeli
decisions is a serious mistake and adds further tension,
undermining any negotiated solution of the ongoing
conflict.

The European Union condemns in the strongest
possible terms terrorist attacks against Israeli citizens.
Such attacks obstruct the efforts of the international
community to restore peace in the region and damage
the interests of the Palestinian people. The European
Union considers the authors of these acts as enemies of
peace. It strongly urges the Palestinian Authority to
take all necessary concrete measures against those
terrorist organizations that are opposed to any political
dialogue and undermine all efforts to restore hope and
to bring peace, security and better conditions of life to
the region.

It is in this context that the European Union has
inserted the political branch of Hamas into the
European list of terrorist organizations. The European
Union renews the call made by the Thessaloniki
European Council upon all Palestinian organizations to
declare immediately an unconditional ceasefire. The
European Union recalls also that the conclusions of the
Thessaloniki European Council called on Israel to
abstain from any punitive measures, including
extrajudicial killings, and to act in accordance with
international law.

The European Union reaffirms the strategic
importance of the Palestinian Authority as a partner for
peace. The European Union has strongly emphasized
that the new designated Prime Minister, Ahmed Qurei,
must rapidly form a new Palestinian Government that
is empowered to act decisively on the priorities of the
fight against terrorism, the efforts to relaunch the peace
process with Israel in the framework of the Quartet
road map, and the continuation of Palestinian Authority
political and economic reforms without any further
delay.

The European Union strongly believes that, in
order to achieve a lasting, just and peaceful settlement
of the conflict and a comprehensive peace in the
region, including Syria and Lebanon, there is no
alternative to the speedy implementation, in good faith
by the two sides, of the Quartet road map, which
contains clear timelines for the establishment of an
independent and viable Palestinian State, living side by
side with Israel together in peace and security, and for
the normalization of Arab-Israeli relations.

It is in this regard that the European Union has
urged both parties to take the following measures. The
Palestinian Authority should form a new Government;
reorganize its security forces under the control of the
new Prime Minister; re-establish public order and
undertake visible efforts to dismantle the terrorist
organizations; implement the reforms already started;
and organize, in due time, free and transparent
elections.

