Ms. Tincopa (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I wish to thank Mr. Ian Martin, Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General, for his briefing. We also
welcome the presence in the Chamber of Minister for
Foreign Affairs J ose Luis Guterres.

Moreover, we wish to express our thanks for the
reports of the Secretary-General.

Peru firmly supports the Government and people
of Timor-Leste in their quest to ensure a State that will
be peaceful and sustainable in the long term. In that
regard, we would highlight the measures adopted in the
past month to halt the violence and insecurity
experienced by that country in May and June 2006. We
welcome the appointments of Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta as
Prime Minister and of other members of the cabinet on
10 July, creating an atmosphere of tranquillity and
hope following a series of unfortunate events. We
believe it essential for the Government and the various
political forces to work on the basis of dialogue and
reconciliation and with the support of the international
community and, of course, of the United Nations in
implementing defined objectives to ensure stability,
development and security in Timor-Leste.

The Secretary-General's report pursuant to
resolution 1690 (2006) provides a complete and
objective assessment of the situation in Timor-Leste,
along with specific recommendations for the
establishment of an integrated and multidimensional
United Nations mission. Peru supports many of those
recommendations, among which I would highlight the
following.

We support the Secretary-General's proposal to
deploy a maximum of 1,608 United Nations police
personnel to Timor-Leste in the period leading up to,
during and after the 2007 elections, and gradually to
draw it down following the elections.

We support a small military component under the
control and command of the United Nations with a
maximum of 350 armed and unarmed troops of all
ranks, to be concentrated in Dili, with the exception of
unarmed liaison officer teams in the border districts, as
described in paragraph 118 of the Secretary-General's
report.
We support the inclusion of the civilian
component and its various mechanisms, including units
for political affairs, elections, human rights and
transitional justice, democratic governance,

humanitarian affairs and gender, to mention but a few.
We also support the joint operations and joint mission
analysis centres.

In brief, we would stress that Peru supports the
strong and robust mandate for the new United Nations
mission in Timor-Leste described in paragraph 110 of
the Secretary-General's report. We would wish the
elements and activities described therein to be included
in the draft resolution to be adopted by the Council in
the coming days.

With regard to the civilian component, we would
like to focus on the gender unit. Its relationship to
resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security is essential in a country like Timor-Leste,
where women need an opportunity to participate fully
in all aspects of the promotion, maintenance and
building of peace and where they need to be
empowered in order to participate in the political
decision-making and development of their country.

We also believe it important to have a human
rights and transitional justice unit to monitor the
human rights situation and assist the Timorese
authorities in ensuring that those who are responsible
for violating human rights are punished and that
victims will enjoy individual and collective redress.

Along the same lines, we would refer to the
Secretary-General's report on justice and reconciliation
in Timor-Leste, in which emphasis is placed on
recognizing the efforts undertaken by Indonesia and
Timor-Leste in the area of truth and friendship. We
believe, however, that it is important for both
Governments to continue to strengthen the capacities
of their respective judicial systems, in particular with
respect to bringing to justice those responsible for
serious violations of human rights committed in Timor-
Leste in 1999.

In conclusion, I wish to underscore the
importance of continuing to promote economic
development in Timor-Leste and for income to reach
those most in need. To a great extent, the long-term
success of Timor-Leste will depend on the success of
economic and social development. In that regard, I
would point to the reference in the Secretary-General's
report to a "compact" between Timor-Leste and the
international community to reorient the existing
national development plan in order to make it more

effective and productive. If that challenge is to be met,
it is essential for the Government and the national
social actors of Timor-Leste to work together and
responsibly in drafting policies and programmes to that
end.

