Mr. Hachani (Tunisia) (spoke in French): Permit
me at the outset to tell you, Sir, how pleased my
delegation is at the initiative you have taken in
organizing this debate. I should also like to
congratulate you on the remarkable way in which
Pakistan and you yourself have been presiding over the
work of the Council this month.

This debate comes at a crucial time for
peacekeeping operations. In fact, given the
unprecedented scope of the missions already approved
and of those planned, the number of troops deployed
could, according to estimates, reach 70,000 on four
continents by the end of this year. Therefore, it is
imperative that Member States work together more on
steps to be taken to strengthen our collective capacity
to meet this challenge more effectively. The ideas
presented by the delegation of Pakistan are very useful
in that regard.

The expansion of peacekeeping missions only
reaffirms the importance that the international
community attaches to United Nations actions aimed at
peace throughout the world. Nevertheless,
peacekeeping cannot replace the quest for just and
definitive solutions or the addressing of the root causes
of conflicts.

In that regard, we appreciate the tireless efforts of
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO),
under the leadership of Under-Secretary-General
Guehenno and his colleagues, to deal with urgent and
complicated situations. The close cooperation between
Member States and the Secretariat helps to strengthen
the peacekeeping capacity of the United Nations.
However, those efforts are not enough to guarantee the
success of peacekeeping operations if they are not
accompanied by sufficient adaptation on the part of all
other actors and partners.

In that context, Tunisia favours more in-depth
and more interactive consultation through the
consultation mechanism among the Secretariat, the
Security Council and troop-contributing countries to
enable Member States to be better informed of the
situation on the ground in a thorough and regular
manner. In future, it is absolutely necessary to take
further into account the concerns of troop-contributing
countries, whose views should be more than merely
consultative.

The commendable efforts of developing
countries- which alone constitute 70 per cent of
United Nations forces - should be mentioned. Faced
with the constantly increasing demand for troops for
future peacekeeping operations, other countries are
requested to share the burden with developing
countries, particularly since they have the capacity to
meet, as quickly as possible, the needs arising at the
operational level. We also need to further strengthen
Brindisi's strategic deployment stocks, which are now
seriously depleted after being used successfully in the
United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL). That
base, which unfortunately was planned to meet the
needs of only one mission, must be strengthened to
deal with the situations we now face.

The safety of United Nations and associated
personnel is of particular importance. My country,
which is a party to the Convention on the Safety of
United Nations and Associated Personnel, takes this
opportunity to pay a heartfelt tribute to all those who
devote their lives to the service of peace and to the
noble values of the Organization. It is imperative that
the United Nations commit itself, in cooperation with
Member States, to strengthening security systems and
procedures and to improving the machinery for
gathering information on the ground in order to
increase threat prevention and management capacities.

My delegation would like once again to
emphasize its interest in cooperation between the
United Nations and the African Union, particularly
with a view to improving the latter's institutional
capacities. Africa currently hosts three fourths of the
Blue Helmets deployed throughout the world. Africa's
efforts to manage its own affairs require increased
support from the United Nations and the rest of the
international community. The recent establishment of
the African Union's Peace and Security Council with a
view to establishing a regional conflict prevention
policy will, we are convinced, greatly help African
States.

Nevertheless, international efforts aimed at
strengthening the collective peacekeeping capacity of
African countries do not relieve the international
community of its collective responsibilities under the
Charter of the United Nations, which entrusts the
Security Council with the principal responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security.

For Tunisia, peacekeeping is an important

element of our foreign policy and of our contribution to
the United Nations system. Our more than 40 years of
experience in that area and our participation in a large
number of United Nations peacekeeping missions are
an illustration of my country's commitment in that
regard - a commitment that President Zine El Abidine
Ben Ali, President of the Republic of Tunisia, has
repeatedly reaffirmed. Tunisia is currently participating
in five peacekeeping missions, and we doubled our
participation in the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo last
year. We shall continue our contribution, within the
limits of our resources, as part of a constant dialogue
with the Secretariat.

