Mr. Nel (South Africa): Allow me to thank
President of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) Judge Theodor Meron and
President of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda Judge Khalida Rachid Khan for their
briefings. We also express our gratitude to the
Prosecutor of the ICTY, Mr. Serge Brammertz, and the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR), Mr. Hassan Jallow, for their
interventions.
We note the progress made by the two Tribunals
to complete the cases before them. We are encouraged
by the efforts that the Tribunals have made to ensure
the completion of their work in time for the start of the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals. In the course of the month, the General
Assembly will elect the 35 members of the Residual
Mechanism. That should remind us of the urgency of
bringing the remaining cases to a close as soon as
possible.

We strongly support the need to provide sufficient
resources to the Tribunals to assist them in completing
their work. We recognize the difficulty in retaining
staff as the Tribunals begin to wind down their work
and staff search for stable employment elsewhere. We
therefore remain committed to exploring innovative
ways to retain competent staff members, including
through incentives, as appropriate.

One important way to assist the Tribunals in
completing their work is through the referral of cases
to relevant and appropriate domestic jurisdictions. We
have noted the applications to refer cases to Rwanda
and the decision of the ICTY to refer a number of cases
involving low- and middle-level accused to national
courts in the regions.

Our delegation remains concerned about the
unwillingness of Member States to enter into
agreements with the ICTR for the transfer of
individuals who either have served their sentences or
have been found not guilty. We urge Member States,
particularly in the immediate region and where family
members of the individuals are located, to consider
reaching such agreements with the Tribunals. We
welcome the report that, in July, one convicted person
was transferred from Arusha to a Member State. We
also express our appreciation to the Government of
Tanzania for its willingness to provide facilities in the
interim, in particular safe houses.

South Africa stresses the importance of
cooperation with the Tribunals, in accordance with the
respective statutes, in particular article 28 of the ICTR
statute and article 29 of the ICTY statute, and the
relevant Security Council resolutions. We especially
stress the obligation to cooperate with the Tribunals in
effecting the arrests of those wanted. This year, we
have seen substantial progress in that regard with the
arrest of the key indictees Bernard Munyagishari,
Ratko Mladie and Goran Hadzic'. We urge Member
States to step up efforts to locate, capture and,
ultimately, surrender the remaining nine fugitives to
the ICTR.

Finally, we wish to register our appreciation of
the cooperation between the ICTR and the ICTY and
the Office of Legal Affairs in doing the necessary work
in preparation for the Residual Mechanism, including
the preparation of a joint budget and the work on the
rules of procedure.

