Mr. Lal (India): We thank you, Mr. President, for
conducting this timely debate. The discussion has been
useful. In the interest of brevity, I will highlight some
parts of our statement, the complete version of which
will be available for circulation.

Maintaining peace and security across the world
continues to be a massive challenge. The nature of
conflict itself is changing. While the United Nations
continues to be heavily invested in peace and security
efforts, it is difficult for it to succeed on its own.

While the United Nations has engaged in
peacekeeping efforts in Africa since the 1960s, in the
past couple of decades the African Union (AU) and
some regional groups - such as the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, the Economic Community
of West African States and the Southern African
Development Community - have also undertaken
such efforts in several conflicts in Africa. At the
same time, cooperation and coordination between
the Security Council and the AU Peace and Security
Council has become institutionalized. The United
Nations-AU collaboration on peace and security has
been successful in many ways in the context of United
Nations collaboration with regional arrangements under
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.

AU peacekeeping efforts have formed the
precursor to, and the basis for, several United Nations
peacekeeping efforts, for instance in Liberia, Cote
d'Ivoire, Sierra Leone, Burundi, the Central African
Republic and Somalia.

Regional organizations can have several advantages
in dealing with crises in their respective regions. If
capable, they may become quick responders; they may
have a better understanding of the complexities of the
region; they may enjoy advantages of language and
intelligence, et cetera. They can also act as buffers until
the deployment of United Nations peacekeepers. Many
regional organizations, however, may also face serious
constraints of capacity, resources and conflicting
geopolitical interests. Priorities of the Security Council
and those of the regional organization could also differ
significantly on some occasions.

While the largest United Nations peacekeeping
deployments have been in Africa, their record of
success has been mixed, which is partly a reflection
of the complexities of geopolitics, political will and
the capacities and resources backing the peacekeeping
efforts. Important lessons can be drawn from analysing
the various missions.

The international community has recognized the
cross-cutting and interlinked nature of the factors
essential for peace with the adoption ofthe 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1) and with the AU Agenda 2063. The
importance of sustainable development, economic
growth and greater funding has also been recognized
in the twin resolutions adopted last month - General
Assembly resolution 70/262 and Security Council
resolution 2282 (2016) f on the peacebuilding
architecture and sustainable peace.

India has always engaged actively on peace and
security issues, including in the Security Council. India
has been a member of the Peacebuilding Commission
since its inception, 10 years ago. India has also made
significant financial contributions to the Peacebuilding
Support Office. The Government of India has seconded
an officer to the United Nations office in the AU. Indian
peacekeepers have served in 22 missions in Africa
since the 1960s. Currently, Indian peacekeepers are
serving in eight United Nations peacekeeping missions
on the African continent. The first-ever female formed
police unit, provided by India and deployed in Liberia,
was highly successful. India has also made a financial
contribution to the operations of the African Union
Mission in Somalia. The Indian navy contributed to the
international efforts to fight the menace of piracy off
the coast of Somalia. India has also contributed to the
training and capacity-building of peacekeepers from
Africa.

India has long-standing, close links with Africa,
not only through its diaspora and trade and investment
relations but also by partnering with Africa, first during
the decolonization and anti-apartheid phases and then for
development cooperation. The tradition of South-South
solidarity was reinforced during the third India-Africa
Forum Summit, held last October. At the Summit, Prime
Minister Modi announced a significant enhancement of
the scale of our development partnership, which helps
strengthen the foundation for peaceful and prosperous
nations. Prime Minister Modi also announced support
for the African Union's peacekeeping efforts, including
through the training of trainers in India and in Africa.
India, along with the United States, will organize a
United Nations peacekeeping course for our African
partners in July and August of this year.

In addition to pursuing very substantive
development partnerships with our friends in Africa,
India stands ready to contribute to any future
peacekeeping operations that may be required to
maintain peace and security.

