Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): I would
like to express my appreciation to you, Sir, for holding
this debate on the situation in Afghanistan. I would
also like to thank Ambassador Tanin of Afghanistan
for his statement and Mr. Nicholas Haysom, Special
Representative of the Secretary- General for Afghanistan
and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), for his report (S/2015/151).

The Islamic Republic of Iran, with its deep
cultural and historical ties to Afghanistan, has always
supported peace, stability, security and socioeconomic
development in Afghanistan. To us, security in
Afghanistan is tantamount to security on our borders
and in our region.

Iran was among the first to welcome the formation
of the national unity Government in Afghanistan, with
Mr. Ashraf Ghani as its President and Mr. Abdullah as
its Chief Executive. Having assumed full leadership,
Afghanistan has now embarked on a very crucial
path of transformation. The strong and visionary
leadership taken by the new Government will address
current challenges in a sustainable, strategic and
consistent manner. We are confident that the national
unity Government is best positioned to face the major
challenges of peace and development.

The latest Secretary-General's report on Afghanistan,
which indicates a possible increase in armed attacks
and violence in the coming summer season, should
be a matter of deep concern to us and all countries in
the region. Insecurity, instability and poverty provide
the most fertile of ground for the rapid growth and
re-emergence of violent extremist groups and even
footholds for the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham
in Afghanistan, as Special Representative Haysom
mentioned today.

Unfortunately, the report shows that the number of
terrorist acts has increased during the recent months.
We condemn all violent attacks committed by these
terrorist groups as well as any cooperation with them,
which we believe would embolden them in their odious
behaviour and be counterproductive to establishing
peace in Afghanistan.

On the important question of security arrangements
and the activities of the foreign troops, including
through the Resolute Support Mission, we believe
that such activities should be carried out with the
full consent and in constant consultation with the
Government. This is a vital requirement to demonstrate
the strong commitment of the international community
to respecting the sovereignty, independence, territorial
integrity and national unity of Afghanistan.

On bilateral cooperation, Iran's Minister for Foreign
Affairs visited Kabul on 20 January and discussed issues
of common interest, such as security cooperation and
establishing bilateral strategic cooperation. That visit
was preceded by the 15 December signing in Tehran of
a memorandum of understanding by the Commander of
the Iranian Border Guards and his Afghan counterpart
to enhance cooperation in countering terrorism and
drug trafficking. Iran stands ready to increase its
bilateral cooperation, in particular on security matters,
counter-narcotics efforts, developing projects and
economic cooperation in the fields of infrastructure
and agriculture, as well as seeking a durable solution
for Afghan refugees.

There is also great potential to explore in the
fields of trade and transit. Completing the railroad
project between Harat and Khaf city in Iran and Iran's
readiness to make available its port facilities in Chah
Bahar are two ongoing examples in this regard. The
tripartite agreement between India, Afghanistan and
Iran needs to be finalized in order to move forward
with the subjects addressed in that agreement.

On the counter-narcotics efforts, we are particularly
concerned about the reports indicating that opium poppy
cultivation in Afghanistan has almost doubled since
2012. It is a real threat for the region and beyond and
should be addressed by the international community.
We welcome the regional initiatives taken by countries
in the region, including China, Pakistan, Tajikistan,
Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan and Iran, to that end.

The strong support and commitment of the
international donors, Afghan authorities and the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime is essential to efforts
to deter those who would engage in drug cultivation and
drug trafficking. That is not only a major public health
challenge, but also, and more importantly, a major
source of income for extremist and terrorist groups.
Thus, the international community should especially
support the trilateral initiative on cooperation on
countering narcotics by Afghanistan, Iran and Pakistan.
It is a useful initiative that will benefit Afghanistan and
transit and destination countries.

Millions of Afghan refugees continue to live in
Iran. The drop in the rate of their voluntary repatriation
underlines the importance of meeting the reasonable
needs ofrepatriated refugees in Afghanistan in order to
reverse that trend and underscores the need to mobilize
more international support for the host countries of
Afghan refugees pending their repatriation.

We support UNAMA and the United Nations
agencies in their efforts to provide development and
reconstruction assistance to Afghanistan through robust
regional engagement on issues such as border security,
immigration, the return of refugees and drug control
measures. The role of UNAMA should be further
strengthened in the light of the important political
and socioeconomic developments in Afghanistan. The
future involvement of UNAMA will be deepened and
strengthened given its unique role and the multifaceted
and increasingly complicated challenges it faces.

Let me conclude by expressing my best wishes to
the people of Afghanistan on the occasion of our - and
their - new year, Nowruz. I wish them peace and
prosperity in the new year, which starts on the first day
of spring.

