Mr. Bermudez Alvarez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): Uruguay attaches great importance
to the different matters on the Security Council's
Middle East agenda, which are always complex
and multidimensional.

We wish to thank the Under-Secretary-General
for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, for her informative briefing, as well as the
co-Directors of EcoPeace Middle East, Mr. Gidon
Bromberg and Ms. Nada Majdalani, for their briefings.
We also wish to thank the United Nations Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for his continued and dedicated
work, which Uruguay fully supports.

The ninth quarterly report (S/2019/251) of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution
2334 (2016) - the second report submitted in writing in
the permanent format that my country requested when
it previously took the floor in the Council - provided
a disappointing outlook last month in that we have
seen no improvements since December 2016. The few
positive measures that have been adopted have been
unable to reverse the negative trends on the ground, as
a result of which the viability of the two-State solution
is in serious jeopardy.

We once again recognize the potential contribution
of the different multilateral, regional and unilateral
initiatives - both those in force and those that are
taking shape - but we are clearly still very far from
achieving a solution to a conflict that has already
lasted more than seven decades. The two-State solution
remains the only viable option; there is no plan B that
can replace it. Uruguay maintains strong ties with both
the State of Israel and the State of Palestine. We once
again reaffirm the right of Israel and Palestine to live
in peace within secure and recognized borders, in an
atmosphere of renewed cooperation that is free from
any threat or act that might breach the peace.

We must return as soon as possible to the table
for direct negotiations that can clarify all pending
issues. That will be difficult, but to continue in the
state of paralysis and stagnation that we are currently
witnessing will be even worse. To achieve that goal,
we must reverse the current negative trends on the
ground that are clearly detailed in Special Coordinator
Mladenov's most recent report, as it will otherwise be
extremely difficult, if not impossible, for Palestine to
consolidate its State territory.

The intensification of the development, approval
and construction of settlements in the West Bank and
East Jerusalem, as well as the illegal measures that
sustain them, is extremely worrisome. The eviction of
Palestinian families and the continuous demolition and
confiscation of their property compound that scenario,
while stoking speculation and heightening the risk of
plans for a future annexation. We condemn the fresh
acts of violence and terrorism against Israeli civilians,
including the firing of rockets and explosive devices
from Gaza, and the increase in settler violence against
Palestinian civilians, as well as the excessive use of
Israeli force in response. We categorically reject the
incitement and glorification of all violent acts.

For all those reasons, we would once again like to
request both sides to adopt measures and make gestures
that gradually de-escalate and ease tensions, which
is the only way to reach a definitive solution to the
conflict in the medium and long terms and a just and
lasting peace to this long-standing disagreement.

Last October, Uruguay presented a set of 10
measures in that regard, which we wish to reiterate
today, including ending the launching of industrial
and homemade missiles from Gaza and ceasing all
actions that could be classified as terrorist; refraining
from the disproportionate repression of demonstrations
in Gaza; suspending the settlement policy in the
occupied territories; suspending demolition orders for
Palestinian homes; fully recognizing the State oflsrael;
returning prisoners or their corpses, as a minimum
demonstration of humanity in the conflict; consolidating
reconciliation agreements between Fatah and Hamas to
promote Palestinian unity and dialogue; and working
for the economic potential of the region and options for
cooperation. The experience demonstrated today by the
representatives of EcoPeace Middle East should serve
as a role model for that.

Seventy years ago, the General Assembly adopted
resolution 181 (II). Thanks to the impetus of that
international legal act taken by the Organization,
Israel and Palestine have continued to consolidate their
identity, rights and obligations as States and recognized
legal entities. As was the case 70 years ago, when it was
responsive and eager to find a solution, the international
community today remains ready and expectant.

A positive outcome is not advanced by leaders taking
action without considering their consequences, while
the international community supports and promotes
them in good faith. It is time to put aside hatred,
mental blockages and frustration. Any territory gained
or exercise of misconceived sovereignty is worthless
if it is achieved at the cost of peace and prolongs the
struggle of the peoples that inhabit the region.

Before concluding, allow me to briefly touch
upon the situations in Yemen, Syria and, owing to its
geographical proximity, Libya.

The humanitarian crisis in Yemen shows no signs of
improvement. While the Stockholm Agreement marked
a beacon of hope in the long and bloody conflict, the
parties must respect what has been agreed and avoid
actions on the ground that harm civilians and carry the
risk ofincreasing famine, cholera and other afflictions.
This month's attack against a school in Sana'a is yet
another example of the plight of millions of Yemenis
every day.

In Syria, we support the efforts of Special Envoy
Geir Pedersen to move forward the peace process
and the future integration of a balanced and credible
constitutional committee, in line with resolution 2254
(2015).

Finally, the recent military escalation in Libya,
encouraged by the support that some Council members
and important actors in the region have offered to one
of the parties - a party that does not respect binding
international agreements - is endangering the United
Nations-supported Government of National Accord and
pushing the country closer to another civil war.

