Mr. Radomski (Poland): At the outset, I would like
to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Ms. Helen Meagher La Lime, for her
informative briefing and dedicated service as Head of
the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
(MINUJUSTH).

Poland associates itself with the statement to be
delivered later by the observer of the European Union.

In recognizing Haitian efforts to ensuring the
stability of the Government and the prosperity of its
people, I must underline our concerns about the ongoing
fragility of the situation. The violent events that took
place in October and November in Port-au-Prince and
other cities in Haiti reflect the ongoing volatility of
the situation faced by the Haitian people. We further
reiterate our call on all parties to abstain from the
use of violence in trying to achieve political goals, as
well as to respect the rule of law and continue efforts
to find a consensual solution to the problems faced
by the country. Poland encourages the Government
of Haiti to continue undertaking concrete actions
to address the demands of the population, including
through a constructive dialogue with civil society and
the opposition. Such dialogue should result in the long-
term stability of the country.

Let me underline that we fully agree with
the observation in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2018/1059) that the holding of elections in 2019
will be a significant milestone in stabilizing Haiti.
We recognize and support the Government's request
for electoral assistance from the United Nations. In
that spirit, Poland encourages Haiti to strengthen
good governance, build up public confidence in
national institutions and promote private investment,
as those measures are critical to fostering sustainable
development and ultimately achieving the Sustainable
Development Goals.

Turning to the presence of MINUJUSTH in Haiti,
we believe that a smooth and effective transition to a
non-peacekeeping presence is possible only through the
sustained efforts of Haiti's leaders and people, with the
support of MINUJUSTH, the United Nations country
team and the wider international community. We
welcome the continued contribution of MINUJUSTH
to ensuring public security by providing capacity-
building services to the Haitian National Police,
including operational support and equipment. We note
the positive role of MINUJUSTH in the improvement of
the Haitian justice system. However, durable solutions
will emerge only if the justice sector is reformed along
the lines established by resolutions 2350 (2017) and
2410 (2018).

The fragile political and economic situation
amplifies the conditions in which human rights
are exposed to the risk of abuse and violation. The
persistent problems of prison overcrowding and gang
activity only add obstacles to the malfunctioning
justice system. We therefore believe that paying special
attention to ensuring respect for human rights in the
work of the security forces and correction officers, as
well as impartial justice for all, is truly essential. The
Secretary-General's report shows that much remains to
be done to achieve the objectives ofMINUJUSTH's exit
strategy. Efforts must be multiplied to ensure that the
benchmarks are reached. Bearing in mind the fragility
of the situation and the vastness of work to be done, we
believe that the presence of the United Nations in Haiti
should not be withdrawn excessively or too early.

In conclusion, I would like to underline our
continued support for the Government of Haiti and
efforts towards a non-peacekeeping presence in
the country. Democratic transitions can be difficult, but
we believe that, with determination and the constructive
engagement of the international community, Haiti will
enjoy a stable, secure and democratic future.

