Mr. Cunningham (United States of America):
Let me begin by thanking the German Government and
the other organizers for hosting the Berlin conference
on Afghanistan. It was, obviously, as we have heard
today, a very successful event and succeeded in
renewing the international community's commitment to
the principles put forth in the Bonn Agreement. I want
to join other colleagues in thanking you, Sir, and Mr.
Guehenno for your presentations this morning on the
results.

The United Nations, the Afghan Government, the
German Government and the donors are all to be
congratulated on a Conference that raised significant
financial contributions totalling $8.2 billion for the
next three years, which will help us work to ensure -
together with our Afghan friends - the future of a
stable and democratic Afghanistan. We think that the
international community's generosity in Berlin is a
very hopeful sign for Afghans and for those in the
international community who worry that interest is
flagging and that donor fatigue is setting in. It is
particularly noteworthy that the Afghan Government's
needs for the coming fiscal year are fully covered and,
also, that the Government of Afghanistan and its
President played a full and important role in producing
the results of Berlin. Those results show that there is a
continuing resolve to pursue the partnership for the
future that the organizers hoped to demonstrate.

We also note that the cost of election registration
is now almost fully covered and that, on very short
notice - indeed, on the spot - donors were able to
raise $68 million towards the polling phase. We would
urge the United Nations to work closely with the
Afghan Government to identify ways to bring down the
overall projected cost of polling, which is currently
$135 million.

I thought I might say a brief word about security.
United States and coalition forces are conducting
reconstruction operations throughout Afghanistan and
combat operations, as necessary, to target and destroy
Taliban and Al Qaeda operatives in the region.
Operations will continue in the region for the
foreseeable future.

As a representative of the lead nation for the
development of the Afghan National Army, I would
like to update the Council on recent progress. As of
early March, the Afghan National Army had a total
operational strength of 7,600 troops, with another
almost 1,700 troops in training, bringing the total force
size to 9,300. Given that another 1,200 troops await
training, we believe that we can reach the goal of a
10,000-member Afghan Army by the end of June. The
growth rate in the past year has been strong - for
example, the total force has been augmented by 4,600
troops in the last seven months - and attrition rates
are also improving. During the period from November
2003 to February 2004, troop losses averaged just 2 to
3 per cent per month. Afghan Ministry of Defence
leadership and ownership in the recruiting and
retention process are producing positive results.

With regard to police, where we are co-lead
nation with Germany, we are on track to reach the goal
of having trained and equipped 20,000 police officers
by June of this year. The United States portion of the
programme has taken responsibility for building seven
regional training centres for police, border police and
highway patrol in seven key cities. This programme
has already completed the rebuilding of the Kabul
training facility, and other regional training centres in
Gardez, Mazar-e-Sharif, Kandahar and Kunduz are
operational and at their capacity of 1,000 students each.
The training centre in Jalalabad just expanded capacity
and two other training centres in Herat and Bamiyan
are under construction.

The United States has now established nine
provincial reconstruction teams of the 12 that are in the
country. Our objective in creating these teams is to
enhance stability, extend the reach of the central
Government and help facilitate reconstruction in the
provinces. I would note that the provincial
reconstruction team in Herat, following the recent
murder of the Minister of Civil Aviation and Tourism,
provided shelter to German officials and assisted in the
deployment of the Afghan National Army. We have
indications that the teams are increasingly popular, not
only with the leadership of the Transitional
Administration, but also with the Afghan citizens to
whom they provide much-needed security and
reconstruction. We, of course, join others in supporting
calls for the establishment of additional such teams.

