Mr. D0 Hung Viet (Viet Nam): Viet Nam commends
the United Kingdom presidency for the initiative to
hold today's open debate on conflict prevention. We
appreciate the informative and insightful briefings by
the Secretary-General and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement made
by the representative of Iran on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries.

Our topic today is all the more pertinent in the
wake of a number of crises that the world is watching
with profound sorrow across the continents. Talk
about conflict prevention, to some, could be seen as
deja vu all over again. Nevertheless, time and again,
the international community has to bear witness to
numerous conflicts that, in hindsight, could have been
averted or at least moderated. Many lessons were
elaborated at the open debate in this very Chamber on
war, its lessons and the search for permanent peace
last January (see S/PV.7105), yet the fact is that only
more simmering tensions and conflicts have broken out
during the intervening months. It is therefore imperative
to revisit the lessons learned and the measures for
conflict prevention, and our delegation would like to
touch upon the following.

First, conflicts stem from the wishful thinking that
the imposition of force from a position of strength will
work, and from an ungrounded belief in power politics
and its accompanying aggressive behaviour. History
has, however, provided us with ample evidence that the
use of force will only result in massive loss oflives and
material destruction. The use of force should no longer
have any standing in the twenty-first century.

Secondly, human progress since the end of the
Second World War has provided us with strong
institutions of peace, which we must hold dear and
strongly promote. Faced with warning signs of
inter-State and intra-State conflicts, including those
related to territorial disputes, international law and
its fundamental principles must be upheld, especially
the principles of the peaceful settlement of disputes
and respect for national sovereignty and territorial
integrity. It should be stressed that, in the wake of
discord and disagreement, the most important principle
that the parties concerned must uphold is the need to
accede to common international and regional rules and
normative frameworks. In that connection, we welcome
the related elements set out in the resolution adopted by
the Council earlier today (resolution 2171 (2014)).

Thirdly, basic principles must be translated into
concrete actions. Parties related to inter-State and
intra-State conflicts, bearing in mind the potential
severe consequences of violence and coercion, should
be supported to engage in sincere dialogue and other
means of peaceful settlement. International and regional
organizations should promote such efforts and facilitate
efforts addressing the root causes of conflicts. Such
crucial engagement, if conducted in the appropriate
manner, could be conducive to more creative solutions
to outstanding issues.

In that respect, over the past decades, the United
Nations, including the Security Council, has played a
critical role thanks to the creative and timely employment
of the various mechanisms and tools available to it.
Those include the important role of the Secretary-
General and his special envoys, good offices missions,
fact-finding missions, mediation, reconciliation and
peacebuilding efforts, the employment of which in
other parts of the world could be further studied.

As a result, the growing workload at the United
Nations related to conflict prevention can be interpreted
as commensurate with the growing role accorded to the
Organization. That can also be seen as an indication
that more needs to be done by the United Nations,
in which the primary responsibility is given to the
Security Council, especially its permanent members.
In doing so, coordination among the Council, the
Secretary-General, the General Assembly and regional
organizations should be further promoted for better
information sharing and early warning for effective
conflict prevention.

The international community today is equipped
with not a few tools, lessons and measures for effective
conflict prevention. But the ultimate reason for a number
of failures has been the lack of strategic trust among
the parties concerned and the failure to understand that
what the parties could have achieved by preventing and
avoiding conflicts would far outweigh what they did
after giving up chances for peace.

The Security Council, together with other
international and regional partners, could engage in
promoting a culture of peace and proactive prevention,
including by adhering to international law and common
rules and norms and by taking concrete action under
frameworks of dialogue and consultation. Only by
doing so will we be able to live up to our task of saving
succeeding generations from the scourge of war.

