Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): Madam President,
we deeply appreciate that you are presiding over
the Council meeting today. We thank Argentina
for organizing this open debate on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. This third debate on
the subject in the Council this year underlines the
overarching importance of the subject. We are also
grateful for the very insightful briefings given today
by the Secretary-General, the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs, the High Commissioner for
Human Rights and the Director for International Law
and Cooperation of the International Committee of
the Red Cross. The concise concept note circulated by
Ambassador Perceval and her team (S/2013/447, annex)
identifies priority issues of compliance, access and
accountability and guides our discussion today.

As we meet here today, wars and conflicts continue
to unfold before our eyes, and the vast majority of their
victims are civilians, who face random or targeted
deaths, grievous injury and massive displacement. The
Secretary-General has rightly pointed out that, despite
established norms and laws, the abysmal state of the
protection of civilians in armed conflict has changed
little.

It is imperative to translate normative standards
into concrete actions on the ground. The Council has
done its job in urging all parties to armed conflict to
comply with their obligation to protect civilians and
abide by international humanitarian, human rights and
refugee law. Compliance with those laws is sporadic
at best, or entirely lacking. Defiance of international
humanitarian law is rampant. There are obstacles to
legitimate humanitarian access to affected populations.
Accountability is weak and, in most cases, non-existent.

Pakistan strongly condemns all attacks against
civilians in situations of armed conflict, especially the
use of gender-based Violence as a tactic of war. The
principles of distinction and proportionality must be
observed in all circumstances.

We endorse the View of the Secretary-General
that those principles also apply to the use of new
technologies, including armed drones. We support High
Commissioner for Human Rights Pillay's call today
for clarifying the legal basis for armed drone strikes.
We believe that such strikes Violate international
humanitarian law, and therefore should be stopped.
Negotiations in that regard must be intensified.

Special measures must be taken to protect
vulnerable groups such as women, children, refugees
and internally displaced persons. Protection must also
be ensured for humanitarian actors, including medical
professionals and associated personnel, journalists,
students and teachers.

The Security Council must continue to address the
issue of the protection of civilians in armed conflict
as a key priority. There should be no impunity and no
exceptions.

The Security Council and international tribunals
have successfully addressed some of those concerns
in a number of situations and has taken targeted
measures against violators. Because of its proven value,
the Council should persevere in that approach in an
objective, impartial and non-politicized manner.
The protection of civilians, although part of many
United Nations peacekeeping mandates, is the primary
responsibility of States. Pakistan, as one of the top
troop contributors, has proudly performed the task
of protecting civilians in different parts of the world,
including in existing missions in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Darfur, Cote d'Ivoire and
Liberia.

Based on our first-hand experience, we reiterate
our demand that peacekeeping missions be given
adequate resources and operational tools to implement
their mandates, especially with regard to reporting and
intelligence capabilities and the protection of women
and children.

Before concluding, I would like to make the
following observations. All parties to conflict must
remove obstacles to ensure the swift provision
of legitimate humanitarian assistance to affected
populations. The interaction between humanitarian
actors and parties to armed conflict should conform to
the principles of international humanitarian law, within
the framework of host country agreements. The term
"protection of civilians" should be used with the utmost
precision, to avoid giving recognition or legitimacy to
terrorist groups or criminal gangs.

The clear distinction between the established norms
on the protection of civilians and the evolving concept
of the responsibility to protect should be maintained.

The cause of the protection of civilians is best
served by preventing the outbreak of armed conflicts,
addressing the root causes and by pursuing the peaceful
settlement of disputes and conflict resolution. That
approach leads towards sustainable peace.

Finally, the ceremony held today to remember
those who have laid down their lives in the service of
peace has reminded us that new and more effective
measures should be taken to ensure the safety and
security ofUnited Nations personnel, peacekeepers and
humanitarian actors.

