Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
I welcome His Excellency Mr. lvica Daeic', Prime
Minister of the Republic of Serbia, and His Excellency
Mr. Hashim Thaci, Prime Minister of Kosovo. I also
thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Kosovo, Mr. Farid Zarif, for his presentation
of the report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/254) on
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK).
Developments that can be described as historic have
taken place since the last debate of the Security Council
devoted to UNMIK (see S/PV.6939). On 19 April, after
the tenth round of talks, a first tentative agreement
governing the normalization of relations was reached in
the high-level political commitment under the auspices
of the European Union. This agreement is a milestone
for reconciliation between the two countries, which
share a painful past marked by the atrocities of war.
Like leaders of other countries in the region before
them, the leaders of Serbia and Kosovo were able to
act based primarily on the firm commitment of their
people to rejoining the European family.

Luxembourg can only welcome the political
vision and leadership shown by the Prime Ministers
of Serbia and Kosovo. As a member of the European
Union, Luxembourg also welcomes the role played
by the Union, in particular the personal commitment
and considerable efforts of its High Representative for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, Ms. Catherine
Ashton, who has been able to facilitate and lead
sensitive and difficult negotiations.

By adopting at the end of May the plan to implement
the provisions of the historic agreement of 19 April,
the Serbian and Kosovo Governments confirmed
their desire to normalize their relations in order to
realize their European perspective. Negotiations are
now under way in Brussels on the practical details of
the implementation. Luxembourg encourages both
parties to continue to uphold the spirit of compromise
in order to achieve tangible and visible results in the
implementation of the April 19 agreement, even before
the European Council meets on 27 and 28 June in
Brussels.

My country is ready to continue to support the
efforts of the two countries and their leaders to achieve
their common goal. Luxembourg remains strongly
committed to the stability, the development of the rule
of law and socio-economic development of Kosovo,
through its participation in KFOR and EULEX and
through a substantial bilateral cooperation programme.

In his report, the Secretary-General reported on
a situation that has remained generally calm, but with
transient tensions in multi-ethnic areas as well as in
northern Mitrovica. The European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) and the Kosovo Force
have responded, in close collaboration with the Kosovo
police, by increasing the visibility of their regular
patrols and strengthening other preventive measures in
the sector.
We also commend the efforts of the Kosovo
authorities to establish, in cooperation with EULEX,
a multi-ethnic police unit that is responsible for the
protection of religious and historical sites. The unit will
play a key role in preventing a repeat of the vandalism,
in January, of Serbian Orthodox sites role.

To conclude, let me reiterate the profound
conviction of Luxembourg to see the future of Kosovo,
and that of Serbia, form part of a decidedly European
perspective. A long road toward peace and stability has
been achieved since UNMIK was established in 1999.
It must therefore continue.

