Mr. Belinga-Eboutou (Cameroon) (spoke in French): I would first like to congratulate Ambassador
Heraldo Mufioz of Chile, Chairman of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999), for the
excellent and very detailed briefing he has just so
eloquently given. I would also like to welcome the
presence at this meeting of Mr. Michael Chandler,
Chairman of the Monitoring Group, as well as the other
members of his team, who have skilfully and devotedly
tackled the tasks entrusted to them. I also wish to thank
the President for organizing this open meeting on the
activities of the Committee established by resolution
1267 ( 1999).

On 6 May 2003, the Spanish Prime Minister
graced with his presence the open meeting of the
Council held on the same subject as the one we are
today discussing, namely, threats to international peace
and security caused by terrorist acts. At that time, I
congratulated Spain for refusing to give up. I also
noted its long experience in, and commitment to,
counter-terrorism. That commitment is unanimously
recognized and commended. The Spanish presidency
this month has corroborated what I said then. In fact,
since last week's open debate on combating terrorism,
when we considered the report of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC), the President of the
Council stated that he had planned an open meeting to
be held today on the same subject and in the context of
our consideration of the report of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999), which
is so well presided over by my friend Ambassador
Mufioz.

The timing of those events was no coincidence;
my delegation believes that it demonstrates the
President's desire to draw the international
community's attention to the ongoing nature and
seriousness of the evils of terrorism. It also illustrates
the close link that exists between the Committees
established by resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1373
(2001). In fact, on 23 July 2003, I welcomed the
cooperation that had been established between the
Committees. I also said that I very much wanted to see
that cooperation expanded to bring about true synergy
between other Security Council committees doing
complementary work.

Resolution 1267 (1999) and the series of
resolutions that supplement and strengthen its
regime- resolutions 1363 (2000), 1390 (2002) and
1455 (2003) - set forth a set of measures, particularly
the freezing of financial and economic assets of
targeted terrorists, the travel ban aimed against them,
and the arms embargo. Those resolutions, because they
are the backbone of this determined fight by the
international community, must be strictly implemented
by all countries. And today's meeting provides us with
precisely the opportunity to take account of the
Committee's work and of the implementation of the
relevant resolutions aimed at combating Osama bin
Laden, the Taliban, Al Qaeda and the persons and
entities associated with them.

The Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) (1267 Committee) spoke to us a few moments ago about the
consolidated list of identified targets whose format and
contents have been improved, about the adoption of
clear and transparent procedures for processing
information submitted by States and by international
and regional organizations, about the adoption of
precise guidelines aimed at assisting Member States in
the preparation of national reports relating to the
implementation of resolution 1267 (1999) and, finally,
about the establishment of an open, constructive
dialogue with Member States. Those are all actions to
assist in the effective implementation of the measures
set forth to help penetrate, understand and thwart the
various methods used by the Taliban and Al Qaeda,
which do not hesitate to exploit the misery of
populations or to misuse charitable organizations for
their deadly purposes. We might have hoped that their
financing and recruitment networks and their sphere of
action would have gradually shrunk as a result of the
joint action of the 1267 Committee and of the
international community, since many of the leaders of
those networks have been successfully tracked down
and arrested. Unfortunately, nothing of the kind has
happened. Rather, we note the emergence of third-
generation terrorists, trained by Afghanistan's veterans
and scattered throughout the world today - terrorists
whom we must tirelessly track down and flush out.

Our fight against terrorism, as we have stressed,
is a long-term endeavour, and we have the obligation of
constant vigilance. That is why, generally speaking, my

delegation - which reaffirms its full satisfaction with
and confidence in the Chairman of the Monitoring
Group and his team - supports most of the
recommendations made by the Monitoring Group. This
struggle, which is a painstaking task that we have
always supported, requires mobilization and
participation by all States, the organized cooperation of
all actors and partners involved in this battle, and
capacity-building assistance for the States that need it.

With regard to assistance, my delegation hopes
that the commitment made by the World Bank and by
other international organizations to support the
principal African subregional organizations will be
acted upon. Here, my delegation must thank the World
Bank for its recent support for the Bank of Central
African States in the context of actions by countries
members of the Economic and Monetary Community
of Central Africa related to combating money-
laundering and terrorism.

Furthermore, I should like to indicate Cameroon's
support for the programme of activities of the 1267
Committee and that of the Monitoring Group. Finally, I
should like to reaffirm my country's commitment to
continuing to join its efforts with those of other States
for the implementation and effective application of the
regime established by resolution 1267 (1999).

