Mr. Musambachime (Zambia): My delegation
would like to congratulate you, my brother from the
great Republic of Mali, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
December.

Allow me also to thank your predecessor,
Ambassador Durrant of Jamaica, who guided the
deliberations of the Council in the month of November.

In addition, allow me to welcome the presence
and the statements of the Ministers from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Uganda and the
United Republic of Tanzania, and the Adviser to the
President of the Republic of Rwanda. Their
participation in the deliberations this afternoon have
helped to clarify a number of issues.

I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this very important meeting on the illegal
exploitation of the natural resources and other forms of
wealth of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, our
neighbour. The convening of this meeting is yet
another demonstration of the Security Council's
continued resolve to ensure the full implementation of
the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement in order to achieve
durable peace and stability in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and in our region as a whole. It is for this
reason that the Republic of Zambia provided its full
assistance to the Panel to facilitate its work during its
visit to our country.

I also want to assure you, Mr. President, that the
Government of the Republic of Zambia will continue to
cooperate fully with you and the other members of the
Security Council in your noble efforts.

It is no secret that the Zambian Government
attaches great importance to all efforts to ensure that
there is peace and stability in our region. My
Government has always played a leading role in these
efforts in Angola and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Our contributions have been acknowledged by
the Council and the international community at large.
The efforts and personal sacrifices of the President of
the Republic of Zambia, Mr. Frederick J. T. Chiluba, in
the pursuit of peace and stability in the Congo are well
known and well documented, and cannot be ignored.
He has done everything possible to advance the cause
of peace.

My delegation is therefore extremely
disappointed with the comments about my country
contained in the addendum to the report of the Panel of
Experts on the Illegal Exploitation of Natural
Resources and Other Forms of Wealth of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, contained in
document S/2001/1072. Without even acknowledging
the enormous sacrifices that Zambia has made and
continues to make in the search for peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Panel makes
serious and unsubstantiated allegations against my
country. In the report, the Panel is in fact insinuating
that Zambia is undermining its own efforts and those of
the international community to bring peace to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Please allow me to address some of the issues
raised by the Panel. In paragraph 111, the Panel alleges
that

"Zambia does not have the capacity to exert much
control over the refugee camps in its territory,
where training activities have been conducted for
incursions carried out from Zambian territory."

This is a serious allegation. It casts serious doubts on
the sovereignty of our country as well as on the ability
of our security institutions to conduct or undertake
their statutory functions. We do not know how the
Panel arrived at this conclusion, because - let me tell
the Council - during all the times it was in Zambia, it
did not visit a single refugee camp. Therefore, we
wonder why the Panel, without knowing the facts,
chose to cast Zambia's ability in a negative light. This
is unacceptable.

According to the 1951 United Nations
Convention relating to the Status of Refugees, to which
Zambia adheres religiously, the supervision,
administration and management of refugee camps are
the responsibility of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). The host
country provides security for refugees and citizens
alike.

UNHCR has been in Zambia for more than 30
years. In that period, it has never complained of
Zambia's lack of capacity to provide military or police
protection. Similarly, UNHCR has never complained
that refugees' enjoyment of rights was worse than that
of the citizens, residents, migrant workers, tourists and
visitors. This statement, therefore, is far from the truth.

Zambia currently hosts more than 270,000
refugees, who are in two settlements and four camps
under the supervision of UNHCR. If it is true that
military training is being conducted in these camps, as
the Panel alleges, then the conclusion would be that
this is being done with the full knowledge of UNHCR.
Of course, we know that this is not true.

The protracted conflicts in Angola and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo have continued to
generate large numbers of refugees who are sheltered
in Zambia. As pointed out in the UNHCR report in
document A/56/12, Zambia is the country most
adversely affected by the influx of refugees from those
two countries. Because of our adherence to the United
Nations Convention relating to the Status of Refugees,
my country continues to shoulder the heavy burden of
looking after refugees. Unfortunately, we must admit
that the arrival of civilian refugees is often
accompanied by the entry into the country of armed
elements and ex-combatants. This situation poses a
very serious threat to the security of the local
population and of the civilian refugees themselves.

To counter this, the Zambian Government, in
collaboration with UNHCR, disarms and separates
those identified as ex-combatants and sends them to a
refugee camp called Ukwimi, which is located in the
eastern part of the country, close to the Malawian
border and far from the borders of Angola and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and from the camps
for civilian refugees. Currently, I wish to report that
Ukwimi refugee camp is holding 2,278 ex-combatants,
who are being screened by the National Eligibility
Committee in collaboration with UNHCR.

I want to inform the Council that this information
was and is readily available not only with the Zambian
Government, but with UNHCR as well. The Panel
could easily have got this information had it asked for
it. One wonders why, when there are facts, the Panel
decided to insinuate otherwise and to paint a
completely erroneous picture.

Annex I of the addendum to the Panel's report is
a list of the countries it visited and the officers it met.
On page 35, it is clearly indicated that the Panel met
with the President of the Republic of Zambia, Mr.
Chiluba, four Government Ministers, including the
Ministers of Defence and Presidential Affairs; and the
Permanent Secretaries of the Ministries of Foreign
Affairs and of Mines and Minerals Development. As a
nation, we are therefore shocked to note that, in
paragraph 114, the Panel reports that there was a lack
of cooperation from the Government of the Republic of
Zambia.

I want to pose the following questions. Where
was the lack of cooperation when the Panel met the
topmost person in the country - the President - and
the Ministers relevant to its visit? Where was the lack
of cooperation when the Government of the Republic
of Zambia ensured that the Panel met with whomever it
requested to meet? Where was the lack of cooperation
when the Government of the Republic of Zambia
ensured that it visited places that it wanted to visit?
Indeed, where was the lack of cooperation when the
Government provided transport and other facilities for
the Panel?

Sharing the longest border with the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, my country has been the worst
affected by the spillover from the conflict. Zambia does
not stand to gain in any way from this conflict. In fact,
the conflict is impacting negatively on the well-being
of Zambians. The continuous flow of refugees and
increased insecurity along the borders have greatly
disrupted the lives of our people. We do not cherish
this situation and that is what the Panel should have
known and should know.

Zambia has always supported and cooperated
with the panels sent by the Security Council and other
United Nations bodies. We have facilitated their
smooth operation in the country and ensured that all
impediments to their work were removed. They have
been free to go wherever they want and to see
whomever and whatever they want to see.

My delegation is convinced that the mandate
given to this Panel was a noble one and made in good
faith. We believe that, if properly focused, the Panel
could make a positive contribution towards bringing
peace and stability to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. However, the tone and content of the report as
it relates to Zambia creates an element of distrust and
suspicion which could easily fuel an already volatile
situation. We have already invested a lot in the search
for peace. We should not allow the efforts that we have
made and the progress so painstakingly achieved to be
undermined by people with different intentions and
agendas.

We are therefore disturbed by these unjustifiable
accusations. If the Panel, as claimed in paragraph 111,
has information that various Congolese resources
transit through Zambia illegally, the noble and decent
thing to do would be to inform my Government so that
the necessary control measures can be effected.

My country therefore challenges the Panel to
substantiate these allegations as they appear in the
report. If it should fail to do so, we would demand a
retraction and an apology. We make these demands
because we believe in transparency; we believe in
objectivity, justice and fair play. I wish to assure the
Council that we will always extend help to other
panels.

