Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank
the Joint Special Representative for Darfur and Head
of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID), Mr. Jeremiah Mamabolo, for his
comprehensive briefing on the report of the Secretary-
General on the situation in the Sudan (S/2018/3 89). We
take this opportunity, through him, to commend the
work that UNAMID is conducting on the ground.

At the outset, we underscore the positive aspects
highlighted in the Secretary-General's report, in
particular with regard to security, which has remained
stable, as in previous reporting periods. We also welcome
the Government's decision to extend the unilateral
ceasefire to all areas of operations until 30 June.
We would also like to underscore the positive results
of the first arms-collection campaign promoted by the
Government. It is clear that this process has contributed
to improving the security situation in Darfur. It
is important to continue to encourage the civilian
population and militias to maintain and increase their
commitment to that governmental campaign, which is
in line with the peacebuilding process.

With regard to the humanitarian situation, we regret
that the clashes between the Sudanese armed forces and
the Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid faction have
complicated the delivery of humanitarian assistance in
some areas of Jebel Marra. Despite that, we underscore
the improved access of humanitarian assistance to
that area, which was previously inaccessible. In the
same vein, we welcome the return of the almost 2,000
internally displaced persons to Yasin. However, despite
that positive development, many challenges remain.
We therefore encourage the international community

to continue to support projects that enable internally
displaced persons to have to access basic services and
improve their quality of life.

Bolivia believes that the political situation continues
to be one of the main challenges for the Sudan. We
appreciate the Government's efforts to promote the
implementation of the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur. Again, we stress that the only way a solution
to this situation can be achieved is through a political
process that addresses the root causes of the conflict,
which are primarily disputes over land ownership.
We also underscore that further efforts are needed
to help resolve the differences that exist with regard
to the Doha Document. We call on the movements that
have not signed the Document to engage constructively
in dialogue with the Government and to achieve a
permanent cessation of hostilities. We highlight the
communique of the Peace and Security Council of
the African Union of 20 February, which called on
the African Union Commission to develop possible
measures, including possible sanctions, that could be
applied against all those who continue to impede efforts
to achieve peace and security in Darfur.

With regard to the reconfiguration of UNAMID,
we commend the progress made with the successful
completion of the first phase and the initiation of the
second phase. We are pleased to learn that UNAMID
started withdrawing in the first phase from the
areas envisioned and that did not have any negative
consequences. We must continue to work to strengthen
the country team's capacities to ensure that the
withdrawal of the Hybrid Operation is successful. We
also highlight the fundraising strategy for sustaining
peace in Darfur that was developed by UNAMID and
the country team. We must support that strategy to
ensure a successful transition from peacekeeping to
peacebuilding in Darfur.

Finally, we appreciate this opportunity to
acknowledge the great work being done by Joint Special
Representative Mamabolo, UNAMID, the United
Nations country team and the members of the African
Union High-level Implementation Panel to achieve
peace and sustainable development in Darfur.

