The Russian delegation has consistently abstained in the voting on draft resolutions on the extension of the work of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals for further two-year periods as an outcome of its review by the Security Council. The reason is the unsatisfactory work of that body, which continues not to allow the Council to proceed with its legal closure. One of the major problems, which our delegation has referred to on numerous occasions, is the absence of a judicial planning system. Unfortunately, the Residual Mechanism inherited this flaw from other criminal tribunals created by the Security Council. There is a separate provision on this point in resolution 2529 (2020). The Residual Mechanism must produce "clear and focused projections of completion timelines at the earliest stage possible and disciplined adherence thereto" (para. 9). Our country is concerned with the protection of rights of persons detained under the authority of the Mechanism, in particular the quality and timeliness of the medical care provided to them. In the past, we repeatedly urged the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) to conduct a serious inquiry into Ratko Mladi¢'s treatment and, if it was beyond the prison doctors' capabilities to treat him, to temporarily release him for treatment in Russia, with our comprehensive guarantees. The Tribunal cynically refused to grant the motion of the accused's lawyers. Serbia's guarantees were also rejected. The ICTY is no longer in existence, but the problem persists. The members of the Security Council are well aware of it since the issue has been brought to their attention. For several months now, we have been witnessing their struggle with administering the United Nations penitentiary institution in order to ensure appropriate medical care to an individual whose health is rapidly deteriorating. Accordingly, a new provision has been included in resolution 2529 (2020), which underlines the importance of ensuring the rights of persons detained pursuant to the authority of the Mechanism, including those related to health care. We expect the Mechanism to fully implement the terms of this provision. We also expect the Office of Internal Oversight Services (OJOS) to monitor the implementation of the provision, and we are looking forward to receiving information on its implementation in the next OIOS report on the work of the Mechanism.
