Mr. Kickert (Austria): Austria aligns itself with
the statement delivered earlier by the observer of the
European Union.

We would like to thank Poland for convening this
open debate, as Austria strongly believes that a rules-
based international system with clear and predictable
rules is an indispensable precondition for lasting
peace and development. We call on all Member States
to actively promote an international order based on
international law and the rule of law, with the United
Nations at its core.

The President has asked us to consider what can be
done, in concrete terms, to improve the state of respect
for international law in three main areas.

Regarding the first area 4 the peaceful settlement
of disputes 4 we call on all Member States to accept,
without reservations, the compulsory jurisdiction
of the International Court of Justice, in accordance
with Article 36 of the Charter of the United Nations.
Crucially, we must also work much harder to prevent
violence and conflicts in the first place. One way to
do so is to enhance capacities for early warning and
response, as well as national expertise in mediation
and preventive diplomacy. Austria is working with
partners, for example, with the Economic Community
ofWest African States, as well as the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, in that regard.

The United Nations must also do more to
support Member States in implementing the rule
of law and related elements of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. The Security Council has
often reaffirmed that justice and the rule of law are
fundamental building blocks of conflict prevention and
resolution and sustainable peace. The Security Council,
in cooperation with the United Nations system, must
therefore ensure that peacekeeping operations have
the necessary resources to deliver justice and promote
respect for the rule of law and human rights, including
in the transition to United Nations country teams.
Secondly, we must do much more to ensure
compliance with international law during conflicts.
The intergovernmental process within the International
Committee of the Red Cross to strengthen respect
for humanitarian law and the good offices of the
International Humanitarian Fact-Finding Commission
under Article 90 of the Additional Protocol I to the
Geneva Conventions are important tools in that regard.
As Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe last year, Austria
was able to contribute to the initial activation of the
International Humanitarian Fact-Finding Commission,
in connection with an incident on 23 April 2017 in
eastern Ukraine.

We emphasize that our collective response to
threats to international peace and security must be
guided by the rule of law. When it comes to Security
Council sanctions, fair and clear procedures, including
an independent mechanism for review, are a prerequisite
for the legitimacy of sanctions and compliance
with them. Austria urges the Secretary-General to
exercise his prerogative by swiftly appointing an
Ombudsperson for the Security Council Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015), concerning ISIL (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and
associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities, in accordance with resolution 1904 (2009), a
post that has been vacant for more than nine months
now. The longer that vacancy lasts, the more likely
it is to undermine trust and confidence in Security
Council sanctions and jeopardize progress made over
many years in establishing and implementing fair and
clear procedures.

Austria urges the members of the Security Council
to refrain from using the veto to curtail Council action
where it could prevent or stop violence or conflict, in
accordance with the purposes and principles of the
Charter. Austria therefore supports the code of conduct
of the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
group, as well as the initiative by Mexico and France in
that regard. We also hope that open debates such as this
one, or Arria Formula meetings, can be further utilized.

As to the third main area on which we are asked
to comment, Austria believes that accountability and
the fight against impunity for violations of human
rights and humanitarian law are central to rebuilding
post-conflict societies and sustaining peace. Austria is
a strong supporter of the International Criminal Court
(ICC), and we call on the Security Council to refer the
situation in Syria to the ICC and to ensure cooperation
and follow-up in situations it has already referred to
the Court.

Austria supports the International, Impartial and
IndependentMechanismfortheSyrianArabRepublicand
the Commission of Inquiry, which document violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law
and gather evidence in view of future legal action. With
regard to the Investigative Team to support domestic
efforts in Iraq to hold Da'esh accountable, it is the duty
of the Security Council to ensure that it will operate
impartially and in accordance with international human
rights standards. Austria would also like to highlight
that, as of 17 July, the twentieth anniversary of the
Rome Statute, the ICC's jurisdiction over the crime of
aggression will be activated, which will contribute to
upholding international law within the context of the
maintenance of international peace and security.

In conclusion, I would like to stress that our efforts
to promote international law and the rule of law do not
serve an abstract goal, but the protection of the rights
and interests of every individual. Austria, including in
its role as coordinator of the Group of Friends of the
Rule of Law, will continue to give the utmost priority
to that subject.

