Mr. Choi Jong-moon (Republic of Korea): The
Republic of Korea appreciates the timely initiative of
France to convene today's high-level open debate on
protecting civilians in the context of peacekeeping
operations. I thank His Excellency Minister Jean-Marc
Ayrault for having come to New York to preside over
today's debate. It is a testimony to France's enduring
commitment to effective United Nations peacekeeping
operations and the universal promotion of human rights
and international humanitarian law.

Korea also appreciates the thorough briefing by
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon. We commend his
leadership in guiding the three landmark reviews
on peace operations, the peacebuilding architecture
and resolution 1325 (2000). In particular, we strongly
support his initiative to place high priority on the
protection-of-civilians mandate in United Nations
peace operations.

I also thank President Touadera of the Central
African Republic and International Committee of
the Red Cross President Maurer for their invaluable
remarks on this very important issue today.

The Republic of Korea is deeply concerned about
the unprecedented scale of civilian casualties from
armed conflicts around the world. In fact, under the
Korean presidency in February 2013, the Council
adopted presidential statement S/PRST/2013/2, on
protection of civilians. It focused on fighting impunity,
implementing peacekeeping protection mandates, and
establishing a regular reporting cycle for the Secretary-
General's reports. Despite the growing emphasis on the
importance of the protection of civilians, the reality
on the ground is quite troublesome. Peacekeepers
in South Sudan, the Central African Republic, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Sudan still
face great difficulties in carrying out their protection of
civilians mandate.

Korea, as a long-standing troop-contributing
country and major financial contributor, makes firm
commitments to finding ways that will allow the United
Nations to carry out its mandate successfully. Korea
organized a series of meetings in New York and Seoul
last year to this effect. Findings from those meetings
provided inputs for the high-level thematic debate on
peace and security organized by the President of the
General Assembly last month. Allow me to briefly
introduce some of the findings, which are also in line
with the concept note for today's debate.

First, peacekeeping protection ofcivilians mandates
should reflect the context on the ground instead of
following pre-existing templates. Related to this
point, deeper engagements with relevant stakeholders,
including local communities, were emphasized in
order to avoid a one-size-fits-all approach. Secondly,
analytical function needs to be strengthened during
the pre-mandate planning stage. Thirdly, there is
a need for the Security Council to prioritize and
consider sequenced mandates that can make Security
Council resolutions more realistic and implementable.
Fourthly, the training, capacities and responsibility of
troops were identified as an area that must be explored
further, especially in light of the recent cases of sexual
exploitation and abuse. Indeed, this is a grave concern
for all ofus. Korea concurs with all ofthese findings and
urges Security Council members to seriously consider
these and other similar recommendations that emerged
from various processes that followed the 2015 review.

The latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2016/447) laments the fact that humanitarian needs
are at a record high and more than 80 per cent of United
Nations humanitarian funding is directed at conflict
response. Faced with such a daunting challenge, Korea
joined other Member States to build up the momentum
generated by the World Humanitarian Summit held
in Istanbul, Turkey in May. During the summit, we
pledged to expand our support for conflict prevention
and humanitarian assistance.
Furthermore, Korea, along with the co-host, Timor
Leste, is pleased to announce that the sixth annual
meeting of the Global Network of Responsibility to
Protect Focal Points will be held in Seoul on June 20 to
22. It will be the first of its kind to take place in Asia,
and will bring together senior officials responsible
for facilitating national mechanisms for atrocity
prevention, with much of the discussion to be focused
on the protection of civilians.

In closing, Korea is deeply concerned by the lack
of protection of civilians caused by the devastating
conditions inside Syria's besieged and hard-to-reach
areas. We support the French and Mexican initiative on
veto restraint, as well as the code of conduct regarding
Security Council action against genocide, crimes
against humanity or war crimes, and urge the members
of the Security Council to take timely and decisive
action to protect civilians in conflict-affected regions.

