Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to welcome you, Madam President,
and thank you for your comprehensive and excellent
statement. I also extend my appreciation Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon, Mr. Olof Skoog and Nobel
Laureate Ouided Bouchamaoui. We congratulate her,
for it is truly a great honour and distinction that an
Arab woman has been awarded the Nobel Peace Prize.

The United Nations and the international
community have been making great efforts in order
to maintain international peace and security and
promote development and human rights. Despite
ongoing regional conflicts, we have managed to make
courageous and tangible progress in those fields at all
levels, but we have not worked sufficiently to highlight
the complementarity of those fields. No one denies the
close relationship that has been reflected in the manner
the Security Council has chosen to address daily
global conflicts as well as threats to global security.
Addressing the root causes of conflicts and violence
should be the focus of the ongoing efforts made by the
Security Council in the maintenance of international
peace and security, especially because the conflicts
of today are both intra- and inter-State in nature. We
call upon all parties to shoulder their responsibilities
in order to prevent conflicts and never to overlook the
primary root causes of conflicts and violence.

Given the close relationship between sustainable
development and security, there can be no national
development without a protective security system in
place, and the converse is true. The peacebuilding
architecture encompasses and links both concepts.
That is why I underscore the importance of supporting
peacebuilding operations in a concerted and systematic
manner, given their role in developing security, the rule
of law and justice and the part they play in combating
poverty, unemployment and corruption. As development
and security are interdependent, how can we maintain
that complementarity in a way that achieves security,
stability and development? Let me propose a few ideas
to help us maintain that complementarity and overcome
related obstacles.

First, we need to start by facing all the challenges
that hinder the achievement of security and development
and undermine peacebuilding efforts. We need a
common and collective vision that recognizes the close
complimentary roles of security and development,
including strategies and mechanisms, while promoting
human rights and the rule of law and achieving
justice, so as to build secure societies and the required
corresponding stable environments. Those mechanisms
should not be an end in and of themselves. We should
not stop establishing them without continuing to
develop them.

Secondly,weneedtoutilizeandinvestinthepotential
of all members of all our societies. Marginalizing
certain segments of our societies, especially youth, is
an extremely dangerous policy, especially because they
influence and are influenced by their economic, social
and security surroundings. In that regard, I would
like to stress that the recent terrorist attacks should
motivate us to uproot the reasons for such acts that have
depleted our resources and, most important, resulted in
the loss of numerous innocent lives of those who have
rejected terrorism. My country numbers among those
which have been beset by such barbaric attacks. That
is why we accord the utmost importance to combating
terrorism, which is threatening our population, and
in particular our youth. We have spared no effort in
that regard, the most recent example of which was
our participation in Global Forum on Youth, Peace
and Security. We should enhance the role of young
people by establishing a sustainable mechanism to
protect them and increase their engagement in political
processes and the maintenance of international peace
and security in our countries.

Coordination among United Nations bodies
is critically important because the Organization's
decisions and their implementation should not be the
exclusive responsibility of the Security Council. We
need a diverse toolkit to enhance the complementarity
between security and development. We should not
prioritize the interests of particular countries. We
need the political will of all countries, especially those
that can play a significant role in such efforts, and
recourse to regional organizations and their potential
in peacebuilding efforts.

Fourthly, at the national level social responsibility
requires the engagement of Governments and the
reconsideration of national policies and goals in order
to harmonize our efforts with the needs of the current
context and with the work of the United Nations. We
stress the importance of national ownership because
reform should arise within countries and not be imposed
from outside.

In conclusion, there are three key elements
related to the issue of security and development:
complementarity, partnership and inclusiveness. As
we strengthen the integration of and complementarity
between security and development, we should work to
make every sector of our societies a positive factor in
peacebuilding and not a threat to it. We must assess our
progress in responding to contemporary needs, which
requires us to harmonize the need to address security
threats with the political priorities we are implementing
by upgrading our plans and strategies at all levels, in
which security and development are intertwined and
mutually reinforcing.

