Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like first of all to congratulate you, Madame President,
your delegation, and Ambassador Susan Rice on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of December. We also wish to express our
appreciation to the delegation of the United Kingdom
for its excellent work in the presidency during the
month of November, carried out with imagination and
creative spirit.

My delegation would like to thank the Presidents
and Prosecutors of the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda and the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia for introducing their respective
biannual reports on progress in their completion
strategies (see S/2010/574 and S/2010/588).

Mexico recognizes the efforts that both Tribunals
have made to expedite the completion of their judicial
activities in a responsible and efficient way, as well as
the progress made in the implementation of their
completion strategies over the past six months, and the
manner in which they have guaranteed the rendering of
justice and respect for the rights of the accused, the
witnesses and the victims.

However, considering the reports before us this
morning, it is clear that the Tribunals will be unable to
conclude their work by the dates that were set in
resolutions 1503 (2003) and 1534 (2004) and that their
work will continue beyond 2010 and most likely until
the end of 2013. Factors such as the lack of
cooperation, the difficulty of retaining qualified staff
and of referring cases to national courts, and the lack
of agreement about the relocation of acquitted persons,
among others, pose significant challenges to the
prompt conclusion of the Tribunals' mandates.
Therefore, it is important that both Tribunals be given
the means to conclude their judicial work as soon as
possible. It is necessary to extend the terms of office of
their respective judges in order to allow them to
conclude the cases they have been assigned.

The cooperation that States provide to Tribunals
is also key. In that respect, we call upon the States
concerned to respond without delay to requests made
by the specialized bodies of the Tribunals, in particular
with regard to locating and arresting the fugitives
mentioned. We commend in particular the valuable
judicial cooperation provided by the Government of
Uganda in apprehending Mr. Jean-Bosco Uwinkindi on
30 June. We also express our appreciation for the
cooperation demonstrated by the Government of
Croatia, which we encourage to continue to cooperate
with the same readiness regarding matters pending
before the Tribunal. We also acknowledge the
constructive attitude of the Government of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

For my delegation, the referral of cases to
national jurisdictions is also fundamental for the
successful conclusion of the Tribunals. We therefore
deem it crucial that international tribunals continue
their task of facilitating the strengthening of the
capacities of national tribunals.

Even given the complex and highly detailed
considerations that we have heard today, the Security
Council must not lose sight of the principle objective
of guaranteeing that justice is carried out with regard to
the most serious crimes and atrocities against
humankind committed in the conflicts in the former
Yugoslavia and in Rwanda. At the same time, however,
we should not overlook the fact that international
tribunals face an ongoing challenge, namely, achieving
a balance between the rendering of justice,
administrative efficiency, guaranteeing the

fundamental rights of the accused, witnesses and
victims, and completing their work as soon as possible.
For this reason, the Security Council should strive to
conclude negotiations on the residual mechanism in a
manner that is satisfactory for all parties.

Finally, my delegation wishes to fully
acknowledge the work accomplished by the Informal
Working Group on Criminal Tribunals under the
Austrian chairmanship, led by Ambassador Mayr-
Harting, in finalizing work on the establishment of the
residual mechanism.

