The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of Kuwait.

The State of Kuwait voted in favour of the first
version of draft resolution S/2018/156, submitted by the
United Kingdom, because it renews the sanctions regime
mandated by resolutions 2140 (2014) and 2216 (2015).
The draft resolution also extended the mandate of the
Panel of Experts on Yemen mandated by resolution 2342
(2017), and contained important language that made it
possible for the Council to address a dangerous aspect
of the Yemeni crisis that it should pay more attention
to - the smuggling of ballistic missiles into Yemeni
territory, which the Houthis launched against our sister
State of Saudi Arabia, firing a total of 95 missiles by
5 February. We condemn those acts by the Houthis in
the strongest terms.
The Houthis have also claimed that they have
launched such missiles against the sister State of the
United Arab Emirates and have announced that they
intend to wage such attacks against Saudi Arabia and
other States in the region. This represents a dangerous
development and a challenge to the entire international
community. It undermines every effort aimed at
reaching the political solution we want that can end the
crisis in our brother State of Yemen. We underscore our
position that we stand fully with our brothers in Saudi
Arabia and support all measures designed to maintain
its peace and security.

We are all members of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014), on sanctions against
Yemen. We read the report of the Panel of Experts on
Yemen (S/2018/68) concerning the fact that the Houthis
have been receiving support from outside parties,
especially arms that were sent to Yemen after the arms
embargo. That constitutes a clear violation of paragraph
14 of resolution 2216 (2015), and we therefore call on
all States Members of the United Nations to comply
with the arms embargo and the relevant Security
Council resolutions.

In conclusion, we underscore that a political
solution in Yemen should be based on paragraph
1 of resolution 2216 (2015). We should bear in mind
the three references that were agreed on: the Gulf
Cooperation Council Initiative and its implementing
mechanism, the outcome of the Yemeni National
Dialogue Conference and the relevant Security Council
resolutions, in particular resolution 2216 (2015), which
is the cornerstone for a resolution of the crisis in
Yemen. The sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity There are no more names inscribed on the list

oncmcn must be maintained.
of speakers.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council. The meeting rose at 4.101). m.
