Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I will try to be brief. I realize
that it is very late in the day and that it has been a
long meeting. I would like to say a few words on our
leadership of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011), on Libya sanctions, the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2374
(2017), on Mali sanctions, and the Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict. I will share some
experiences of chairing those subsidiary bodies and
provide some remarks on the general functioning, or
not, of subsidiary organs and the role of the Chairs.

First of all, I want to pay tribute to the Secretariat,
the Security Council Affairs Division and the Panel of
Experts for the support they provided, as many here
have mentioned. I also want to pay tribute to the 12
loyal and dedicated colleagues from Member States
outside the Council who are present and taking interest
in this debate at this time of the day.

Let me say a few words about the Libya Sanctions
Committee. That Committee is very labour-intensive,
perhaps not as much as the Committee pursuant to
resolution 1718 (2006), but still, it is active and operates
in a politically complex environment. At times, political
divisions inside the Security Council have made it
difficult to agree on even quite minor issues. Despite
those divisions, we have tried to enable the Committee
to be active and attuned to the political situation in
Libya itself. For example, this year the Committee
listed several individuals for the first time since 2011,
inter alia for involvement in human trafficking, migrant
smuggling and attempts to illicitly export oil. We have
adopted a separate listing criterion on sexual and
gender-based violence, which is a development that we
encourage Member States to continue to consider in
the context of other sanctions regimes. A third issue
has been adopting Implementation Assistance Notices
in relation to the assets freeze, which we hope will
facilitate the effective implementation of the sanctions.

We have listened very carefully, in our national
capacity, to Libya's concerns regarding the management
of the frozen funds 4 a considerable amount of money.
We have very actively pursued a way forward on that
in discussions with other members of the Committee,
Libyan representatives and the Libyan Investment
Authority, as well as at the highest level in Tripoli,
beginning with the President. I believe that working
with the World Bank is the best way forward on that
particular issue. The people ofLibya need to be satisfied
that their funds are managed in the best way possible.
We encourage Libya to continue engaging with the
World Bank and the incoming Committee Chair.

Despite great difficulty in reaching consensus, I
led the first visit by the Committee to Libya since the
inception of the sanctions regime, in 2011. I thought it
was a very useful trip, about which I have given some
personal impressions here in the Council. Regrettably,
we were not able to visit the eastern part of Libya, as
envisaged in the terms of reference, but I hope that the
second part of the trip can be realized soon.

The exploitation of Libya's resources for personal
gain continues to do huge harm to Libya and to peace.
Understanding those detrimental undercurrents is
something that I recommend the Committee, and
other committees, to look more closely into to more
effectively deal with it: How do war economies work?
Who benefits? And what can we do to go after those
interests more forcefully?

Turning to the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2374 (2017), on Mali, that sanctions regime
was set up at the request ofthe Government of Mali. The
aim of the sanctions is to advance peace, security and
stability for the benefit of the Malian people, in support
of national efforts, not least through the implementation
of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali.
The Government has been very good in its cooperation
with the Committee, but so have the other signatories
of the agreement. Engagement with the region has been
another important component of our work, including
through informal consultations with countries
neighbouring Mali. I visited Mali just a few days ago
and would like to reflect on a few things there.

Many actors, including the parties to the peace
agreement, pointed to the positive impact of the
sanctions regime in maintaining pressure to move
forward in the implementation process. There was also
a general awareness of the expectations of the Council,
as put forward in resolution 2423 (2018), including the
evaluation of progress needed before March of next
year. Of course, there is a time when expectations and
words must translate into concrete action if deadlines
are not met. There are some positive dynamics among
the parties since the elections this summer and the
signing of the pact for peace. At the same time, spoilers
and violators of international humanitarian law need
to be contended with and the momentum seems not
to have been matched by concrete results. We remain
ready, in the last few days of our term on the Council,
to consider listing individuals in accordance with the
designation criteria.

I was also the Chair of the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict. I would like to thank
countries for their support of the Working Group and our
efforts to work towards a more proactive chairmanship
of the Working Group. We are witnessing utter disregard
for international humanitarian law and human rights,
as reflected in the increase in violations and abuses
against children in many conflicts around the world
and under many Council agenda items. I believe that
reality demands a strengthening of engagement, both
in the field and in dialogue with States. United Nations
efforts must also be reinforced at the country level in
order to reverse that very negative trend.

The Working Group is now efficiently adopting
country conclusions within a one- to two-month time
frame and making regular field visits, focusing on
countries that are ready to engage but need a push,
as was the case in Darfur in the Sudan and in South
Sudan, most recently. I see room for improvement
with more engagement from all Council members and
better follow-up and implementation by the Council as
a whole, in a more determined and consistent manner.
I believe that the questions related to children
and armed conflict are central to prevention and
sustaining peace, and efforts must not be limited to the
Working Group. I want to come back to the Council
later on with a more extensive list of lessons learned
and recommendations as the Council moves forward
without Sweden. Finally, I think that the Working
Group's collaboration with civil society has been
absolutely crucial, as is so often the case for many other
issues on the Council's agenda.

I would like to turn now to some general remarks
about the working groups. I agree with most, if not
all, of what our Dutch colleague just suggested in his
recommendations on moving forward. Sanctions can
never be successful in isolation. They must always be
part of a broader political strategy. Sanctions committees
should not operate in a vacuum, disconnected from their
political context. The Council needs to become better
at discussing country-specific items and sanctions
regimes together, and there should be closer interaction
between Chairs of sanctions committees and the
penholders of draft resolutions mandating sanctions, as
the two are mutually reinforcing.

Chairing subsidiary organs is an important and
demanding task that comes with great responsibility.
Sanctions remain one of the most intrusive instruments
available to the Security Council, apart from the use
of force, and the sanctions committees are mandated
with the important task of ensuring the effective use
of that instrument, with direct effect for sanctioned
individuals and entities.

Chairs should therefore enjoy greater trust and
cooperation from all members ofthe Council. They have
been appointed by the Council and should be entrusted
with a higher degree of independence, without being
hamstrung or micromanaged in the discharge of their
mandates. That holds true when it comes to travelling
on behalf of their committees, communicating about
their work or interacting with the Council itself. The
fact that any committee decision, no matter how minor,
must be taken by consensus, has in essence conferred
the right ofthe veto on all Council members. Of course,

as we all know, in most cases it is the permanent
members that block effective committee action.

Effective stewardship of subsidiary organs is a
challenge and a responsibility that requires resources
and extensive knowledge of the United Nations sanctions
system. Given the extent of that responsibility, Sweden,
as my Dutch colleague hasjust mentioned, together with
other Member States, have developed a best practices
guide for Chairs and delegations of subsidiary organs
to help incoming delegations prepare for that important
task. We hope that the guide will be published before
the end of the year. Since we are leaving, we hope that it
can be a legacy for our colleagues and their delegations

in trying to make the overall work of the Council, as it

relates to sanctions, more effective and efficient.

