Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in Arabic): Israel has
committed a very grave crime. It has killed an elderly
sheikh - a quadriplegic who was leaving a mosque in
his wheelchair - and six other Palestinians. That
crime, which cannot be justified and which was
perpetrated in cold blood, in the middle of the day, was
the result of a decision taken by the Prime Minister,
who has indicated that he is proud of that decision. The
representative of Israel has rudely boasted of that today
before us in the Council. That act is undoubtedly a
terrorist act and should be condemned.

By assassinating Sheikh Yassin, Israel has made
clear that it has decided deliberately to escalate the
violence and to turn its back on the peace process and
on its historical responsibilities. Israel is aware that this
brutal crime will bring the situation in the entire region
to a boiling point. The resulting anger and rage will be
translated into an escalation of acts of violence and
other tragedies. Violence will soon be generated and
intensified with death and suffering and will perhaps
definitively bury a moribund peace process.

Just a few days ago, before the Council, I warned
of the consequences of political assassinations and acts
of terror by Israel and the tragedy that will take place if
they are not brought quickly to an end.

The Council, unfortunately, has not been able to
take any decision, and Israel has undoubtedly been
comforted by this and is thereby encouraged in its
impunity. Today it has proven its arrogance and
contempt to which it has accustomed us by the killing
of an old man and by affirming that it will continue to
pursue its policy of assassination and terror against the
Palestinian people. Furthermore, a very clear reference
has been made today to President Arafat, the elected
and legitimate President of the Palestinian people, who
last year was considered an obstacle to be eliminated
by the Israeli Government.

Algeria, which strongly condemns the
assassination of Sheikh Yassin and his companions,
believes that, while the entire world has denounced this
bold crime, it is the Security Council's duty above all
to ensure respect for international legitimacy and to
maintain international peace and security by
condemning this criminal act.

The Council cannot remain silent and passive. It
must order Israel to immediately cease its policy of
assassination and extrajudicial executions, to end its
military operations against the civilian population and
to comply with norms of international law and the
Geneva Conventions, in order to maintain what
remains to be preserved in occupied Palestine.

The Quartet must act, and act quickly, before it is
too late and the region becomes completely engulfed in
violence. Only a bold initiative on its part, taken at the
appropriate political level, can save a peace process
that Israel is always bent on derailing. We dare to hope
that this will occur and that the worst will be avoided.

