Mr. Sareer (Maldives): My delegation wishes to
thank Argentina, in its capacity as President of the
Security Council, for convening this open debate in
connection with the agenda item on the situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question. I would
also like to extend our appreciation to the Secretary-
General for his briefing and his dedicated efforts
towards a resolution of the conflicts in the Middle East.

Once again, the Maldives takes the floor in the
Council to join the global chorus of voices condemning
the violence in the Middle East, especially in the State
of Palestine. For the past few decades, the international
community has expended time, energy and resources
towards the realization of a two-State solution based
on relevant United Nations resolutions, the Madrid
principles, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet
Road Map. However, time and time again the progress
made ends in the sound ofgunfire, rockets, missiles and
bombs. Time and time again, it ends in the cries of the
innocent who unwillingly give their final measure in
what we so nonchalantly refer to as collateral damage.

Generations grow up under the oppression of
occupation and learn both hatred and violence,
although there has been long-standing consensus on
the parametres of a solution. United Nations resolutions
and subsequent negotiations have made clear that the
Israeli occupation that began in 1967 has no place in
the modern world, and that the State of Palestine must
be recognized. It must be granted full independence
within its pre-l967 borders and with East Jerusalem
as its capital. As elaborated in these resolutions, the
issues of refugees, borders, settlements, security,
natural resources, prisoners and East Jerusalem must
be addressed if there is ever to be hope for peace.

Yet with peace only a distant hope, the international
community must first rally to keep this latest induced
despair and human misery at bay. The United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East now estimates that 600,000 Palestinians were
affected in the latest bombings that destroyed 100,000
homes, and the need for more aide is dire. Yet, with the
current restrictions on movement, trade, employment
and aid, the effort at rebuilding is severely hindered.
A resolution from this Council ensuring the reopening
of the Gaza Strip based on the 2005 Agreement on
Movement and Access, an end to the blockade and
guaranteed protection of civilian populations is long
overdue and much wanted.

This is the first step in easing the situation - the
first step in rebuilding. Unless population recovers its
God-given right to human dignity, the cycle of hatred
and violence will continue, not only in Palestine but
around the world. Hatred breeds violence, contempt,
extremism and the very worst that humankind has to
offer. We have seen this hatred infect young people from
every nation, race and creed. Yet today it spreads across
the Middle East and threatens the future stability of the
entire region. It is a threat facing the Islamic Ummah.
Terrorist organizations, including the so-called Islamic
State, are among the greatest emerging threats to the
global community.

The President of Maldives, Mr. Abdulla Yameen
Abdul Gayoom, and the Government of Maldives
condemn these groups, their ideologies and activities in
the strongest terms. The Maldives welcomes initiatives
that emphasize the global will to jointly address the
issue of foreign fighters, including resolutions 2170
(2014) and 2178 (2014). Unfortunately, far more needs
to be done.

It is deeply concerning to note that an estimated
1.8 million Iraqi citizens have been internally displaced
this year alone. It is deeply concerning that, every
day, thousands of refugees are fleeing for their lives
and that the refugee crisis is only worsening, with no
end in sight. More than 3 million Syrians have been
registered as refugees outside of the country, with
another 6.5 million estimated to be internally displaced
since the Syrian civil war began.

The need for continued aid is ever present. The
ongoing violence in the region is once again creating
a generation without access to basic needs including
food, water, shelter, education, health care, peace and
stability. Once again, a generation will grow up in fear
and will learn hatred unless we begin to take steps that
will address them in a holistic and long-sighted manner.
It is time we stopped repeating our mistakes.

