Mr. La Yifan (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation would like to thank High
Representative. Mr. Lajcak for his briefing to the
Council and the report submitted to the Council prior
to the briefing. We are also pleased to welcome the
Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, His Excellency Mr. Nikola Spirie, and
we thank him for his statement.

We have been following the political process in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and we note that the overall
situation during the past six months has been, on the
whole, stable. Progress has been made on the road to
European integration. We note in particular the
adoption of two laws on police reform, the signing of
the stabilization association agreement with the
European Union and cooperation with the International
Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia. However,
we are also concerned by some destabilizing factors
and difficulties facing Bosnia and Herzegovina.

As mentioned in the High Representative's
report, parties concerned have exchanged tit-for-tat
rhetoric. Also, Bosnia and Herzegovina's economic
growth has encountered new challenges. As refugees
and displaced persons return, it is experiencing many
obstacles. Despite these challenges and difficulties, we
hope the High Representative and the relevant parties
of Bosnia and Herzegovina will make continued efforts
to maintain the country's political stability and security
so as to move it forward on the road to peace,
reconciliation and development. And, in particular,
efforts should be made to implement the five objectives
and two conditions put forward by the Peace
Implementation Council Steering Board.
China respects Bosnia and Herzegovina's
sovereignty and territorial integrity. The future of the
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina is in their own
hands. We believe that the maintenance of lasting
peace and stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina is in the
interests of all sides and that continued dialogue and
cooperation will provide an important basis for
achieving this goal.

We welcome the joint statement issued on
8 November by the three major parties of Bosnia and
Herzegovina concerning areas of constitutional reform
and population census. We hope that Bosnia and
Herzegovina's ethnic groups, in a spirit of
reconciliation, will increase mutual trust, carry out
sincere cooperation and refrain from political tension
and confrontation. We also encourage the High
Representative to continue to conduct extensive
consultations with all sides as mandated by the Dayton
Peace Agreement, with the aim of helping the various
ethnic groups to take constructive measures and make
headway in areas of constitutional reform, economic
development and law and order.

We are ready to continue to support the High
Representative's work and we are also pleased to see
the positive role played by the European Union in
maintaining Bosnia and Herzegovina's stability,
economic growth and associated development within
the framework of the Dayton Peace Agreement. We are
also prepared, together with the international
community, to support and assist Bosnia and
Herzegovina in its efforts to realize lasting peace,
stability and a sustainable development.

