Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We are grateful for the
briefing by the Secretary-General on the situation in
the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.

Our delegation aligns itself with the statement
to be delivered by the representative of the Islamic
Republic of Iran on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.

The Middle East continues to be affected by a
complex political reality - the product of war, foreign
interference and terrorism - all of which are the direct
result of military interventionism and the lack of a
political agreement to resolve the region's conflicts.
The deadlock in the peace process between Israel
and Palestine represents the primary obstacle to the
stability of the region. For that reason, we will focus
our remarks on that issue.
In the complex scenario of the region, the solution
of the issue of Israel's occupation of Palestine remains
deadlocked in terms of the political process, while at
the same time the occupying Power is deepening its
colonization of Palestinian land. Such actions continue
apace in the light of the apathy of the Security Council,
which is making no effort to demand that Israel cease
its acts of violence against the Palestinian population
and end its illegal expansionist and settlement policies
on Palestinian land. There can be no doubt that this
inactivity on the part of the Council is fuelling the
impunity with which Israel acts, as it continues to
commit a whole range of acts of aggression against
Palestinian men, women and children.

We would like to highlight some of the major
serious obstacles to the two-State solution to the Israel-
Palestine conflict. The prolonged Israeli occupation has
been exploited to consolidate the settlement policy on
Palestinian territory. By way of illustration, look no
further than the support of the Israeli Government for
the settlers, which increased in 2015 compared with the
figures for previous years. It is noteworthy that during
the first three months of 2016, settlement construction
increased 250 per cent compared with the same period
of the previous year. All of this is reflected in the
expansion of the illegal occupation of the territory:
today there are more than 650,000 settlers living in
more than 260 settlements in the West Bank, including
neighbourhoods in East Jerusalem. To this we would
add the seizure of Palestinian land, which is carried out
by the simple proclamation by the Israeli authorities
declaring such land State land or State property.

In addition to the settlement policy, let me stress
that the Israelis are continuing to demolish houses,
in some cases on the baseless excuse of the lack of a
building permit by the Palestinians. In other instances,
the Israelis use the pretext of applying collective
punishment to Palestinian families for crimes alleged
to have been committed by certain members of
those families.

As a result of these abusive practices, between
January and April 2016 the Israeli authorities
demolished 586 houses or structures of other kinds in
vulnerable communities in the region, particularly in
the area known as Area C. Their actions left more than
700 individuals homeless. The occupying Power does
not seem to care that many of the buildings destroyed
were constructed thanks to international support and
seems indifferent to the fact that many demolitions are
carried out in areas where Palestinian families live in
poverty, and that being left homeless means that they
have no choice but to swell the ranks of refugees.
Israeli settlements are illegal, and the Security Council
should be able to muster the political unity necessary to
condemn them, as the entire international community
hopes to see it do.

The situation of violence in the country is also
extremely sad, and it is sad to hear the victims' personal
stories of violence. But we have to make sure to put
the situation in the proper context. We could fill this
Chamber with the victims of violence in Palestine. We
could fill the General Assembly Hall. This is just to
try to give the Council an idea of what is happening in
Palestine and of its scale and magnitude.

The origin of all this suffering is the illegal
occupation by Israel. The situation of violence in the
occupied territories is worrisome owing to the ongoing
criminal actions of the occupying Power against the
inhabitants of Palestine, under the pretext of the need
to increase security to respond to the acts committed
by Palestinians targeting Israelis. Our country
unequivocally condemns such acts. However, because
we understand that the root cause of the violence
is the Israeli occupation of Palestine, and given the
differences in strength between Israel and Palestine, we
denounce with even greater vigour the disproportionate
response, including administrative detention, collective
punishment and extrajudicial executions, of the
occupying Power against the Palestinian population.

In a similar vein, we denounce administrative
detentions, which violate human rights and which
have been increasing to include even minors. Reports
indicate that 78 per cent ofthe Palestinians held in Israeli
detention facilities, that is, almost 5,400 individuals,
including 264 minors, are considered to be prisoners
for security reasons and thus suffer conditions that are
harsher than those of the prison population in general.

Arbitrary arrests of Palestinians by Israel are often
linked to torture and abuse by the occupying Power.
A recently published report indicates that of the 149
Palestinians murdered by the Israeli Defence Forces
in 2015, 77 were killed during incidents related to
attacks against Israel, whereas the other 72 died as the
result of disproportionate action and aggression by the
occupying Power at checkpoints, while it was cracking
down on protests or carrying out routine operations. In
many of these cases, the victims did not pose any threat
whatsoever to the security or the well-being of the
repressive authorities. We urge that all those involved
in such crimes targeting innocent and defenceless
citizens stand trial and hope that the day will come
when impunity ends and Israel will be held accountable.

Faced with this pattern of systemic violence
targeting the Palestinians, we urge the Council to
take account of the call to establish an international
protection system for the Palestinian population
in the occupied territories, in line with the Fourth
Geneva Convention and resolution 904 (1994). In that
framework, and as we have previously suggested in
this body, we could consider contemplating a presence
by the humanitarian agencies of the United Nations
system that are already deployed in Palestine. Within
the limits of their specific competencies, they could
play a protection-of-civilians role.

The humanitarian situation in Gaza continues to be
delicate, as a result of the blockade and siege to which
the population has been subjected since 2007. This latter
step exacerbates the military aggression perpetrated
by Israel during Operation Defensive Shield in 2014,
which took the lives of 2,251 Palestinians, including
1,462 civilians and 551 children.

International efforts for the reconstruction of Gaza
have been hampered by lack of cooperation on the part
of Israel and the continued blockade. The repair and
rebuilding of houses, schools, hospitals and service
infrastructures are seriously undermined by Israeli
restrictions on the entry and exit of goods and materials
to and from Gaza, as well as the threat of fresh attacks
and destruction by Israel. Israel must lift the inhumane
blockade to which it is subjecting the people of Palestine
and Gaza, which is a clear violation of international
humanitarian law.

We believe that the Palestinian question is one of
the most egregious failures of the Security Council. The
Council has deceived the millions of Palestinians who,
for more than 60 years, have trusted it to take action
as the guarantor of international peace and security in
the quest for a solution to the conflict. Nonetheless, the
occupation and the settlement process in the Palestinian
territory not only persists but continues to expand,
taking many lives and causing unremitting violence in
the region.

Palestine is the victim of one of the most serious
tragedies and injustices in modern history. Certain
members of the Council are directly responsible for the
inaction of this body in the face of this tragedy. We are

wondering how long the Palestinian people must wait.
Why does the Security Council sit by silently and allow
the mass violation of human rights and international
humanitarian law by Israel? Why does the Security
Council maintain double standards on this matter?
How many more Palestinian children must die before
the Council reacts?

This issue can be resolved only on the political
track, and we therefore welcome all of the efforts
currently under way on various fronts to breathe new
life into the peace process, which has been moribund
for more than 20 years now. We will consider in
good faith and in a constructive spirit any initiative
that would allow us to make headway in negotiations
conducive to rekindling peace negotiations on an equal
footing between Palestinians and Israelis and based on
a political, negotiated and inclusive solution that would
bring a definitive end to the conflict in the framework of
the two-State solution, with full acceptance of the right
of the Palestinian people to live within internationally
recognized borders, in line with the Charter of the
United Nations and the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly and the Security Council. All of
these represent the key elements in the negotiations.
They cannot be changed. We must avoid any action on
the ground that could threaten the two-State solution.
We believe that all the initiatives, such as that of the
Quartet, the Arab League Initiative and the French
initiative, must adhere to those principles in order to
achieve a positive outcome.

