Mr. Al-Barout (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in Arabic): On behalf of the United Arab Emirates, I
would like to congratulate you, Sir, on the outstanding
manner in which you have presided over the Security
Council this month. I would also like to congratulate
the five new non-permanent members of the Council. I
wish them every success in their term of office.

The Secretariat's regular monthly briefings of the
Council on developments in Palestinian and Arab
territories occupied since 1967, including East
Jerusalem, have given us a full picture of the serious
humanitarian and other violations of the rights of the
Palestinian and other Arab populations of those
territories by Israel, the occupying Power.

The Israeli Government has continued its policy
of aggression and its blockade of the Gaza Strip,
depriving Palestinians of their basic rights and of food,
fuel, medicine and construction materials to rebuild
after the destruction caused by the Israeli military
machine in Gaza last year.

Israel has also continued to take a number of
unilateral and illegal steps, including expanding the
already illegal settlements in the West Bank and, in
particular, East Jerusalem and its environs. The
systematic policy of confiscating Palestinian territory
and wealth, depopulating that land and replacing its
inhabitants with Israeli settlers, along with the closure
of Palestinian institutions and the provocative acts
against Muslim and Christian Holy Sites in the Old
City, including attacks on Al-Aqsa Mosque, have
produced bitterness and great rancour in the Arab and
Islamic worlds.

The United Arab Emirates would like to warn that
all those Israeli policies in East Jerusalem are very
dangerous. They are intended to compel as many
Palestinians as possible to leave the Holy City in order
to make it easier for Israel to illegally Judaize it,
change its political and demographic character and
impose a de facto order that rides roughshod over
international resolutions and over commitments made
by Israel in peace agreements with the Palestinians.

How else can we interpret the stepped-up efforts
to confiscate thousands of Palestinian identity cards in
order to prevent Palestinians from living in the Holy
City? Reports indicate that last year alone, Israel
revoked the residency rights of about 14,000
Palestinians in the Holy City and confiscated the
identity cards of 5,000 of them. That is the largest
number of permit cancellations in East Jerusalem in a
single year since the city was occupied in 1967.

As has recently been reported, Israel has used
various pretexts for doing that. Tens of thousands of
Palestinians face the same fate of losing their property
and the right to reside in the city. That illustrates
Israel's ongoing efforts to ethnically cleanse East
Jerusalem of Palestinians and to illegally impose a de
facto situation on the city.

The United Arab Emirates strongly deplores all
unilateral illegal measures by Israel intended to
prejudice final status negotiations. They do not serve
the cause of peace and peaceful coexistence. We call
on the Security Council and the Quartet to assume their
responsibilities and take every necessary step to put an
immediate end to those Israeli acts.

We call upon the international community to
condemn Israel's unilateral measures in Palestinian
territory and to require it to dismantle its separation
wall and settlements.

We also call on the international community to
force Israel to stop confiscating land and violating the
Road Map, the provisions of international law, the
Fourth Geneva Convention, all relevant resolutions of
international legitimacy - including those of the tenth
special session of the General Assembly - and the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice.
We demand that Israel end its siege and its policy of

starving the Palestinians, and allow international
assistance to reach the affected Palestinian areas,
especially the Gaza Strip.

In this context, while we note the compensation
paid by Israel for deliberately destroying United Nations
installations in the Strip, our delegation calls on Israel
to provide the necessary financial compensation to the
Palestinians in the Strip for its crimes and aggression
against them, in accordance with the Goldstone report
(A/HRC/12/48).

We have to provide international protection for
the Palestinians against repeated Israeli aggressions.
We call on Israel, the occupying Power, not to commit
aggression against defenceless Palestinians, in
accordance with its commitments and responsibilities
under the Geneva Conventions of 1949, which apply to
all occupied territories under Israel's authority. We call
on the international community to double its financial
and economic assistance to Palestinians in order to help
them deal with this extremely serious humanitarian
crrsrs.

As for sisterly Lebanon, the United Arab Emirates
deplores the daily Israeli violations of Lebanese air
space. We reaffirm our position that the occupying
Power must withdraw from all Lebanese territory,
including the Shab'a farms, Al-Ghajar village and the
Kfar Shuba hills. The United Arab Emirates stands
with our brothers in Syria, and we deem all measures
taken by Israel, the occupying Power, in the occupied
Syrian Golan null and void and illegal. In this context,
we call for the full withdrawal by Israel from the
occupied Golan to the lines of 4 June 1967, in
accordance with resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).

In conclusion, we reaffirm that any delay by the
international community in compelling Israel to end its
illegal measures would send the wrong message to
Israel and only encourage it to pursue them. That
would push the area towards more conflict and
violence, and obstruct regional and international efforts
to establish a political climate conducive to peace
negotiations and a comprehensive and just resolution to
the Palestinian question through the two-State solution,
which would allow the States to live in mutual respect,
peace and security.

