Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, my delegation would like to
thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres for his clear
and detailed briefing. We also thank Mr. Tegegnework
Gettu, Associate Administrator of the United
Nations Development Programme, and Ms. Cate
Blanchett, United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees Goodwill Ambassador, for her valuable and
moving presentation.

Following the mass exodus that occurred in August
last year, in which more than 700,000 Rohingyas were
forced to flee Myanmar to Bangladesh, my delegation
has paid particular attention to the situation of the
refugees from that minority ethnic group, who have
remained in vulnerable conditions in Bangladesh
community centres for a year. We commend the efforts
of the Government of Bangladesh and its people, with
the assistance of the United Nations, its partners and
other non-governmental organizations, in providing
security, shelter and humanitarian assistance to
all individuals who have fled the violence, and we
encourage them to continue doing so until those people
can return voluntarily, safely and with dignity to their
homes in Myanmar.

Within the framework of efforts to address the
crisis, a working delegation comprised of Council
members visited Bangladesh and Myanmar in April
and May, where it visited specific locations and had
the opportunity to talk with governmental and military
authorities and officials at various levels. Subsequently,
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General on
Myanmar, Ms. Burgener, travelled to the area in June
and July, having visited Rakhine and held meetings
with Myanmar authorities. As part of that sequence
of visits, of particular note was the visit in early July
of the delegation led by Secretary-General Antonio
Guterres, who arrived in Cox's Bazar and met with the
Prime Minister of Bangladesh.

Equatorial Guinea commends the reception and
assistance that the authorities of both countries and
United Nations agencies gave to all the delegations to
facilitate their work. However, we also share the various
concerns about the situation of refugees in community
centres, as well as the setbacks that have so far
prevented a large-scale voluntary and safe return that is
backed by a political settlement guaranteeing the rights
of the Rohingyas in Myanmar. In that regard, we call on
the Government of Myanmar to redouble its efforts to
create conditions conducive to the safe, voluntary and
dignified return of Rohingya refugees and internally
displaced persons to their homes in Rakhine.

Nonetheless, my delegation welcomes several
aspects clarified in a letter dated 27 June, addressed
to the President of the Council from the Permanent
Representative of Myanmar, including: the
implementation of the Mechanism of the Union
Enterprise for Humanitarian Assistance, Resettlement
and Development in Rakhine, in order to provide
humanitarian assistance to all communities in need
and coordinate such assistance; the signing of a
memorandum of understanding by the Government
of Myanmar, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and the United Nations
Development Programme on 6 June, paving the way
not only for assistance at the various stages of return
and resettlement in the repatriation process, but also
for an improvement in humanitarian assistance and
livelihood opportunities for returnees, as well as for
all communities in Rakhine state; the Government's
declaration that it does not accept any violation
of human rights and will take action against any
perpetrator in accordance with the law, provided that
the accusations are supported by sufficient evidence;
and the public commitment of the Government of
Myanmar to implementing the recommendations of
the Advisory Commission on Rakhine State, as well
as establishing a ministerial-level commission to
implement the recommendations.

Finally, in view of those assertions, I would like to
conclude by encouraging all members of the Council
and the international community to continue their
constructive role in creating the external conditions
necessary to facilitate consultations and dialogue that
can help the Myanmar Government to find a solution
to this situation.

