Mr. Shin Dong Ik (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, I would like express my appreciation to you,
Madame President, for having organized this
meaningful open debate on the question concerning
Haiti.

Following the destructive earthquake of January
2010, Haiti is now showing signs of recovery and
reconstruction, and seeing a semblance of normalcy
return to daily life. Our task is to ensure that this
continues while we simultaneously do everything we
can to facilitate security, humanitarian relief,
institution-building and political and economic
development.

With regard to the political situation, my
delegation was encouraged by the announcement, on
4April, of preliminary electoral results by the
Provisional Electoral Council, which provided
evidence of the spirit of peace and fair play in Haiti.
My delegation hopes that the results of the final tally,
due on 16 April, will be accepted by all parties
involved, so that Haiti can move forward into a new
era of leadership and development in the post-quake
era.

In the same vein, strengthening the rule of law
and building institutions across the board is imperative
for the long-term security and development of Haiti.
Indeed, reconstruction and humanitarian programmes
in Haiti must be pursued with a view both to promoting
a sustainable security situation and furthering
economic, social and political development. It is
therefore essential that peacekeeping, peacebuilding
and sustainable development be pursued by a parallel
approach that takes into account the various challenges
of institution-building.

Institution-building in Haiti must ensure that
basic national capacities are restored at the earliest
possible juncture in order to stabilize the delicate post-
disaster situation. The rule of law, effective governance
and security-sector reform are the areas that require the
highest priority.

We must also take into consideration the
complementary relationship between development and
security. As the Council recently concluded,
underdevelopment is a root cause of insecurity and
conflict. Taking a broad approach to political insecurity
that takes economic and social factors into account can
yield results.

My delegation believes that development in Haiti
continues to require the engagement of a variety of
stakeholders, including the United Nations, the
international financial institutions and civil society. By
harnessing our collective efforts to promote sustained,
long-lasting development today, we can tackle the root
causes of Haiti's security concerns of tomorrow.

One tangible way that this can be pursued is to
actively focus on creating employment opportunities
for young people. This would allow many young
people options beyond joining armed groups and
resorting to crime, which are often the only providers
of immediate wages and sustenance. As such,
development, and economic development in particular,
must be undertaken in a sustained, inclusive and
equitable manner.

The Korean people and Government have the
utmost sympathy for the Haitian people in the
aftermath of the devastating earthquake and the
subsequent humanitarian crisis. We take note of the
overwhelming international response following the
quake and the many improvements that have been
implemented to provide basic necessities such as water,
food, temporary shelter and medical care. In that
regard, the Korean Government and private sector have
contributed more than $47 million to provide post-
quake humanitarian relief to support key reconstruction
projects, such as strengthening the basic health
infrastructure, improving the water supply and
providing job training.

Beyond humanitarian contributions, Korea also
dispatched a 240-strong engineering company to the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH). The company is currently active in the
Leogane area of responsibility, one of the hardest-hit
areas of the country. At the present juncture, Korea is
focusing on providing targeted relief in the areas of
debris removal and completing road construction. We
commend MINUSTAH for its invaluable role in both
maintaining peace and security and leading the way in
recovery and reconstruction efforts.

My delegation is extremely concerned by the
recent report of the Secretary-General on MINUSTAH
(S/2011/183*) and reports by non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) on Haiti that detail widespread
incidences of rape and sexual violence occurring
within camps for internally displaced persons and the
broader community. We urge the Haitian Government,
as well as the Department for Peacekeeping Operations
and NGOs on the ground, to do their utmost to protect
vulnerable women and girls within the camps.

As noted in the report of the Secretary-General,
the United Nations initiated an operational plan to
increase women's security in August 2010. This is a
step in the right direction, but problems persist in the
reporting of crimes of sexual violence, data collection,
the climate of impunity and the overall lack of
institutions. These hinder the rule of justice in finding
and prosecuting perpetrators of such crimes.

As we move from post-disaster humanitarian and
security relief to long-term reconstruction, it is
imperative that the international community remain
resolute in doing everything it can to strengthen Haiti's
capacities. In the near future, however, the
international community is still needed to provide
additional direct assistance, particularly in the areas of
shelter, sanitation and ensuring adequate supplies of
clean water. The mobilization of the international
community in the immediate aftermath of the quake
was heartening and unprecedented, but we must
continue to stand with Haiti in the critical months and
years to come.

