Mr. Eick (Germany): I thank the Guatemalan
presidency for having organized this briefing with
representatives of the Special Court for Sierra Leone.
We are also very grateful for the presentations made
today by the Court's President and Prosecutor. I would
like to take this opportunity to commend them once
again for their work and for the Court's achievements. I
would also like to thank the Deputy Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Sierra Leone for her statement.

I would like to make the following points. First,
Germany recognizes the invaluable contribution of the
Special Court to the rule of law, ending impunity and
maintaining peace and security in Sierra Leone and
beyond. By trying those accused of the most horrendous
war crimes and crimes against humanity committed
during the brutal conflict in Sierra Leone, the Court has
brought some justice to the victims of those crimes, and it
continues to stand out as a testament to the determination
and capacity of States to prosecute international crimes
in partnership with the United Nations.

The Court has undertaken major capacity-building
initiatives aimed at rebuilding the criminal justice
system of Sierra Leone. I would also like to express
our appreciation for the important outreach activities
undertaken to inform the people of Liberia and Sierra
Leone of the Court's work.

Secondly, the Court has made legal history on
many accounts. Both its Statute and jurisprudence have
recognized the need to address gender-based crimes,
including forced marriage, and have thus transformed
the commitment contained in resolution 1325 (2000)
into practice. The Court has set a precedent for
prosecuting the crimes of enlisting, recruiting and using
child soldiers, and has thereby shaped international law
in this area, not least by providing important references
for the recent conviction of Thomas Lubanga by the
International Criminal Court (ICC).

Most important, the indictment, trial and conviction
of Charles Taylor represent a landmark in criminal
proceedings against a head of State. Together with
the conviction of Thomas Lubanga by the ICC and of
those responsible for atrocities committed in the former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda by the International Criminal
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia and International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, respectively, the Taylor
case has made clear that the age of accountability has in
fact begun.

Thirdly, the work of the Court is not yet complete.
The appeals process in the Taylor case needs to be
concluded, and several contempt proceedings against
individuals who have threatened witnesses are pending
before the Court.

At the same time, the Court is preparing its transition
into a residual mechanism, with the target date of
30 September 2013. We look forward to the conclusion
of the relevant agreements between the United Nations
and Sierra Leone.

This briefing is a welcome opportunity to highlight
the Council's appreciation of, and full support for, the
Special Court. The draft presidential statement to be
read out later today does just that.

Germany has made significant financial contributions
to the Court's budget, as well as for witness protection
and legal experts programmes. In addition, we have
been actively engaged in ensuring the United Nations
subvention granted to the Court in 2010.

As we are aware of the Court's present dire
financial situation, Germany supports further efforts to
find practical solutions in order to ensure the successful
completion of the Court's work.

