Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): I too would like to
thank Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo, Ambassador
Van Oosterom and Ambassador Vale de Almeida
for their useful briefings and reports to the Security
Council today.

We welcome the Secretary-General's report on the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2018/602),
which endorses the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA) on Iran's nuclear programme. The nuclear
agreement with Iran was negotiated over a period of 12
years and was a success for diplomacy and the peaceful
resolution of conflicts. It has also been endorsed by the
Security Council. As we have consistently stated, its
continued implementation is crucial. The agreement
has ensured the exclusively peaceful nature of the
Iranian nuclear programme, which in itself contributes
to stability in the region and beyond. In that regard,
we note that Iran continues to fulfil its nuclear-related
obligations, according to the most recent report of the
International Atomic Energy Agency.

It is for that reason that as we have stated previously,
we deeply regret the decision by the United States to
withdraw from the agreement. Its withdrawal poses
a serious risk to the international peace and security
architecture and could have negative repercussions for
global non-proliferation efforts. The European Union
(EU) is unified in its full support for the deal and
its implementation. Sweden and the EU will work to
preserve the JCPOA. It is vital to ensure that the deal
continues to be respected and that Iran continues to
fulfil its commitment.

We remain seriously concerned about reported
violations by Iran of the arms embargo and the travel
ban put in place under resolution 2231 (2015). Any new
information pertinent to such cases should be verified
by the Secretariat. We have also expressed our concern
about the previously reported ballistic-missile launches,
which we believe to be inconsistent with resolution
2231 (2015). We echo the Secretary-General's call on
all Member States of the region to take the necessary
steps to fully implement their obligations in relation to
resolution 2231 (2015), including those on the travel ban,
as well as on asset freezes on individuals and entities
on the list maintained pursuant to the resolution. We
would appreciate further information in future reports
with regard to the reported seizure and transfer of
dual-use items to Iran without the prior approval of the
Security Council.

There is strong EU support for broad relations and
dialogue with Iran, including on regional issues, the
worrisome human rights situation and the principles
of the rule of law. All actors in the region, including
Iran, must come together to de-escalate tensions and
contribute to finding political solutions to the ongoing
conflicts and crises in the region. However, those
matters should be treated as separate from the JCPOA
and resolution 2231 (2015).

