Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): The delegation of
Kazakhstan congratulates the Russian Federation on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council. We
wish our colleagues every success in chairing the work
of the Council in the month of June. We also commend
Ms. Wronecka, her team and Poland, as a whole, for
their excellent and professional stewardship of the
Council's activities last month.

Kazakhstan voted in favour of the Kuwaiti draft
resolution S/2018/516 today because we believe that any
type of violence against civilians - including acts of
terror, provocation, incitement and destruction - must
be stopped. Lives were lost and we cannot remain silent.

In addressing the Palestinian-Israeli conflict,
the draft resolution calls on the good offices of
the Secretary-General and the use of peacemaking
mechanisms ofthe United Nations in this context. At the
same time, the document calls on all parties to refrain
from any actions that might aggravate tensions further
or lead to a spiralling of conflict from which we could
not recover. As a supporter of the draft resolution, we
would also like to reiterate our principled position in
favour of resolving disputes through peaceful dialogue,
confidence-building measures and constructive
negotiations between States on the basis of equal
responsibility for peace and security.

Astanacalls ontheworldcommunity and conflicting
parties to make renewed and urgent efforts to create
conditions necessary to relaunch credible negotiations
and to achieve, without delay, the establishment of
an independent Palestinian State, living side by side
in peace and harmony with Israel within secure and
recognized borders. That goal should be reached on the
basis of relevant United Nations resolutions, the Madrid
terms of reference, including the principle of land for
peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet road
map, as called for in resolution 2334 (2016) and other
relevant resolutions.

I conclude by calling on all sides to find common
ground as peace and security are the only possible
solution to this difficult issue.

