Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): In accordance with
paragraph 24 (e) ofresolution 1970 (2011) of26 February
2011, I have the honour to report to the Security
Council on the work of the Committee established
by that resolution. The report covers the period from
9 November 2012 to 14 March 2013, during which time
the members of the Committee met twice in informal
consultations.

In informal consultations on 28 November, the
outgoing Committee Chair took stock of the work
carried out by the Committee since its establishment.
The Committee discussed pending matters and a case
of alleged proliferation of arms from Libya into the
region. Subsequently, on 18 December the Committee
sent a letter seeking further information from the
Member State that had originally referred to that case
in a meeting of the Security Council.

On 30 November, the outgoing Committee Chair
provided an open briefing to all Member States in which
he gave an overview of the work of the Committee
against the backdrop of a continually evolving
sanctions regime. The Panel of Experts, which also
participated, elaborated on the guidance contained in
the Committee's implementation assistance notice no. 2
in relation to arms embargo exemptions. An interactive
discussion followed.

On 15 February 2013, the Committee received the
final report of the Panel of Experts under resolution
2040 (2012). I will briefly recapitulate parts of the
executive summary of that document (S/2012/163, annex).
Concerning the arms embargo, the Panel concluded
that, despite notable efforts, most of the challenges to
implementation and enforcement highlighted in its
previous report continued to exist. In that context, the
Panel noted that Libya's security sector was still in the
process of being built. It found that the proliferation of
weapons from Libya had continued at a worrying scale
and spread into new territory, and it expressed concern
that, while several Member States had notified the
Committee of the transfers of military and other materiel
to the Libyan authorities for security assistance, there
was an absence of any official procurement mechanism
within Libya for such transfers. The Panel also reported
on cases of transfers of arms and ammunition to and
from Libya during the uprising and/or more recently,
and on its ongoing investigations in that regard.

Concerning the assets freeze, the Panel focused its
efforts on the hidden assets of the two listed entities,
the Libyan Investment Authority and the Libyan
Africa Investment Portfolio, and on the assets of the
listed individuals, most of which were believed to be
held abroad in different names. The Panel collected
information regarding the efforts of certain listed
individuals to negate the effects of the assets freeze
measures by the use of front companies, and of
accomplices who had assisted them to that end. The
Panel also reported on the implementation, or lack
thereof, of the assets freeze by certain Member States.

As regards the travel ban, the Panel continued to
seek information on all Violations, with a particular
focus in the report on two listed individuals.

The Committee discussed the report and
recommendations of the Panel of Experts in informal
consultations on 6 March. The report was generally
well received, and the main points that emerged in the
discussion were concern about the level and reach of
arms proliferation from Libya, with acknowledgement
of certain steps taken by the Libyan authorities
towards improving the situation; a desire to apply the
sanctions framework in partnership with the Libyan
authorities and in support of the Libyan-led transition
and institution-building process; ways in which to raise
awareness of the sanctions measures and to remove
any misconceptions of them as barriers to progress;
and how to carry forward the recommendations of
the Panel of Experts. Of the eight recommendations,
the Committee agreed to take follow-up action on
five. A sixth recommendation required no action and
the Committee simply took note of it, while the two
remaining recommendations were addressed to the
Security Council.
Lastly, let me provide the Council with some
updated statistics on the issues dealt with by the
Committee since its last periodic report to the Council
(see S/PV.6857). In relation to the arms embargo,
the Committee approved 10 exemption requests
and received 29 notifications on which no negative
decision was taken. With respect to the assets freeze,
the Committee received four notifications, on which
no negative decision was taken. The Committee also
responded to four requests for guidance from Member
States. Finally, the Committee received a request for
the removal of a name from its travel ban and assets
freeze list. The process of considering that request
is continuing. Going forward, I intend to continue
the good practice established by my predecessor of
reflecting such statistics and issues in a tabular format,
to be updated regularly, and to share them with the
members of the Committee.

