The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of Jamaica.

Let me first of all thank Ambassador Mahbubani,
Chairman of the sanctions Committee established
under resolution 1343 (2001), and the Chairman of the
Panel of Experts on Liberia for introducing the Panel's
report. I also wish to thank the representative of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs for
the briefing we received.

As far as the humanitarian situation in Liberia is
concerned, my delegation has noted the decreasing
donor funding, which has exacerbated the already dire
condition of the Liberian people, and that the presence
of non-governmental organizations, as well as of
humanitarian agencies, is on the decline in Liberia due
to a lack of funding. My delegation urges international
donors to increase funding to meet the humanitarian
needs of the people of Liberia, particularly through the
consolidated appeal, which is presently seriously
underfunded.

The Panel of Experts has presented a report
which is well researched and comprehensive and merits
our careful consideration. As other delegations have
already commented on several aspects of the report, I
will confine myself to addressing a few of the issues
raised.

First, the Panel reports that a steady flow of arms
continues to enter Liberia and that access to small arms
and light weapons has helped to perpetuate the cycle of
violence in the region. The Panel report also cites the
continued activities of armed non-state actors in the
region and the fact that these groups obtain weapons
from state supporters, trade in diamonds, alluvial gold
and other natural resources. It is indeed a tragedy that
these groups continue to profiteer from war, continued
violence and instability in the region. We therefore
concur with the recommendation that the moratorium
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) on small arms be broadened to an
information exchange mechanism for all weapons types
procured by ECOWAS member States for the purpose
of transparency and confidence-building.

We also believe, as we have stated in the past,
that the Security Council and the international
community must assist the States members of
ECOWAS to initiate a common system of controls that
includes the recording, licensing, collection and
destruction of small arms and light weapons. We
support the Panel's recommendations on end-user
certificates and the establishment of a United Nations
working group to develop the modalities for a
standardized end-user certificate.

We remain disappointed that the diamonds
embargo continues to be violated and that the sale of
Liberian diamonds, camouflaged as those from
neighbouring countries, has become pervasive. My
delegation would welcome the establishment of a
diamond certification regime for Liberia and we note
that the Government of Liberia has pledged to establish
such a regime. This system must be credible and
subject to international standards and scrutiny.
With regard to the monitoring of the
implementation of sanctions, the recommendation of
the Security Council Working Group on sanctions for
improving the effectiveness of sanctions regimes
requires the enhancement of internal institutional
mechanisms within the United Nations system,
including the development of a more effective
monitoring capacity within the Secretariat, adequate
staffing, streamlining of procedures and the
harmonization of guidelines. The case of the Angola-
UNITA monitoring mechanism serves as a good
example, and we therefore support the proposal for an
in-house capacity for monitoring the Liberian sanctions
regime. As we continue to debate the effectiveness of
targeted sanctions, critical examination must be made
to ensure that sanctions imposed by the Security
Council do not affect the Liberian population. Every
effort must also be made to reverse the anti-United-
Nations information campaign.

It is also critical that the measures taken are
carefully balanced with an eye to the positive political
developments that are occurring within the Mano River
Union. Our ultimate goal is to ensure that the peace
process in Sierra Leone remains on track and that
normalcy can be restored to the region as soon as
possible.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I call now on the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Liberia, His Excellency Mr. Monie R. Captan.

