Mr. Doutriaux (France) (spoke in French): I
wish to pay tribute to you, Sir, for personally presiding
over our work on Kosovo today. I also wish to thank
He'di Annabi for his very complete briefing on the
situation in Kosovo.

As Mr. Annabi has told us, a few weeks away
from municipal elections in Kosovo, we find ourselves
at a crossroads once again. Those elections will surely
present a new test of inter-ethnic reconciliation in
Kosovo. However, as Mr. Annabi has also told us,
some tension has emerged in the wake of several
arrests in recent weeks. This shows that we still have
some important tasks to accomplish in the near future
and that there are still obstacles to be overcome.

France supports the statement to be made by the
Danish presidency of the European Union. I would
therefore simply wish to emphasize two points.

First, with regard to the important aspects of
human rights, security, combating organized crime and
so forth covered by Mr. Annabi, the message from the
entire Security Council must be one of unanimous
support for the efforts of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), KFOR
and Special Representative Michael Steiner. They are
carrying out an active policy of restoring the rule of
law, fighting crime and, as Ambassador Lavrov has just
noted, combating inter-ethnic incidents and actions
taken against members of other ethnic groups. We must
give full support to UNMIK in this.

We are gratified by what Mr. Annabi explained to
us, that among the Kosovar authorities there is now a
greater understanding of UNMIK's action to restore the
rule of law. The fact remains that the European Union
did express regret at the statement made on 19 August
by the Kosovo Government in that respect. But I
understand that things are now improving and that
UNMIK's action is better understood today.

UNMIK's action to restore the rule of law
involves all ethnicities. The support we give to
UNMIK'S activities in this regard applies to actions by
both sides. It is important to recall this today.

A second point concerns the elections, which will
be an important test on 26 October. We are pleased to
hear from Mr. Annabi that preparations are proceeding
well, that many voters have already registered,
whatever their ethnic affiliations, and that many
candidates have already come forward. The Serbian
authorities have called upon the Serb community to
participate fully in the elections. This is, of course, a
very good thing. The international community, the
Security Council, will be following the conduct of the
elections very closely. For us, this will be another test
in the restoration of a fully normal situation in Kosovo.

Let me conclude by briefly recalling my country's
important commitment to Kosovo in UNMIK and
KFOR. The French Minister for Foreign Affairs will be
in Kosovo on 7 September and, the day before, in
neighbouring Bosnia and Herzegovina.

