Mr. Onemola (Nigeria): At its 2984th meeting,
on 29 April 1991, the Security Council, through
resolution 690 (1991), established the United Nations
Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara
(MINURSO). Central to the Mission's mandate is a
referendum in Western Sahara as part of a peaceful
11-31280
settlement of an intractable problem. In essence,
MINURSO derives its legal basis and relevance from
that resolution. We are deeply troubled by the lack of a
reference to resolution 690 (1991) in the current draft
resolution (S/2011/268).

Paragraph 120 of the Secretary-General's report
(S/2011/249) reinforces the point that the decision of
the fate of Western Sahara lies with the people of the
territory. The Security Council has supported this
principle through its positions on South Sudan and,
now, in North Africa. The people of Western Sahara
must be given a similar opportunity to determine their
own destiny. Indeed, the ongoing developments in the
Middle East and North Africa are a strong reminder
that the status quo is no longer tenable.

All Members of the United Nations have
emphasized the need for coherence and consistency in
the policies we promote. In 2005, human rights
received a major boost with the establishment of the
Human Rights Council. Collectively, Member States
reaffirmed their commitment and obligation to promote
universal respect for and observance and protection of
all human rights and fundamental freedoms for all in
accordance with the United Nations Charter. That is
even more so in cases where parties to conflict accuse
each other of rights violations. The intolerable human
rights violations in Western Sahara require constant
monitoring and appropriate rapid-response capability,
which only a permanent and neutral international
human rights monitoring and reporting body could
provide.

Nigeria is convinced of the importance of
upholding human rights as a universal principle. The
Council should be seen to promote and vigorously
defend human rights in all circumstances. The
Saharawi Arab Democratic Republic, a full-fledged
member of the African Union (AU) since 1984,
remains the only country on the continent still awaiting
the completion of its process of decolonization. It is
inconceivable that neither the African Union nor a
member State of the AU is a member of the Group of
Friends of Western Sahara. We believe that the time
has come to involve African Union countries in the
efforts to find an international solution to the conflict.
Nobody could be better friends of the people of
Western Sahara than the representatives of the regional
group to which it belongs.
3
My delegation will vote for this draft resolution,
but we hope that, in the future, some of the concerns
we have raised will be considered.

