Mr. Denisov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I would like to join others, Mr. President, in
wishing you well during your presidency and I would
also like to extend my thanks to the Permanent
Representative of Spain.

The Israeli-Palestinian situation is still moving in
the wrong direction. On all sides of the conflict there is
still deep-seated, mutual distrust and a spirit of
confrontation. As a result, there is violence on both
sides, Israeli and Palestinian civilians are dying - and
we extend our condolences to their families - and
homes and the civilian infrastructure are being
destroyed.

Like many who spoke before us, we, too, confirm
Israel's right to self-defence - to protect itself fully
against terrorist raids. However, actions by the Israeli
army in the northern part of Gaza clearly go well
beyond the level required to crush the activities of the
extremists. We would urge Israel to demonstrate
restraint and to understand that problems, even security
problems, cannot be solved by force.

We cannot fail to note that what led to the current
clashes was the rocket attack by the Palestinians
against the Israeli town of Sderot, in which children's
lives were lost. We would like to emphasize that unless
the Palestinian leadership effectively struggles to
control the terrorist groups, then a recurrence of what
is happening in Gaza today is unavoidable -
regardless of any draft resolution on the subject that
may be before the Council for adoption.

Genuine reform of the Palestinian security
services is long overdue and it cannot be put off
further. Responsibility for dragging out decisive action
on that matter lies squarely with the Palestinian
National Administration.

The crisis in Gaza threatens implementation of
the provisions of the road map. We would like to recall
that there is no alternative to the road map. There is no
alternative to the logic of reciprocal steps and the
strategic goal of the road map - the establishment of
two States, coexisting side by side. The clashes in Gaza
severely complicates the implementation of the road
map.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that
settling all aspects of the situation in the Middle East is
something that can be done only through a
comprehensive approach.

