The President: I thank Ms. Viotti for her briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Poland.

First, let me very warmly thank Ms. Maria Luiza
Ribeiro Viotti for her insightful and comprehensive
briefing on the recent developments in the Middle East
and their impact on international peace and security.

Let me also say that Poland fully subscribes to
the statement to be delivered today by the Charge
d'affaires ad interim ofthe Delegation of the European
Union (EU) .

Middle Eastern issues have been very frequently
discussed in the Security Council Chamber.
Unfortunately, solutions worked out so far have not
provided peace and stability. In recent years the region
has been ravaged by a wave of violent conflicts in a
number of its once-peaceful countries.

What we need is a positive approach in order to
restore peace and economic growth in the Middle East.
Uneven distribution of wealth generates inequality,
disrupts social cohesion and distorts economies.
Therefore, promoting entrepreneurship, especially
among young people, strengthening good governance,
combating corruption and ensuring access to education
are key to addressing social issues and releasing the
economic potential of the region.

Today's meeting comes at a critical time. Current
uncertainties about the dynamics in the Middle East
are again keeping the whole region in the political
spotlight. The war in Syria has not ended, and any
subsequent escalation might bring about shattering
consequences for the Syrian people. We are witnessing
in Yemen the world's largest humanitarian crisis, with
13 million people facing starvation. A political solution
acceptable to both sides in the peace process between
Israel and Palestine remains elusive. Growing tensions
in the Persian Gulf may lead, through a minor accident
or miscalculation, to a military confrontation.

These tensions have a variety of root
causes - demographic pressure, weak economies
and governance, violent extremism, radicalization
and illegal mass migration. People in Syria, Yemen
and Palestine face daily struggles with deprivation,
food shortages, low-quality medical care and lack of
education. It is our common responsibility and moral
obligation to find a way to end the suffering of civilians
and bring peace and stability back to the region. The
Security Council should actively support those willing
to act in accordance with international law to counter
aggressive policies and activities in the region.

Security in the Middle East is integrally linked
to the structure of the global order. Conflicts and
tensions in the region trigger worldwide political,
economic and social consequences, such as refugees
and increased migration, which are among the most
urgent global issues.

International terrorism represents another
challenge. In Iraq and Syria, the defeat of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant is an important step. But we
are still far from eliminating the scourge of terrorism
in the region and the threat that it poses around the
world. In our view, the aim is to set up financial rules
and regulations in such a way as to prevent terrorists
from using existing gaps to conduct their activities.
The return of foreign fighters also poses a threat to
their homelands.

Another challenge is the proliferation of missiles
capable of delivering weapons of mass destruction,
particularly to non-State actors. The tragic consequences
of the loopholes in the control regime have been
repeatedly observed, inter alia, in the case of Houthi
attacks in Yemen. It should be reiterated that resolution
1540 (2004) states that all countries should introduce
domestic controls on technologies related to weapons of
mass destruction and their delivery systems.

We are also concerned, as a European Union
member that is a party to the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action (JCPOA), about Iran's announcement that it
will not commit to fully abide by the provisions of the
agreement. Iran should refrain from actions that could
further undermine the implementation of both the
JCPOA and resolution 2231 (2015).

The freedom and security of maritime navigation
in the region is an ongoing concern. Recent attacks
and seizures of ships in the Gulf pose a direct threat
to the security of maritime navigation. The United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea must be
fully observed.

With its ample resources and strategic location, the
Middle East plays a key role in securing global energy
supplies. There is a need to strengthen the security
of critical energy infrastructure in order to minimize
fluctuations in crude oil prices and further ensure the
security of supplies.

Ensuring security in cyberspace is another key
challenge is. Responsible behaviour in cyberspace
by nations in the Middle East can reinforce
regional cyberstability.

It is often reiterated at the United Nations that there
is a strong link between human rights and peace and
security. The observance of fundamental human rights
in the Middle East, such as free and fair elections, the
freedom of speech and the rule of law, is of particular
importance. It applies also to the rights of women, who
are predestined to fight hatred and to build stability and
social peace.

Poland organized a Security Council briefing last
week (see S/PV.8596) on international humanitarian

law on the occasion of the seventieth anniversary of the
Geneva Conventions. It is our common responsibility
to observe international law and protect the most
vulnerable groups in armed conflicts, including
children, women, people with disabilities and members
of religious minorities.
In two days' time, on 22 August here in New York,
we will celebrate the International Day Commemorating
the Victims of Acts of Violence Based on Religion
or Belief - established by the General Assembly on
the initiative of Poland. Advancing the security and
safety of religious minorities in the Middle East is our
common obligation. The rich culture of the Middle East
region also requires protection. We should safeguard
tangible and intangible heritage alike, which helps
develop interreligious and intercultural dialogue as a
vital platform for reconciliation.

We need a bold initiative to address the challenges
to peace and security in the region. Poland, in line
with the EU position, underscores that solutions to the
Middle East's problems require multilateral approaches.
Building on that assumption, in February Poland
and the United States jointly organized the Warsaw
Ministerial to Promote a Future of Peace and Security
in the Middle East, which launched the Warsaw process.
It will consist of working groups dealing with the main
horizontal topics that I have just presented. The groups
will cover counter-terrorism and illicit financing,
missile proliferation, maritime and aviation security,
cybersecurity, energy security, as well as humanitarian
and human rights issues.

The working groups are scheduled to convene
in October and November, and the results of their
discussions willbepresentedatthe high-levelconference
in the first months of 2020. We will be encouraging
countries from around the globe to join these efforts.
We trust that the Warsaw process will contribute to the
resolution of the multifaceted problems of the Middle
East and bring more stability and confidence to the
region and beyond.

We need to create the conditions for stability and
well-being in the region. Only then will the Middle East
be able to unlock its enormous potential as a valuable
contributor to global peace and security.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I call on His Excellency Mr. Michael Pompeo,
Secretary of State of the United States of America.

