Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): I would like
to thank His Excellency Secretary of State Tillerson
for convening today's debate on the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, which is a topic that has
unfortunately become highly relevant in the light of
recent events.

For the people and the Government of Kazakhstan,
nuclear disarmament, non-proliferation and nuclear
security have been essential priorities in our national
policy since independence. From the time we joined the
United Nations, in March 1992, my country has worked
with steadfast determination to promote disarmament
and non-proliferation globally. That is why I hope
today's meeting will help the Security Council to come
up with collective multilateral action to bring peace to
the Korean peninsula and find ways to its achieve its
denuclearization.

My country strongly believes that the Security
Council, as the single body entrusted with maintaining
international peace and security, should preserve its
unity at this critical stage. In that regard, we welcome
the Council's recent statement stressing the importance
of working to reduce tensions on the Korean peninsula
and beyond. We are all pained to see how the situation
in and around the Korean peninsula has worsened with
the passage of time, resulting in a complete impasse. It
is worrisome that the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea continues to lunch ballistic missiles and conduct
nuclear tests in flagrant violation ofall relevant Security
Council resolutions.

As one of the Chairs of the ninth Conference on
Facilitating the Entry into Force of the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) and as the Chairman
of The Hague Code of Conduct against Ballistic Missile
Proliferation, my country makes every effort to promote
the nuclear non-proliferation process. Five nuclear
tests have been conducted so far, and a sixth could be
around the corner, if we do not take real action aimed
at defusing tensions. We therefore urge the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea to refrain from actions that

have a negative impact on the nuclear-disarmament
and non-proliferation process and pose a threat to both
regional and global security.

We call on all Member States to strictly observe
the sanctions regime put in place under all the
relevant Security Council resolutions aimed at the
denuclearization of the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea, as well as under the CTBT, which calls upon
all States to refrain from conducting any nuclear-
weapon-test explosions or any other type of nuclear
explosion and to maintain the moratoriums. In taht
regard, Kazakhstan co-sponsored resolutions 2270
(2016), 2310 (2016) and 2321 (2016).

The denuclearization of the Korean peninsula is a
key element in preserving broader security across Asia
and Central Asia. Possession of nuclear arms by the
North Korean regime will create a precedent that will
undoubtedly lead to an escalation of the regional arms
race, given that parties might be tempted to engage in
further proliferation in order to balance out the nuclear
threat posed by the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea.

We would like to remind the Council that the
principal position of Kazakhstan is based not only on
the most severe condemnation of the use of weapons of
mass destruction by any party but also on the resolution
of conflicts through dialogue and negotiations. I would
like to inform the Council that Kazakhstan is still
struggling with the devastating legacy of the Cold War,
which is why the closure of the second-largest nuclear-
test site and the renunciation of the world's fourth-
largest nuclear arsenal remain among the proudest
achievements of my country.

Soon, together with other sponsors, we are going
to launch in Kazakhstan the first-ever International
Atomic Energy Agency Low-Enriched Uranium
Bank. As a non-permanent member of this organ, we
bring the same passion and commitment to nuclear
non-proliferation as one of the firm principles, goals
and priorities underlying our work, as envisioned by my
President, Mr. Nursultan A. Nazarbayev, in his address
at the general debate of the General Assembly at its
seventieth session (see A/70/PV.13) and in his manifesto
entitled "The World. The Twenty-First Century".

I believe that all of the foregoing gives Kazakhstan
the strong moral right to call upon all Member
States - and first and foremost the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea - to make every effort
to resolve this troublesome situation. Achieving this
goal requires, above all, intensified dialogue among
all stakeholders in regional and global security, and my
country is ready to contribute to that end. My country's
non-nuclear status is the most convincing example of
how the non-nuclear approach to State development
is the only promising one. We call on the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea to opt for the same choice.
It has been proved that there is no situation for which
there is no peaceful solution, and North Korea is no
exception.

As an example, in 2013, Kazakhstan's status as a
trusted mediator allowed it to facilitate the talks on
the Iranian nuclear programme, which consequently
contributed to the resumption of negotiations between
the P5+1 and Iran. We are convinced that there is no other
option available to us but the collective commitment
to international obligations taken in accordance with
Security Council resolutions.

Kazakhstan believes that now is the right time and
is ready to work with all Member States to eliminate
the nuclear threat for the sake of our world. Complete
nuclear disarmament and the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea's giving up of its nuclear ambitions
could be ensured by a truce backed by the permanent
members ofthe Security Council, guaranteeing political
and military stability on the peninsula. Ifit chooses the
path of peaceful coexistence, the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea will receive significant benefits
resulting from closer engagement with the Asia-Pacific
community.

Such an approach, combined with a comprehensive
and holistic regional strategy, will ensure stability for
the country, the peninsula and the wider subregion. We
call upon all parties, all relevant stakeholders and all
Member States to take balanced and thoughtful actions
that do not lead to irreversible consequences. We call on
all parties concerned to refrain from actions that could
increase the risk of a military escalation and further
tensions in the region.

