Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): I
would like to begin by expressing our condolences to the
United States delegation following the tragic helicopter
accident. I would also like to extend my condolences
to the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF).

I thank Mr. Jan Kubis for having presented the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/721). Through
Mr. Kubis, I would also like to congratulate the entire
staff of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA). I also thank Ambassador
Tanin for having shared with the Council the efforts
being carried out by his country to meet the manifold
challenges it is facing.

The report of the Secretary-General takes stock of
a real momentum taking place in the preparations of
the presidential and provincial elections scheduled for
2014, which are part and parcel of the transformation
process that will come with the withdrawal of ISAF
from Afghanistan.

That momentum has been supported by the

appointment on 15 September 2013 by President Karzai
of the Electoral Complaints Commission and the
allocation of resources so that the Commission can do
its work. The only concern in that respect are the calls
by the Taliban and the armed faction of Hezb-e Islami
to boycott the elections and the attacks on four voter
registration offices that cost the life of a registration
official. We commend UNAMA for its effort to launch
local dialogues to mitigate ethnic and intertribal
tensions during this decisive moment in the electoral
process. We also commend its valuable support for
national reconciliation.

The efforts on the part of both the international
community and the Afghan Government to ensure that
Afghanistan takes the lead in its own security sector
are seen in the expanded capacity of the security
institutions, the increase in the size of the Afghan army
to 185,300 enlisted men and of the air force to 6,800,
and, more symbolically, in the launch of the programme
to recruit women.
We deplore the continued violence committed
by those hostile to the Government, targeting local
security institutions and even ISAF premises. Civilians
continue to die in the conflict, with a 13 per cent rise
in civilian casualties in the first 10 months of 2013 as
compared with the same period in 2012.

On a positive note, we welcome the voluntary return
of 7,907 refugees, bringing to 36,194 the total number
of refugees who preferred to return during the first
10 months of 2013 and to take advantage of aid from
United Nations refugees. That is a sign of optimism on
the part of the population with regard to the prospects
for stability and peace coming to their country. In the
same context, we hail the endeavours to carry out the
polio vaccination campaign that has helped 8,300,000
children under five years of age.

The regional impact of the security situation in
Afghanistan shows how important it is for there to be
cooperation amongst the countries of the region with
respect to political, security and economic issues. The
momentum given to bilateral and regional relations
deserves to be pursued, intensified and diversified in
the interest of all States in the region.

The challenges that Afghanistan faces are great
and many. Political support, economic, security and
humanitarian aid remain vital to helping the country
consolidate the process of stabilization that would lead
to true stability. As we approach the holiday season, we
wish to express our hope that 2014 will be a decisive
year for peace and security in Afghanistan and for all
countries in the region.

