Mr. Braun (Germany): At the outset, let me express
our gratitude to the Republic of Korea for convening
this open debate on non-proliferation.

Germany aligns itself with the statement delivered
by Special Envoy Bylica on behalf of the European
Union and wishes to make the following remarks in its
national capacity.

Today's anniversary is significant. On 28 April
2004, the Security Council unanimously adopted
resolution 1540 (2004), and, ifI may add, the Council
did so at the time under the presidency of Germany.
After 10 years, the relevance of resolution 1540 (2004)
is as high as ever. Attempts by non-State actors to
acquire weapons of mass destruction and related
material remain one of the most severe threats to global
security and to humankind.

In that context, we commend in particular the
tireless efforts of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004) under your able leadership,
Mr. President, as well as its 1540 Group of Experts.
We acknowledge the important role of the Committee
as a forum for assistance matchmaking in moving
implementation forward. Germany continues to
provide substantial direct support and assistance
to other States' implementation efforts, including
through implementing the European Union's assistance
programme in the area of export controls.

We welcome the efforts of the Chair to look at ways
to enhance assistance as a key element of resolution
1540 (2004), and would be happy to see that aspect
incorporated in a medium-term strategy yet to be
elaborated. We also believe that promoting synergies
with other counter-terrorism and non-proliferation
bodies would be beneficial to enhance implementation.

Let me highlight one aspect ofparticular relevance.
The implementation ofresolution 1540 (2004) needs the
active involvement of all the relevant stakeholders. In
that context, the role of industry and the private sector
remains a central concern of the German Government.
That is why two years ago we initiated the so-called
Wiesbaden process in cooperation with the Secretariat.
Wiesbaden, incidentally, is the name of one of
Germany's most beautiful towns in the neighbourhood
of the Frankfurt airport, which is always worth visiting
in the Rhine valley. It is there where Germany hosted
two major international industry outreach conferences
on resolution 1540 (2004). They were aimed at
facilitating the Committee's dialogue with industry and
strengthening the partnership between Governments
and the private sector. This year, we envisage a
conference entitled Governance and Compliance
Management. It will further explore how industry can
complement States' implementation efforts in various
areas, such as biosecurity, chemical and nuclear
security, transport, brokering and export control. We
are confident that this first-ever dialogue process with
industry provides valuable input for the Committee's
work, not only in View of its upcoming comprehensive
review in 2016, but also for the Committee's strategy
and future priorities.

Very much in the spirit of the Wiesbaden process
and following the call of the 1540 Committee Chair,
I am pleased to announce that Germany has just
finalized, together with Council member Australia, a
paper on effective practices on how to engage industry
in the field of export controls. We hope that it will serve
as a tool for reference and may guide or assist other
States in their implementation efforts.

Let me, once again reaffirm Germany's strong
commitment to the full and universal implementation
of Council resolution 1540 (2004).

