Mr. Wetland (Norway): I thank you,
Mr. President, for the opportunity to address this
important issue. We also thank Under-Secretaries-
General Le Roy and Malcorra and General Agwai for
their important briefings. The challenges to United
Nations peacekeeping must continue to be a top
priority on our agenda, and we appreciate the efforts of
the Security Council to intensify dialogue with
Member States on that issue.

Let me begin by reiterating a point made by our
French colleague in the Security Council debate on
29 June (see S/PV.6153). He said that our ability to
protect civilians is the standard by which United
Nations peacekeeping will be judged. The renewed

fighting in eastern Congo last week reminded us of
how much that ability is needed. Thousands of
civilians have been forced to flee their homes, and we
know only too well the suffering that follows in the
wake of such incidents. Girls and women face the
additional horrors of sexual violence, and we must put
forces in place that can effectively deter such crimes.
We look forward to discussing this further on Friday.

My second point concerns the need to meet the
ever-increasing demand for peacekeepers and to secure
the necessary resources. While we need to solicit more
contributions from present contributors, we also need
greater commitment from countries not yet
contributing to their full potential. Peacekeeping is a
global responsibility and calls for the widest possible
engagement of the international community.

My third point concerns the need for mandates to
be accompanied by sufficient resources. Committing
men and women in uniform to potentially life-
threatening assignments in foreign countries is one of
the most difficult decisions a country can take. But
when such decisions are made, Governments and their
people must be certain that missions have the resources
to fulfil their mandates, with the lowest possible level
of risk for personnel in the field. That means proper
training, proper equipment and full capacity in line
with the demands made.

We need to move from a somewhat obsessive
focus on troop numbers to a focus on quality and total
capability. That means that we have to develop
standards and link them to training, equipping and
delivery on the ground. We are pleased to see that this
is another key point made in the New Horizon
non-paper. In addition, let me emphasize the need to
develop common standards with key partners, such as
NATO, the African Union and the European Union.
That will facilitate cooperation, whether it is a joint
effort, as in Kosovo, or a sequential arrangement, as in
Chad.

My fourth and final point relates to the
relationship among peacemaking, peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and development. Peacekeeping is part
of a wider United Nations and global peace, security
and development effort. Mandates must be aligned
with other, complementing initiatives and supported
politically and financially.

Norway supports the Secretariat's
recommendation that missions be requested to include
information on progress in peacebuilding in their
assessment of mandated tasks. Missions should also
report on related actions of United Nations agencies,
funds and programmes and other partners, and all
partners must be called upon to draw attention to
critical gaps.

In conclusion, let me underline the fact that the
most important partner in the United Nations
peacekeeping partnership is the host country. That
needs to be foremost in our minds when we continue
this discussion in the coming months. The international
community can and should assist, but it is the host
country that bears the responsibility for finding
solutions that will last. We need an open and honest
discussion on how we in the international community
can work together to better keep the promises we make
to those in need, and how we can make peacekeeping
deliver more at a time when so much is called for.
Norway looks forward to being an active participant in
that process and to continuing the dialogue.

