Mrs. Eilon Shahar (Israel): At the outset, allow
me to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your able
stewardship of the Council during this month and to
thank you for convening this debate. I also wish to
thank Under-Secretary-General John Holmes for his
informative briefing and to congratulate him and the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs on
their important ongoing humanitarian work on the
ground.

Israel assigns vital importance to the protection
of civilians in armed conflict and is encouraged by the
continued efforts of the Security Council and the
Secretary-General and his staff in this area. We believe
that all individuals should live without fear of physical,
sexual, psychological or other forms of abuse, which
stem from or are aggravated by conflict. But, as
Mr. Holmes noted, lip service is easy; effective action
is much harder. Israel agrees, and I wish to share with
members our perspective on the matter.
A quick snapshot of conflicts around the world
reminds us of the almost daily violence committed
against civilians and of the failure of a number of
States to protect their civilians from such immediate
threats to life and security, triggered by forces of
extremism and instability. Sadly, it is primarily
civilians who are caught in the crossfire, bearing the
tragic toll of casualties and victimhood.

Civilians are often exploited by their own
insurgents who intentionally and cynically choose to
operate from densely populated areas, in blatant
violation of the basic principle of the distinction
between combatants and civilians. The persistent
violence and the culture of impunity in Darfur have
contributed to the continuation of the dire situation in
which rape is used as a weapon of war and sexual and
gender-based violence are widespread, including in
camps for internally displaced persons. Perpetrators
should be brought to justice in accordance with
international law and the basic dictates of humanity,
and immediate humanitarian action should be
enhanced. In that regard, Israel hopes for an immediate
deployment of the African Union-United Nations
hybrid force to the region to ensure the protection of
civilians, who have been denied it for so long.

Similarly, the safety and access of humanitarian
personnel and journalists, who work as professional
independents, must be ensured. Humanitarian workers
provide essential services on the ground, and their vital
work must not be hampered. The rise in violence
directed at journalists and other associated personnel
was addressed by the Council last December in its
adoption of resolution 1738 (2006). The Council
rightfully took a strong stance in condemning the
intentional attacks against journalists, and parties in
conflict should be mindful of the obligations in this
area. Additionally, the masquerading of terrorists and
militants in the vehicles of journalists must be
forcefully condemned.

When sovereign States fail to govern responsibly
according to their duties under international law,
terrorists and other non-State actors seek to take
advantage of the void. We have witnessed that deeply
troubling phenomenon too many times in our region.
This past Sunday, in a moment of deja vu, we saw
rockets once again launched directly at civilians in
northern Israel by terrorist factions in southern
Lebanon.
Moreover, the blatant disregard of terrorists for
the sanctity of human life is a brutal maliciousness that
we have seen, even among their own populations. The
abuse, manipulation and endangerment of civilians are
at the heart of terrorist thinking and tactics. In
Lebanon, Hizbullah stored its rockets inside homes and
launched attacks from positions nestled within the
fabric of civilian life and in proximity to places of
worship and hospitals. In the Gaza Strip, Palestinian
terrorists firing Qassam rockets use similar tactics. As
we see, terrorists groups such as Hizbullah and Hamas
share those tactics.

Additionally, in Gaza we have seen the violence
against Israel accompanied by intra-Palestinian
violence, with blatant disregard for the rights of
civilians caught amid the fighting of warring factions.
In this case, civilians are not merely used as shields to
mask acts of violence; in actual fact, they are
deliberately targeted.

The vigilance of the international community in
protecting civilians, particularly in cases where States
are not able to do so, must not wane. The international
community's choice to deal with these situations could
save the lives of countless civilians.

To this effect, there should be greater focus on
timely and credible prevention measures, in addition to
restorative actions, in order to ensure that humanitarian
agencies can be effective in pursuing protection
concerns in the field. Effective action also requires
consistent follow-up. The Council must be proactive in
monitoring the implementation of these resolutions to
avert further crises stemming from State neglect.

Israel recognizes that it is the duty of all States,
first and foremost, to protect their civilians from all
harm. Equally important is the obligation of all States
to ensure that attacks are not launched from their own
sovereign territory.

Failure to hold accountable terrorist groups, as
well as those States which provide safe haven and
refuge for them, will only encourage extremists to
increase their abuse and manipulation.

