Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Secretary-General for his statement, which
underscored the need to act to preserve the two-State
solution.

I once again express my warmest congratulations
to the Jordanian presidency of the Security Council as
well as our profound appreciation of your presence, Sir,
at this important debate.

Since last summer, France has maintained a simple
position - the two-State solution is fast disappearing.
The continuation of the illegal settlement activity
undermines, day on day, the viability of a Palestinian
State on the ground. The political vacuum raises the
risk of escalation. In Israel and Palestine alike, public
opinion is becoming radicalized and support for the
two-State solution is dissipating.

There is therefore an urgent need to end the
downward spiral we are witnessing. To do so, we must
reaffirm our commitment to the two-State solution and
thence map out a political path leading to the creation of
a Palestinian State alongside that of Israel. Without such
a political path, we will have to face the continuation
of the unilateral strategies under way, which will serve
only to fuel the mistrust between the parties. It is in
no one's interests for security cooperation to cease; for
the Palestinian Authority, in which we have invested
so much, to founder; or for diplomatic Spats to ensue in
international institutions, always with the underlying
risk of an explosion in violence. We cannot pretend that
these risks do not exist.

France's analysis for several months now has been
based on a simple premise - only with renewed and
strengthened international support can the parties
commit resolutely to the necessary path of peace.
Everything in the recent past shows how vain it would
be to hope that Israel and the Palestinians can resume,
and less likely still conclude, negotiations without a
major change in methodology. The peace process, as
we have been going about it for more than 20 years, has
not succeeded. To pretend otherwise is tantamount to
accepting the irreversible deterioration of the situation
on the ground.

France renewed efforts to mobilize the Security
Council last autumn, when we listened to the calls for
patience from our partners - that we had to wait for
primaries then for elections. We must now take stock of
the Israeli elections and statements made around them.

Against the present backdrop, the international
community has two options. The first option is to
manage the crisis with stop-gap solutions, hoping that
the degree of violence remains contained and waiting
for better timing to address the underlying problems.
There will, unfortunately, be good reasons to move the
goalposts, for instance to the formation of the Israeli
Government, regional events or yet further elections.
What will happen tomorrow, while the settlements,
violence and tension carry us ever closer to a point of
no return, when everybody loses?

The second option is to take action. This is France's
choice, not only as it is our responsibility as a member
of the Security Council but also because we have a
direct interest in the emergence of a Palestinian State
to contribute to stability in the Middle East. The choice
to act must, in our view, be based on two particular
elements. First, the international community must
act jointly. France wants to promote a new approach
incorporating a greater number of partners in addition
to the central role of the United States - namely, the
European Union, the League of Arab States and the
permanent members of the Security Council - with
a view to helping the parties to make the difficult
compromises that are necessary for peace and to
support them in their implementation.

Moreover, the Security Council can provide useful
support in this process and must be a central player in
the conflict. This does not mean imposing a solution
on the parties, of course, but setting the framework
for negotiations. Indeed, it is the responsibility of the
Security Council to adopt a consensual and balanced
resolution that finally sets the parametres of the final
status and a timetable for negotiations. Almost 50
years since the adoption of resolution 242 (1967), this
is an imperative step. Such a resolution must provide
a credible basis for a resumption of negotiations and
generating the necessary renewed healthy political
momentum.
Let us be frank; there will be no Palestinian State,
and therefore no peace in the Middle East, without a
strengthened collective commitment on the part of the
international community. We cannot give up and we
cannot resign ourselves to a status quo that would lead
inevitable to disaster. We believe more fervently than
ever that there is no alternative to the establishment of
a Palestinian State: it is in the interests of all parties and
above all of peace. That is why it is vital to ensure that
the Security Council shoulders its responsibility.

