Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks Mr. Tanin. Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Kosovo, for his briefing and
welcomes the presence and statement of His Excellency
Mr. Dacic', First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Serbia. I have also listened
carefully to the statement made by Ms. Citaku.

Currently, the situation in the Kosovo region
involves numerous complex factors. Resolution 1244
(1999) provides an important legal basis for resolving
the question of Kosovo. All parties should act in
accordance with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and within the framework
of the relevant Security Council resolutions and seek
through dialogue and negotiations a solution that is
acceptable to all.

China respects the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Serbia. We understand Serbia's legitimate
concern on the question of Kosovo and commend its
efforts to strive for a political settlement.

China welcomes the continuation of the high-level
dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina. We hope that
the two sides will reaffirm their strong commitment
to a political settlement, continue their dialogue in a
pragmatic and constructive manner, implement existing
agreements and gradually increase mutual trust so as
to build up favourable conditions for finding a lasting
solution that is acceptable to all parties concerned.

Tolerance, reconciliation and peaceful coexistence
serve the fundamental interests of all ethnic
communities in Kosovo and are necessary for achieving
development. China hopes that the relevant parties will
always put the well-being of their people first, protect
the legitimate rights and interests of all communities
in Kosovo, refrain from action and rhetoric that might
escalate the situation, and safeguard the peace, stability
and development of the Balkans.

The sustained attention of the Security Council
on the question of Kosovo is crucial for promoting its
proper settlement. China supports the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
under the leadership of Special Representative Tanin
in implementing its mandate and in cooperating
constructively with all parties. We hope that UNMIK,
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
and the Kosovo Force will work in close collaboration
and play a constructive role in improving the situation
on the ground and achieving a proper settlement of the
Kosovo issue.

