Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank all of today's briefers for their
comprehensive overview of the situation on the
political, military and humanitarian fronts in Yemen.

Russia and Yemen are linked by a tradition of
decades of friendly relations imbued with mutual trust
and multifaceted ties in many areas. We are deeply
pained by what is happening in Yemen today. We have
been compelled to acknowledge that the situation in
Yemen is still tragic. Despite the efforts being made both
through the United Nations and bilateral channels, the
implementation of the Stockholm Agreement, including
the redeployment of armed forces in Al-Hudaydah, the
exchange of prisoners and de-escalation in Taiz, has
stalled. The opposing parties are blaming one another.
That must stop. We call on all Yemenis to abandon
unilateral steps, which undermine the prospects for
launching a full-fledged political process and make
the United Nations mediation efforts very difficult.
We are awaiting the implementation of the first phase
of redeployment.

While the fragile ceasefire regime in Al-Hudaydah
is holding, we are concerned about the intensification
of hostilities in other parts of the country. The
growing tension is complicating the efforts to begin
redeployment. All the parties to the conflict in Yemen
should refrain from aggressive rhetoric and unilateral
action and show restraint. The principle of country first
and foremost, rather than individual narrow interests,
should define the attitude of all the parties.

We want to emphasize that the chances do exist
of making progress in Al-Hudaydah and transitioning
to discussing the parameters for a settlement, which is
what Martin Griffiths is working on. The international
community should collectively support his efforts.
Coordinating the work of all stakeholders will enable
us to unblock the other aspects of the Stockholm
Agreement. Attempts to marginalize individual parties
to the conflict are counterproductive. We have to
understand that the package of accords developed and
agreed on in Sweden is a unique opportunity to break
out of the closed circle of the tragedy in Yemen. We
commend the selflessness and professionalism of the
work of Martin Griffiths, Michael Lollesgaard and our
colleagues on the humanitarian front in getting the
Yemeni parties to implement the agreements reached
in Stockholm.

Russia will continue to support United Nations
mediation efforts in Yemen in its national capacity,
cooperating with regional and international partners
while making use of its contacts with all the parties.
If they are to succeed, the United Nations mediation
efforts must be based on the cooperation of the parties
to the conflict themselves as well as on regional and
international assistance. There can be no military
solution to the conflict in Yemen. Everyone has to
acknowledge that and collaborate with the United
Nations on that basis. We are certain that the further
deployment ofthe United Nations Mission to Support the
Hudaydah Agreement will facilitate the disengagement
process of the opposing forces and will also help to
stabilize the situation in Yemen as a whole.

The people of Yemen desperately need peace. We
urge all the parties to de-escalate. We demand that they
put aside all their differences immediately, cooperate
with the United Nations and start working in earnest
to improve the disastrous humanitarian situation in the
country, the scale of which Mr. Lowcock spoke about
today. A majority of the Yemeni population is starving
and in need of one or another kind of assistance - and
this is the twenty-first century. The country is once
again on the brink of a cholera epidemic, and children
are suffering the most, as Ms. Gamba reported. We
all have to assume that even if the conflict ends in the
near future, the people of Yemen will be dependent on
outside help for a long time. The civil and economic
infrastructure is in ruins and the cost of rebuilding it is
rising steadily every day. We urge the donor community
to recognize the extent of the problem and respond to
the Emergency Relief Coordinator's appeal. Bringing
emergency humanitarian assistance to the people of
Yemen is a priority. Like many other States Members
of the United Nations, including Yemen's neighbours,
we will continue helping to assist the country's long-
suffering people.

Another important point is that humanitarian
assistance to Yemen from abroad should be distributed
in a non-discriminatory manner among the entire
population in all parts of the country, regardless of
who controls which parts of it, and that is exactly
Russia's approach. We want to draw the Council's
attention to the importance of complying strictly with
the provisions of international humanitarian law and
ensuring unimpeded access for humanitarian workers.
The indiscriminate use of force, including strikes on
civilian targets, is unacceptable.

We want to point out, however, that despite the
importance of providing humanitarian assistance,
the answer to Yemen's challenges lies in reaching a
sustainable and comprehensive political settlement.
That is the framework in which the violence can be
stopped, functioning Government bodies established,
the army restored and economic recovery begun. An
all-important issue in Yemen is combating terrorism,
which is exploiting the current state of chaos. We
would like to emphasize that establishing the political
process in Yemen would contribute significantly
to stabilizing the situation in the entire region to a
similar degree. Launching a process of security- and
confidence-building measures in the Persian Gulf, and
ultimately throughout the Middle East, in line with the
well-known Russian initiative in that regard, would
help to resolve some crisis situations, including the
conflict in Yemen. Once again, we urge our friends in
the region to respond positively to Russia's proposal
and the international community to support efforts
in that direction. Threats and confrontations should
give way to dialogue and cooperation in which every
one of the States of the region should participate,
including Iran and the other countries of the Persian
Gulf. We have to work together urgently to improve
the atmosphere, which will enable all of us to focus on
settling the conflicts in the region under the auspices of
the United Nations.

I would like to once again remind the Council of
resolution 598 (1987), which requested the Secretary-
General, together with the States of the region, to
develop a security architecture. The conditions for
starting that work have long been ripe and are very
much needed.

