Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I would
of course like to thank the Turkish presidency of the
Security Council for having organized this debate. We
have all been or could be affected by terrorism, as
France found several days ago with the kidnapping of
five of its citizens in Niger.

France would therefore like to see the United
Nations play a greater role in combating terrorism.
Much has already been done in that regard. Since 1963,
we have adopted 16 international instruments on the
subject. In the early 1990s, the Security Council began
to address this issue, which poses a serious threat to
international peace and security. A sanctions regime
was imposed on Al-Qaida and the Taliban. Thanks to
the willingness of Member States, we now have the
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, for which the
General Assembly has just reaffirmed its support.

However, the character and aspects of the threat
continue to change, given its complex roots specific to
each regional situation. We refer here to roots and not
to causes, much less to justifications. However, the
international community should make no mistake about
the fact that terrorism is inexcusable in every instance
and circumstance. That principled position should not
inhibit us from seeking to understand the roots of the
phenomenon of terrorism so as to better adapt the tools
we have developed to confront it.

In that regard, I feel it important to underscore
one of the most significant developments in terrorist
networks that we have seen in some years - their
tendency towards regionalization. Rather than a
decentralized, amorphous grouping, we are now seeing
movements that are independent of one another, each
with its own recruitment methods, logistical and
financial resources, political aims and raison d'etre,
which require particular and appropriate responses.
Al-Qaida in the Islamic Mahgreb, a group representing
a regional destabilization strategy through cross-border
activities, is one of the clearest examples of that
evolution. We need to come up with a response that
takes such an evolution into account.

We have recorded success against terrorist
networks, but more must be done. All States must
ratify and implement the 16 relevant international legal
instruments. Negotiations on the comprehensive
counter-terrorism convention, a potential cornerstone
of international cooperation, must be concluded. The
fight against terrorism led by the security forces and
the judicial authorities must be pursued in respect for
human rights and the relevant international
instruments. That is a condition for the legitimacy and
effectiveness of the fight against terrorism.

Technical assistance must underpin the joint
activities of intelligence services, police authorities and
judicial bodies. It should help all States to meet their
commitments. Poverty and the lack of development
prospects are the breeding ground for terrorism. United
Nations programmes must continue to take that
element into account.

We must promote genuine regional strategies in
response to the destabilization efforts of terrorist
networks. The increase in transnational organized

crime, which the Council has already debated, is a
significant factor in spreading terrorism in that it
weakens the capacity of States to respond. Our
Organization must remain mobilized against that
scourge. In that regard, I would cite the example of
drug trafficking as proof of that, whether in Central
Asia or West Africa.

Lastly, we must give our full support to the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force
entrusted with coordinating all the Organization's
counter-terrorism work. We must also support the work
of the Group of Experts set up to support the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999), which is responsible for keeping the
consolidated list of individuals and entities linked to
Al-Qaida and the Taliban up to date.

That is our vision - giving the international
community the means to address, in strict respect for
democratic principles and human rights, a threat that
all States face today.

