Mr. Khalid (Pakistan): We are grateful to Under-
Secretary-General Guehenno and the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Mr. Sergio Vieira de
Mello, for their briefings on the horrendous events in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We condemn
all abuses of human rights which have been perpetrated
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The crimes
mentioned today are, indeed, unacceptable. The
perpetrators of these crimes must be brought to justice.

The irony is that such reports of fighting and
atrocities are coincidental with good news about the
political process, including the recent summit between
the leaders of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Uganda, and with progress in the formation of a
transitional national Government. There is thus a
disconnect between the success of the political process
and the deterioration in the situation on the ground.

To date, over 2.5 million people have died in the
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Many more will die as long as the fighting persists.
Civilians have been both the direct and the indirect
victims of this conflict. In spite of agreements and even
progress in the implementation of those agreements,
the situation on the ground remains one of serious
concern. It is also a matter of serious concern that the
continuing fighting will destabilize the situation and
dangerously undermine the peace process. In our view,
the time has come for the international community to
take stock of the situation and to take bold decisions.

We would like here to raise some questions,
which are directed to Mr. Vieira de Mello as well as to
the members of the Council.

What we need is a commitment from all sides to
guarantee the safety and well-being of civilians in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and to ensure that
such atrocities are not repeated. How can we secure
this objective? What efforts can the international
community and the regional actors undertake to make
all the parties refrain from violence and to urge them
instead to seek a negotiated solution to their
outstanding problems? As part of these efforts, could
the Security Council possibly consider the further
strengthening of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
beyond the present phase III expansion and, at the
same time, make its mandate and presence more
robust?

