Mr. Owada (Japan): The Government of Japan has
been watching with great concern and anxiety the recent
developments in the Middle East involving the decision
made by the Government of Israel on the construction of
housing at Har Homa in East Jerusalem. It is particularly
unfortunate that this decision should have come in the wake
of an agreement that had been reached between Israel and
the Palestine Authority on Hebron, after the peace process
had been halted for several months in a turbulent situation
which involved the tragic assassination of Prime Minister
Rabin of Israel. It was Japan's view that the agreement
symbolized a step forward towards advancing the
Palestinian track of the Middle East. peace process.

The decision of the Government of Israel on the
construction of housing at Har Homa, or, in Arabic, Jabal
Abu Ghneim, coming as it did at such a juncture, must be
viewed against the background of these recent
developments. For this reason, the Government of Japan
feels bound to state that this decision on the part of the
Government of Israel is regrettable. In the view of my
Government, this action wouldseem to run the risk of
jeopardizing the basic situation concerning the occupied
territory and prejudging the outcome of the final status
negotiations. Furthermore, we cannot close our eyes to the
fact that the Government of Israel took its decision just at
a time When the Middle East peace process, particularly the
Palestinian track, is at a crucial stage.

Taking into, account all these factors, the Prime
Minister of Japan, Mr. Ryutaro Hashimoto emphasized just
one week ago, on 27 February, when Foreign Minister
Levy of Israel visited Japan, that Japan regretted the
decision of the Government of Israel to construct housing
in East Jerusalem, as it constituted a negative factor for the
peace process. The Government of Japan has since been
urging the parties involved to make the utmost efforts not
to allow the present situation. to develop into a major
obstacle to the peace process and to do their utmost to push
that process further forward.

I wish to recall that on the occasion of the Security
Council meeting on the situation in the occupied Arab
territories on 27 September 1996, I stated the position of
the Government of Japan as follows:

"Improvements to the present situation should be
carried out through» a double-track approach. One task
is immediate and the other a more. fundamental
approach to the basic issues at the root of the
problem.

"The immediate task on which action is
required is for the parties directly involved to
immediately engage in efforts to bridge the chasm of
mistrust that separates them by refraining from any
action which could do harm to the prospects of the
peace process. It is thus essential that they devote
themselves to practical confidence-building
measures At the same time, on a more
fundamental level, it is imperative that the parties
directly involved intensify their efforts, in good faith
and with steadfast determination, to pursue the peace
process in order to restore peace throughout the
region." (S/PV.3698, Resumption J, p., 27)

That is exactly how the Government of Japan sees the
current situation at this time. There would belittle cause
for optimism about progress in those negotiations unless
the parties concerned addressed the outstanding issues
with serious determination and in good faith.

It is out of the same concern for restoring peace in
the region that Japan has been actively involving itself in
the peace process in the Middle East, in particular
through active participation in the multilateral talks that
began with the Madrid Conference in' October 1991.
Japan's policy is based on its conviction that the Middle
East peace process is an extremely complex and delicate
process which for its success requires careful nurturing
through concrete measures of cooperation by the
international community to buttress the efforts to be made
by the parties directly involved. Thus, my country, as a
member of the steering group, as well as gavelholder of
the working group on environment, has been instrumental
in providing a favourable environment that will assist the
direct talks among the parties concerned. Also as part of
those efforts, Japan has been implementing various
projects worth approximately $250 million to promote
Palestinian self-rule in its initial phase after the Oslo
accord. With a view to creating a new spirit of mutual
confidence and of joint cooperation among the countries
in the region, Japan has been calling on the countries
concerned to convene a plenary meeting of the
environment working group, as well as a meeting of the
steering group for the multilateral talks at the earliest
possible time so that the Palestinian track may proceed
smoothly following the Hebron agreement.

Japan feels very strongly that it is most important,
particularly at this very difficult time, for the parties
directly involved to exercise self-restraint, strictly refrain
from any action that would pose an obstacle to the peace
process and do their utmost to bring the peace process
Security Council 3745th meeting
Fifty-second year 5 March 1997

back on track as quickly as possible. Japan is committed to
assisting them in that endeavour to the best of its ability.

There is a very real danger that the Israeli decision
could lead to a crisis of confidence in which the erosion of
the process of peace might result. If that should take place,
the resulting mistrust and rancour among the parties could
destroy the very structure for peace in the Middle East, a
structure so assiduously built up over the years since Camp
David, Madrid and Oslo.

My delegation sincerely hopes that the parties
concerned will not lose sight at this juncture of the critical
importance of overcoming small differences for the sake of
promoting the cause of lasting peace and stability in the
region. In any great undertaking there is always a danger
that we may fail to see the forest for the trees. It is my
earnest hope that all parties concerned will focus their
endeavours on the forest and make their best efforts to offer
the people in the region a solid ground for hope for a more
peaceful and secure future.

