Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Kang Kyung-wha, Assistant Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs, and Mr. Antonio Guterres,
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, for
their briefings. We would also like to reiterate our
appreciation for the outstanding work done by the teams
of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and other United Nations
agencies on the ground, as well as all their partners,
who are carrying out their duties at risk to their lives.
It is unacceptable that humanitarian workers in Syria
are being targeted, attacked, abducted and killed:
72 workers have died since March 2011, and I would
like to pay tribute to them.

As of 15 March, the conflict in Syria will have been
going on for four years. Yet, in report after report, it is
unfortunately clear that the humanitarian situation is
deteriorating at an alarming rate and that there is no
end in sight to the crisis. Despite the Council's strong
message to the Syrian regime and the armed groups,
through the renewal of the delivery of humanitarian
assistance to Syria and its reminder to the parties to
the conflict of their obligation to respect international
humanitarian law, the situation remains dire, as was
forcefully alluded to by Ms. Kang and Mr. Guterres.

The statistics are unassailable: 220,000 dead,
12.2 million people in need of assistance, 7.6 million
internally displaced persons, 3.8 million refugees,
4.8 million in areas that are hard to reach and 212,000
people besieged without the means to survive. Aerial
bombardment, including the indiscriminate use of
barrels bombs by Government forces, continue to claim
civilian lives. The recent report by Human Rights
Watch states that, since February 2014, the Government
has bombed at least 450 sites in the region of Dara'a and
1,000 sites in Aleppo using barrels bombs. The parties
to the conflict also continue to deliberately target
civilian facilities and property, including infrastructure
and vital services and hospitals, which is contrary to
all the rules of humanitarian law, respect for human
dignity and the most basic principles of humankind.
The deliberate interference in humanitarian operations,
the limits imposed on access to assistance throughout
the country and the administrative obstruction by the
regime only exacerbate the suffering of a battered
people. This must stop. The obstacles to the delivery
of humanitarian assistance to besieged areas, blocking
cross-border access and the proliferation of bureaucratic
obstacles are practices contrary to Security Council
resolutions. Moreover, pursuant to resolution 2139
(2014), an end must be put to impunity to violations
of international humanitarian law and human rights.
Those responsible for such violations in Syria must be
brought to justice.

The conclusions of the latest report (S/2015/124)
on the implementation of resolutions 2139 (2014),
2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014) are clear. They call
for immediate action by the parties to the conflict,
including the lifting of the various sieges, which affect
212,000 people, removing obstacles to the delivery of
medical and surgical equipment, ending the use ofbasic
services, such as water and electricity, as a weapon of
war and halting indiscriminate attacks against civilians,
especially the use of barrels bombs. As we know, there
are many obstacles. We must all collectively bring
pressure to bear on the Syrian regime to immediately
remove the obstacles to alleviate the suffering of the
Syrian people.

The current situation in Aleppo and Ghouta only
shows that the regime remains deaf to the calls of the
international community. The bombings carried out by
Government forces in early February in Ghouta, east of
Damascus, left more than 200 dead and 1,000 wounded.
France condemned those bombings in the strongest
way, while recalling that they violated the most basic
principles of international humanitarian law and could
constitute war crimes.

Whatever the measures taken to limit the cost of
the conflict in human lives and reduce the people's
suffering, the humanitarian tragedy in Syria can end
only with the emergence of a political solution. The
conditions must therefore be created for a political
solution. First of all, the regime must immediately
cease aerial bombardment, the use of barrel bombs and
indiscriminate shelling targeting civilians, which are
prohibited by the resolutions of the Security Council.
Secondly, our objective remains, more than ever, to
promote a genuine political transition, based on the
Geneva communique (S/2012/523, annex), and not a
simple makeover for the regime. Through its brutal
repression and rejection of any transition over the past
four years, Bashar Al-Assad has fanned the flamed
of extremism and chaos. As long as Bashar Al-Assad
remains in power, ISIS and the Al-Nusra Front will
continue to grow in strengthen. Renewed commitment
on the part of the United Nations to a resumption of the
political process is essential in this regard. The Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, Staffan de
Mistura, must, of course, play an important role in this
regard.

A focused dialogue on the terms of a political
transition, based on the Geneva communique must be
resumed, bringing together the major parties concerned
among the international community. We must also
support the reconciliation initiatives of the various
components of the Syrian Opposition around the Syrian
National Coalition. Without a moderate Opposition that
is strong and credible, no political transition will be
able to succeed. To achieve any lasting improvement
in the humanitarian situation in Syria will require a
political solution that will itself require the decisive
commitment of the Security Council.

