Ms. Kamara: I wish to convey my special thanks
to the Permanent Mission of the Republic of Poland to
the United Nations, the Government of Poland and the
President of the Security Council for giving me this
wonderful opportunity. I also thank the Secretary-
General for his outstanding report on children and
armed conflict (S/2019/509).

When the Revolutionary United Front began its
attacks on the Liberian border in 1991, one of the
bloodiest civil wars in the past 30 years was initiated.
Sierra Leone became a part of that brutal, senseless and
bloody war, which changed the lives of 95 per cent of
Sierra Leone's people. Children became targets, used
by lawless land leaders to fight against their will.
Killing, rape and maiming were common. Following
that bloody armed conflict, men, children and women
were left with permanent trauma and stigmatization.

Today these children are seen as enemies, unwanted
or unaccepted by their communities and even their own
family members. The possibility of a brighter future
for them is limited by the lack of proper resources,
including education, counselling, vocational training
and psychological assistance, which would equip
them with the tools necessary to give them hope for a
promising future.

Every once in while we come across the story
of someone's life experiences, and we have to take a
breath and reflect. This story is not the plot of a movie
or a novel, the fruit of someone's imagination. This
story is mine; it is about my life. I am honoured to make
this statement before the Council and hope that it will
inspire it to make a move in a positive direction.

My name is Mariatu Kamara. I was born and raised
in a small village in the West African country of Sierra
Leone. In 1999, when I was 11 years old and living
through the 11-year civil war in my country, my life was
changed forever. We lived in a brutal and lawless land,
and one day the rebels attacked my village, captured my
three cousins and myself and held us hostage for a day.
During that time, I witnessed acts of great brutality:
killing, maiming and the burning of houses. Yet my life
was spared.

The rebels left me for dead in the dark of night,
after they had used machetes to completely cut off
both of my hands. A few hours later I found myself in
the middle of dead bodies, bleeding profusely, scared
and very confused. I managed to make my way into
the deep, dark forest, where I spent the night. The next
morning, I met a man who helped to save my life. After
all this savagery and brutality, I forged on, and with the
help of strangers and my own strong will to survive, I
made my way to the hospital in Freetown.

After my treatment, I left the hospital and spent a
lot of time - years begging for money, food and
clothing while living in an amputee camp in Freetown.
At the camp, I joined a theatre group along with many
other young amputees that helped to raise awareness of
our country's plight.

 

Through the kindness of a family from Canada,
I was able to come to Canada. Moving to Canada
was the step I needed to pursue a change in my life.
It was in Canada that I was able to go to school and
get an education for the first time in my life. I studied
in the Assaulted Women's and Children's Counsellor/
Advocate programme, in Toronto. Some years ago,
I managed to transform my life story into a book
called "The Bite of the Mango", with the help of my
family, my friend Susan McClelland and Annick Press,
the publisher.

I have been working for the protection of children
in armed conflict. A few years ago, I was named
a UNICEF Special Representative for Children
and Armed Conflict. That assignment gave me the
opportunity to reach out to those who have never had
the chance to share their stories; to raise awareness; and
to advocate for children affected by armed conflict. I
do this by promoting their rights and raising awareness
about their condition throughout the world, with the
goal of ensuring that such atrocities will not be allowed
to continue.

Serving as a UNICEF Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict is an honour for me. It
gives me an opportunity and a platform to share my
story and the stories of many, and to help educate the
world about the impact of war on children throughout
the world.

I first participated in this work when UNICEF took
me back to Sierra Leone for the first time to visit and
to see the wonderful work it has been doing there to
promote the rights and welfare of children in Sierra
Leone. I visited a centre where children affected by
armed conflict are given the opportunity to share their
stories as they go through the healing process. They
write and publish their thoughts and views for their
communities so as to raise awareness of what they
have been through. During my trip to Sierra Leone
with UNICEF, I also visited schools and camps in
rural areas and spoke to them about forgiveness and
the importance of hope and faith and of finding the
strength to move forward.

I have also been working for a while on my own
project in Sierra Leone for women and children war
amputees, providing counselling mainly for the girls,
who have been traumatized and mentally affected and
often feel forgotten.

Some final thoughts: all of us here have the right
to do what we want to do. When you have children and
families, you wish the best for them. We also wish the
best for our friends and colleagues around the world
who are affected by senseless wars.

We need the Security Council to stand up and
do more. Yes, its members are doing something,
but we need them to do more. As a UNICEF special
representative, I believe in providing those people
with the tools necessary for a better future through
education. It is not just about reintegration, even if that
is part of it. It is not just a question of releasing those
kids from the war zone or from the bad people. They
need life, they need futures - brighter futures. If we
leave them outside on the street, what do we think we
are creating? Clearly we are creating more conflict,
because those kids are going to go right back to where
they started. They do not have the proper training, tools
or resources to go back to their communities and make
positive changes for themselves.

We therefore need education, training and
counselling. We need funding, especially for disabled
people, including children. All forms of disability need
to be addressed, but special focus is required for people
who have been disabled owing to the impacts of war.
In Sierra Leone, there are many cases, including mine.
I am a good example, in fact. In some places, I do not
have the right to do the things that I want because of
disability. I have been subject to discrimination.

We need those things to stop. We cannot do it
alone. Security Council members have the tools and the
power to make those things stop, to make violence stop.
I know that there are rules of war and the law of war.
Who made those laws? The Council has to stand up and
make those laws more effective.

