Mr. Akram (Pakistan): Pakistan sponsored and
supported the draft resolution on the situation in the
Middle East, which could not be adopted due to the
negative vote of one permanent member. The reasons
for our support are as follows.

First, the draft resolution sought to address an
emergency humanitarian situation arising from the
Israeli military incursion, which, in the past few days,
has led to the deaths of over 80 Palestinian civilians,
including women and children. It has also left hundreds
of civilians injured and without shelter.

Secondly, apart from its humanitarian dimension,
the incursion clearly constitutes a serious violation of
international humanitarian law, particularly the Fourth
Geneva Convention, and thus warrants action by the
Council under its Charter obligations, in particular
those as envisaged in Articles 1, 2 and 24.

Thirdly, politically the situation poses a grave
danger to the ongoing peace efforts in the region. The
Council thus had a responsibility to respond.

Fourthly, the draft resolution was carefully
drafted to reaffirm agreed legal positions and demand
measures that would be helpful in alleviating the
humanitarian suffering resulting from the latest Israeli
incursion and in restarting the peace process.

Unfortunately, the Council could not meet the
expectations of the Palestinians, nor of wider public
opinion in the Muslim world. This clearly indicates
that the Council in certain situations is unable to act.
We believe that today's inaction will not contribute to
the cause of peace and justice in the Middle East. The
sense of helplessness and desperation among the
Palestinians will increase further and aggravate an
already volatile situation.

We believe that by not acting today, the Council
has missed an important opportunity to contribute to
peace in the Middle East. We hope that those members
which have refrained from supporting the draft
resolution will use their bilateral influence in
persuading Israel to respond to the international calls
to cease its military operations in Gaza, withdraw its
forces from Gaza and to commit itself to fully
implement the Quartet's road map.

