Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this meeting. My delegation extends
its appreciation to Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey
Feltman for his in-depth briefing.

Malaysia shares the grave concern expressed by
Under-Secretary-General Feltman and other Council
members on the deteriorating situation on the ground
in the east of Ukraine. As expressed by the Secretary-
General on 18 January, the severe escalation in fighting,
especially at the Donetsk airport, has threatened to
unravel the September 2014 ceasefire. With a View to
immediately de-escalating the situation, Malaysia calls
on the conflicting parties to cease fighting and adhere
to their commitments to implementing the Minsk
protocol and memorandum in their entirety. A military
solution would not be sustainable and would not benefit
anyone.

The Ukraine crisis has claimed far too many
casualties. Close to 5,000 people have been killed,
while over 1 million have been displaced. Malaysia is
deeply saddened by the recent tragic shelling of a bus
transporting civilians on 13 January in the Donetsk
region, which caused the death of 12 and injured many
more, among them women and children. Malaysia calls
for an independent investigation into the incident to
hold the perpetrators accountable. That latest incident
is yet another instance of senseless killing as the
escalating conflict in eastern Ukraine claims more and
more innocent victims.

After the downing of MH-l7, which killed 298
civilians and shocked the world last summer, Malaysia
hoped that the tragic incident would push the conflicting
parties to de-escalate the situation, cease fighting and
engage in a dialogue to reach a political solution to the
conflict. Instead the conflict has been prolonged and
grown more intense since then, claiming more and
more casualties, and causing a humanitarian crisis.

It is our conviction that adherence to the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations is of paramount
importance in maintaining international peace and
security. In particular, we affirm our commitment to
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine, as
well as to the principle of non-interference in its internal
affairs, as espoused in the Charter. In this regard,
Malaysia condemns any threat or use of force against
the territorial integrity or political independence of
Ukraine, which has brought about the crisis, and views
such threats as a violation of the United Nations Charter.

Malaysia calls for constructive engagement on all
sides and urges the conflicting parties to continue to
explore all possible avenues to find a peaceful solution.
Malaysia supports every peaceful effort, including
international diplomatic initiatives aimed at resolving
the situation in Ukraine. We call on all parties to
respect the rule of law, including international human
rights law and international humanitarian law, to act
responsibly and to aim towards finding a peaceful
settlement. Malaysia stands ready to play a constructive
role towards de-escalating the crisis and resuming talks
to restore Ukraine's stability and territorial integrity.
We hope that both sides will adopt a moderate approach
and find a mutually acceptable solution. The interest,
welfare and security of the people of Ukraine must be
given top priority by all parties.

