Mr. Park (Republic of Korea): With the change of
guard taking place in several hours, let me add the voice
of my delegation to that of the Ambassador of Botswana
in praising the outstanding achievements under your
leadership, Madam President, in the month of February,
which you characterized as the "longest shortest month"
of the year.

For their valuable efforts, my delegation would like
to pay tribute to the Secretary-General, his Friends for
Haiti and troop- contributing countries of the United
Nations Mission in Haiti (UNMIH) to bring security and
stability to Haiti. Our special thanks to Mr. Brahimi, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
commendable dedication and leadership.

Although Latin America and the Caribbean moved
towards the general trend of politico-econornic
liberalization in the post-cold-war era, Haiti was one of
the few unfortunate exceptions. With the help of the
international community, however, considerable progress
has been made in the restoration of democracy in Haiti.

Among the positive steps which have been taken
since the extension of UNMIH's mandate seven months
ago, the peaceful transfer of power from one
democratically elected president to another through free
elections - to which the Ambassador of Haiti so proudly
referred in his statement - marks a watershed in the
political development of Haiti. We congratulate the
Government and the people of Haiti on this monumental

 

feat and sincerely hope that the Haitian Government will
continue to consolidate the achievements in this field.

Much of this progress can be attributed to the valuable
contributions of UNMIH, which has facilitated Haiti's path
to democracy by sustaining a secure and stable environment
and providing indispensable support to the Haitian
Government and its people. Indeed, through the
commitment and hard work of its staff, UNMIH has
successfully carried the peace-keeping operation over into
post-conflict peace-building, thereby realizing one of the
key concepts of "An Agenda for Peace".

I would also like to note that the Haitian experience
has demonstrated the imperative need for close cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations.
Needless to say, the activities of this world body can be
most effective when strongly supported and assisted at the
regional level. By the same token, regional endeavours are
most fruitful when reinforced by the support of the global
community. My delegation considers that the close
collaboration between UNMIH and the Organization of
American States (OAS) has brought optimal benefits to the
peace-keeping efforts in Haiti, as in the cases of Georgia
and Liberia.

As of now, however, the situation in Haiti is still
tenuous and requires continued vigilance by the
international community. In particular, long-term stability
in Haiti requires the establishment of a fully functioning
police force capable of independently maintaining law and
order and a far-reaching reform of the judicial system. We
have attached marked importance to the institution-building
process in Haiti and have particularly recognized the urgent
need for adequate resources to equip the Haitian police. It
is in this context that Korea has already donated $200,000
to the United Nations Trust Fund for the Haitian Police
created under resolution 975 (1995).

The socio-economic problems plaguing Haiti deserve
equal attention. As noted in the preamble of the draft
resolution, economic development is an integral element for
securing a lasting peace in Haiti. Simply put, without food
and jobs for the people, peace and security cannot be
guaranteed. Now that the political situation has begun to
stabilize, the international community should place
increased focus on the economic and social development of
Haiti.

It is in this spirit that my delegation welcomes the
long-term financial commitments of the Bretton Woods
institutions and United Nations development agencies to the
economic reconstruction of Haiti. We are likewise pleased
to note that 16 Latin American and Caribbean countries
under the sponsorship of the Latin American Economic
System and the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) are negotiating 144 development cooperation
projects with the Haitian authorities. We also look
forward to the firm commitment of the Haitian
Government to carrying out economic reforms which will
create an environment conducive to further inducing
foreign investment and assistance.

It is evident that the people of Haiti bear the
ultimate responsibility for their own destiny. However, in
order to sustain the momentum of the ongoing process of
democratization and economic and social stabilization in
Haiti until the Haitians can assume direct and sole
responsibility for their future, we support the continued
presence of UNMIH for a period of four months with a
reduced troop level of 1,200, as provided for in the draft
resolution. For these reasons, my delegation will vote in
favour of the draft resolution.

