Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
I apologize for asking for the floor once again, but I wanted
to comment on the reply that Mr. Bildt gave to some of my
questions, inter alia, with respect to his assessment of the
prospects for interaction with the Government of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.

As Council members may recall, I asked whether the
Security Council resolutions could possibly be
implemented, whether a regional and comprehensive
approach to the Balkans could possibly be ensured if we
deliberately isolate the Government of the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia. To be frank, I did not hear any reply to that
question. I heard a confirmation of the fact that it is
impossible to interact with Milosevic' s Government because
that Government is headed by individuals who have been
indicted by the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia.

I already had an opportunity to state that in our view
the activities of the Tribunal have been politicized to a
certain extent. If, for example, the Tribunal were to indict
someone else in the region, or in other countries, or if it
should indict one of the leaders of the opposition in the
Yugoslavia - and there have been hints in the mass media
that such things were possible - how would we then react?
Would we all then be hostages to the decisions of the
Tribunal? That would most likely be a very simple solution.
But at the same time, it is too simplistic. Life is always
more complicated and does not allow everything to be
foisted upon one individual or one regime.

Mr. Bildt said that President Milosevic is preparing to
take certain actions against Montenegro, and we have also
heard just recently that it was precisely President
Milosevic who provoked the unrest that occurred in
Mitrovica, in Kosovo. But no one is denying that those
incidents, which are continuing, are the fault of extremists
and were provoked by former members of the Kosovo
Liberation Army - which, even though it has ceased to
exist on paper, has given birth to certain new groups with
new names, groups that are making incursions into other
regions of Serbia from Kosovo, and so forth.

If we are speaking openly here, and openly
criticizing the Belgrade regime, then it would probably be
fair to also fairly assess the neighbouring countries. This
is because there continues to be an illegal inflow of arms
and drugs across the border, first and foremost into
Kosovo, as the mass media sometimes remind us. But we
should not forget about this in the Security Council when
we are trying to follow and integrated, regional approach
to the problems of the region. That integrated, regional
approach requires that we speak the truth about
everything that is happening there. If we take the position
of blaming only one regime for everything, then the entire
integrated approach becomes hostage to such an analysis.

But let me repeat what I said earlier today. If the
voters confirm the current leadership in the elections in
Serbia and Yugoslavia, then what are we going to do?
Are we then going to recommend a violent overthrow of
the regime? Or are we going to say that we have to wait
another four years before we involve Yugoslavia in an
effort to find an integrated, regional solution?

Let me conclude with what I began with this
morning: Yugoslavia is a full-fledged member of the
Dayton process. It is a full-fledged participant in the
agreements set out in resolution 1244 (1999). Yugoslavia
is a full-fledged participant in the settlement principles
with respect to Prevlaka adopted by the Security Council.
Implementing those resolutions without Yugoslavia is
impossible. I would call upon all of us to predicate our
positions on the fact that those decisions must be
implemented. Implementing them through the isolation of
a Government that is legally in power is impossible.

