Mr. Kim Sook (Republic of Korea): I should like
to thank Special Representative Farid Zarif for his
briefing this morning. I should also like to welcome to
the Council Mr. Ivica Dacic', Prime Minister of Serbia,
and Mr. Hashim Thaci, Prime Minister of Kosovo.

The Republic of Korea welcomes the ongoing
negotiations process between Belgrade and Pristina
on the normalization of relations. It is encouraging
that both sides have demonstrated seriousness and
firm political will to engage in the dialogue. We also
applaud the positive contributions of the European
Union in facilitating the high-level meetings. We are
especially grateful for the personal commitment to this
issue on the part of High Representative Ashton. While
the recent meeting in Brussels ended inconclusively,
we believe that such dialogue itself marks an important
step. Such high-level engagement has already led
to early results on the ground. Specifically, we are
pleased at the implementation of the integrated border
management agreement, with the opening of the four
crossing points on the border of northern Kosovo. We
encourage both sides to continue the dialogue to resolve
remaining differences. We sincerely hope that further
tangible progress will be made at the next meeting, on
2 April.

Turning to the security situation in Kosovo,
the overall security situation has remained calm
and stable. However, the recent unrest and fragile
security situation in northern Kosovo remains a
serious concern. There have been a number of violent
protests against the border agreement. In addition, we
are also concerned about multiple incidents targeting
minorities. With that shared concern, we encourage
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) to further strengthen its cooperation
with other international agencies and local authorities
in monitoring the situation and reducing tensions on the
ground.

Another serious concern is the growing number of
incidents of religious intolerance. In spite of the efforts
to the Kosovo Police and the Kosovo Force, incidents
involving the desecration of graves and Orthodox
cemeteries and the vandalism of religious of religious
and cultural heritage sites continued to be reported.
Such acts are unacceptable and need to be addressed
resolutely.

Those incidents and the increased tensions between
ethnic groups pose obstacles to the reconciliation process
and the progress achieved so far. As such, we urge the
authorities in Kosovo to investigate such incidents
thoroughly, work towards bringing all perpetrators to
justice and take all the necessary preventive measures.

Confidence-building among communities is
indispensable in the entire process towards normalization
and long-term reconciliation. In spite of the significant
progress and the political dialogue, we have seen major
challenges stemming from misunderstanding a lack of
trust. Therefore, the political dialogue should take place
parallel to confidence-building measures, including
through educational initiatives and awareness-raising
campaigns. To that end, it is crucial that the authorities
of Kosovo integrate and embrace their citizens in the
north, as well as the ethnic minority groups.

In addition, public trust in the fairness and
credibility oflaw-enforcement agencies will be decisive
in building a harmonious, multi-ethnic society. Respect
for norms and standards and a strengthened role for
legal institutions will prevent minor incidents from
escalating into inter-communal clashes. In that context,
we encourage the Kosovo authorities to continue
to strengthen the national rule of law and to build
institutional capabilities in close coordination with the
European Rule of Law Mission.
In conclusion, I would like to commend Special
Representative Zarif and UNMIK for their commitment
and efforts to maintain peace and stability in Kosovo
and the region.

