Mrs. Albright (United States of America): I would
like to thank the members of the Security Council for this
overwhelming support and also for the condolences
expressed for the deaths of the pilots. But I feel committed
to making a brief statement of reply.

The representative of Cuba has offered us many
words this afternoon. But, despite the many words we
heard, we have heard nothing new. We have heard
nothing to change the fact that the International Civil
Aviation Organization (ICAO) has concluded that Cuba
shot down two planes over international waters. We have
heard nothing to change the fact that the ICAO has
concluded that these were civilian planes. If the
representative of Cuba continues to doubt this fact,
perhaps he should talk to the pilots of the Cuban MIGs
who identified these planes as civilian aircraft before they
blew them out of the sky. We heard nothing to change the
fact that the ICAO has concluded that Cuba violated all
norms of civil aviation by shooting first and asking
questions later. And we have heard nothing to change the
fact that the Security Council has now endorsed the
conclusions of the ICAO report and thereby rejected
Cuba's case completely.

But more important than all of that, I sat here and
listened to the representative of Cuba for more than one
and a half hours and, despite all the words I heard, I
heard nothing to indicate regret by the Cuban Government
for the four civilian men who were killed. I heard no
offer of condolences to the families, and I heard no
willingness by the Cuban Government to take
responsibility for an act that this Council has condemned
as a violation of international law.

Finally, I listened carefully to the representative of
Cuba use the phrase, "Sentence first - verdict
afterwards". I still do not understand the point he was
making, since this Council asked the ICAO to investigate
precisely and to render its final judgment after an
objective examination of the events of 24 February 1996.
But sadly, I must admit, "Sentence first - verdict
afterwards" is precisely what happened. For it is certainly
true that on 24 February, five months ago, without any
inquiry, without any warning, and without regard to law
and decency, the Cuban Government sentenced four of
my countrymen to death over international waters. Five
months have gone by and the verdict is in: this Council
has declared Cuba guilty as charged - guilty of violating
international law. It is high time for Cuba to accept the
judgment.

