Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): Let
me first of all congratulate you, Madam President,
and your entire team on the manner in which you
have conducted our work in a month that has proved
especially rich in activity. I also wish to thank you for
convening this wrap-up meeting on our work for the
month; the added value of such meetings can no longer
be denied and fulfils the goal of transparency which we
support.

I wish to begin my remarks by noting the
new challenges in peacekeeping. United Nations
peacekeeping operations are more often intervening in
complex situations in which there is little or no peace to
maintain and an increased risk of asymmetric attacks
directly targeting our peacekeepers. Multidimensional
responses are necessary given the new context. We
were able to discuss this on 9 October in the annual
open debate with the military commanders of the
peacekeeping operations (see S/PV.7275). The Force
Commanders of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
and the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
provided the Council with their point of view from the
field regarding the impact of these new challenges on
fulfilling the mission mandates, whether due to more
complex situations involving the protection of civilians
or to deteriorating security or operational conditions.
We were able to address some of those issues in greater
detail during the course of the month in our discussions
on the situations in the Golan Heights, South Sudan and
the Central African Republic.

These issues will be all the more critical when the
Council discusses mandate renewals. That will be the
case next month regarding the mandate of the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan. It goes without saying
that discussions with the troop-contributing countries
before the renewal of a mandate will be essential in
considering their concerns and opinions. Moreover,
next month we will have to identify solutions to assist
MINUSMA in more effectively tackling its challenges
in northern Mali. Similar issues may arise in the scaling-
up of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic,
which is already facing a particularly complex situation.

Above all, we welcome the Secretary-General's
announcement of his intention to establish a high-level
task force to carry out a global study on peacekeeping,
aimed at improved strategies in that area. Useful
synergies could be developed in view of the review of
the peacebuilding architecture planned for 2015.

I also wish to briefly reiterate another topic of
great importance - the fight against impunity and to
promote justice. We believe that this is a fundamental
aspect of the Council's effort in the maintenance of
international peace and security, as well as in conflict
prevention.

In last Thursday's open debate on working methods
(see S/PV.7285), Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court, and Ms. Kimberley
Prost, Ombudsperson of the Al-Qaida sanctions regime,
once again stressed the importance of justice and due
process in the Council's actions and the supporting role
that the Court and the Ombudsperson can play. The
annual private meeting of the Security Council with
the President of the International Court of Justice (see S/PV.7290) also helped to highlight the complementary
efforts of both institutions.

This month we also spoke about several crises
where the fight against impunity must be an integral if
not a critical part of the quest for a lasting solution. That
is the case of South Sudan or even in Syria. It will be
crucial to establish at the right time who is responsible
for the violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law in order to achieve reconciliation and
a lasting peace. The poignant accounts heard during
the public debate on the situation of women and girls
displaced by conflict (see S/PV.7289) strengthens
our conviction that the fight against impunity for
perpetrators of crime, namely, sexual crimes, must
be an integral part of any holistic strategy to support
women and girls affected by conflict.

Before concluding, I would like once again to
mention a few other important topics that were on our
agenda for October. First of all, with regard to Syria,
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, Staffan de
Mistura, reported this morning on the steps that have
been taken towards finding a political solution to the
crisis. We must support those efforts, given, above all,
the suffering of the Syrian population and the refugees,
but also given the growing impact of the conflict on
stability for the region as a whole. At the same time, we
must continue to stress the scrupulous implementation
of resolutions 2139 (2014) and 2165 (2014) to provide
humanitarian assistance and relieve the population's
suffering. We must also remain vigilant when it
comes to the complete dismantling of the Syrian
chemical weapons programme. The Security Council
cannot allow violations of resolution 2118 (2013) to be
overlooked.

As to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, the open debate
this month (see S/PV.7281) and the emergency meeting
held yesterday (see S/PV.7291) have underscored the
urgency of overcoming the deadlock. Greater tension in
East Jerusalem is of the greatest concern to us. We hope
that Israel will refrain from any additional step that
would further reduce the chances of reaching a two-
State solution. We call upon both parties to take the
necessary measures to make progress towards peace.

Other questions that were dealt with should be
raised here, in particular the situation in Ukraine, the
fight against the Ebola epidemic or even the hostilities
that continue to ravage South Sudan and the Central
African Republic. They will continue to motivate us in
the weeks and months to come.

The responsibility to steer our work will now fall
upon Australia. I would like to wish every success to
my colleague, Mr. Gary Quinlan, and to his team. They
can count on our full support.
