Mr. Abarry (Niger) (spoke in French): At the outset, I would like to apologize on behalf our minister, who, due to time constraints, was unable to travel to New York to attend this important debate. On behalf of the Government of the Niger, I would also like to once again congratulate the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam on its election to the Security Council, a mandate begun with the great responsibility of presiding over the Council for the month of January. I also congratulate Estonia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and Tunisia, on their election as new members of the Council, along with my country, the Niger. Finally, I would like to express my sincere gratitude to Secretary-General Antonio Guterres for his briefing and his ongoing commitment to the ideals enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and thereby to international peace and security. The President has convened this debate on the theme "Respect for the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations as soon as key element for the maintenance of international peace and security", a theme whose relevance need not be demonstrated, as it invokes the fundamental objectives of our Organization. As we celebrate the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations in 2020, this debate is an opportunity to remember our priorities in the face of the many crises and challenges all over the world and to propose appropriate mechanisms to address them. It is therefore to your credit, Mr. President, that you have placed the Charter at the centre of our concern. This debate gives us the opportunity to renew our commitment to multilateralism in the pursuit of the noble objectives that we set ourselves 75 years ago and to more effectively take into account certain imperatives in the implementation of the Charter in order to prevent the recurrence of the tragedies that led to the creation of the United Nations in 1945. Fortunately, despite the frequent crises which have broken out in a number of regions, we have generally been able to maintain international peace and security in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter - although we have not been able to take effective collective measures to prevent and remove threats to peace and to suppress acts of aggression or other breaches of the peace, as provided by the purposes and principles of the Charter. In the 75 years since San Francisco, the end of the great wars has not been synonymous with the restoration of peace in the world. On the contrary, conflicts of varying intensity have been compounded by threats of a new kind, such as terrorism, cybercrime, serious epidemics and the harmful effects of climate change, to name but a few. In addition to the colossal number of human casualties they have caused, those threats have inflicted untold suffering on civilian populations, especially women and children, throughout the world. They have also generated massive displacements of people at a level rarely equalled in the history of humankind and have generated waves of migration whose tragic consequences are all too well known. Terrorism has become one of the worst threats to international peace and security today. It deserves our special attention because, in addition to taking lives, it undermines the very foundations of nation States. That is particularly true in my region - the Sahel - which, in recent years, has seen terrorist groups use asymmetric warfare to kill innocent civilians, stir up intercommunal conflicts and no longer even hesitate to attack the defence and security forces of States head-on. In this arena and in others, the international community should show solidarity. That is particularly true of the Security Council, which, pursuant to the Charter, has primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security. As we meet today, a Nigerien military camp 40 kilometres from the Malian border is being attacked by terrorist hordes. Chapter I of the Charter, containing the principles on which multilateralism is based and to which my country is firmly committed, calls upon Member States to promote collective measures to prevent and remove threats to peace and to respect the sovereign equality of Member States. As the President of the Republic of the Niger, His Excellency Mahamadou Issoufou, said in his address to the General Assembly at its seventy- fourth session, "multilateralism has made progress only in the wake of bloody conflicts, as was the case with the treaties of Westphalia, in 1648, and the Treaty of Vienna, which founded the European orders that succeeded the Thirty Years' War, the Eighty Years' War and the Napoleonic wars, respectively. The same was true of the attempt to establish the League of Nations after the First World War and the creation of the United Nations following the Second World War. Each time, the objective was to create rules and institutions capable of establishing an order that was conducive to peaceful international relations and governed by the rule of law and that could enable us to emerge out of a state of nature in which every State had absolute freedom to resort to force" (A/74/PV.4, p. 11). In its Preamble, the Charter of the United Nations quite rightly recalls the need to spare succeeding generations from the scourge of war. We must therefore not forget the teachings of history. The complex nature of international relations makes multilateralism even more necessary today in an increasingly globalized world in which States are increasingly interdependent. In conclusion, I would thank Viet Nam once again for having made the wise choice of the theme of today's debate and also paraphrase my President by saying that the world needs governing institutions. While it is true that national interests govern the foreign policies of States, these national interests are better defended through cooperation rather than through confrontation. My country, the Niger, remains committed to the principles and ideals of the Charter of the United Nations and, along with other Members, it will continue to defend those
