Mr. Lomaia (Georgia): I thank you, Sir, for
having convened this open debate on the important
topic of children and armed conflict.

At the outset, I should like to commend the
Secretary-General for his ninth report on this issue
(S/2010/181). I should also like to express our
gratitude to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for her comprehensive presentation.

My delegation supports the statement made on
behalf of the European Union.

Since 1999, the issue of children and armed
conflict has been a permanent fixture on the agenda of
the Security Council. Over the past decade, the Council
has adopted seven resolutions on this matter, but we all
know that these measures are not enough. As we have
learned from the report of the Secretary-General's
before us, the haunting reality remains that children are
being brutally affected by military conflicts around the
world. Any conflict in which children suffer directly
from violence and brutality, or secondarily from their
consequences, requires much closer attention from the
international community.

Over the past several months, Member States
have had an opportunity to address the protection of
civilians at various open debates here in this Chamber.
As many present know, this is an issue of great concern
to Georgia. The Council heard an update on the two
occupied regions of my country, Abkhazia and the
Tskhinvali region, also known as South Ossetia.
Georgian children have suffered in both these regions,
but the Secretary-General's report on children and
armed conflict does not cover that part of the world
this year, and so I felt it important to remind the
Council of the humanitarian aspects of this situation.

While the active conflict is considered to be over,
the problems that we discussed last year remain and, in
certain respects, have even worsened. The demolition
of school buildings, the denial of the right to receive
education in the native language, the forcible
conscription of young men and sometimes teenagers,
and hindered access to education and opportunity are
but a few of the problems facing the young people of
these regions while under foreign occupation.

Our children have been given new textbooks
printed in another country and approved by the
education ministry of that country - textbooks their
parents and community leaders have no ability to
review. Children are no longer allowed to attend
schools on the other side of the artificially imposed
administrative boundary lines, creating divisions and
isolation where before there was community and
shared learning and experiences. Georgian citizens are
being forced to learn the Russian language and given
no choice about their preference or their future. They
are told that their identity, their language and their
culture are lesser than those of the occupying force.

There are many documented cases to which we
could refer to illustrate these charges and flesh out a
picture of how civilian life is being supplanted by the
military occupation. Many know the details of these
cases already. Every time I come here to address the
Council, I am amazed that I can list such examples in
the twenty-first century.
In Tskhinvali in December 2009, six children
between 12 and 16 years of age were detained and
charged with "terrorist activities". Only after active
intervention by the international community were these
children released. This incident is not an exception to
the rule, but rather the reality that is faced every day.
There might not be what we qualify here as an active
conflict, but our citizens battle every day for their basic
rights and freedoms.

A first step towards addressing this problem
would be to allow unhindered humanitarian access,
which could protect and assist those affected by armed
conflicts - children, first and foremost. In reference to
another situation, the report of the Secretary-General
emphasizes "humanitarian access in general has vastly
deteriorated during the year". One could not better
describe the practice of blocking access for
humanitarian aid and international humanitarian actors
to the occupied Tskhinvali region/ South Ossetia, which
has been in effect since August 2008. This is a clear
violation of the principles of international law; of
paragraph 3 of the six-point ceasefire agreement of
12 August 2008 brokered by the European Union; and
of paragraph 4 of the General Assembly resolution
63/307 on the status of internally displaced persons and
refugees from Abkhazia, Georgia, and the Tskhinvali
region/South Ossetia, Georgia, of 9 September 2009.

I would ask everyone here to help us defend the
rights of our children, including their right to a
peaceful and prosperous future. I should also like to
take this opportunity to commend the tireless efforts
undertaken by UNICEF in my country, including its
activities in Abkhazia.

In conclusion, I would like to assure the Council
that my Government stands ready to continue to
cooperate with the entire United Nations family to
defend the interests of all children affected by the
August war and the ongoing foreign military
occupation.

