The President (spoke in French): There are no
further speakers on my list.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council recalls the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and in
particular the Security Council's primary
responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. In this respect,
the Security Council recognizes the role that
natural resources can play in armed conflict and
post-conflict situations.

"The Security Council reaffirms that every
State has the full and inherent sovereign right to
control and exploit its own natural resources in
accordance with the Charter and the principles of
international law.

"The Security Council stresses that natural
resources are a crucial factor in contributing to
long-term economic growth and sustainable
development.

"The Security Council recalls resolution
1625 (2005) whereby the Council adopted the
declaration on strengthening the effectiveness of
10

the Security Council's role in conflict prevention,
particularly in Africa, in which it reaffirmed its
determination to take action against illegal
exploitation and trafficking of natural resources

and high-value commodities in areas where it
contributes to the outbreak, escalation or
continuation of armed conflict.

"Moreover, the Security Council notes that,
in specific armed conflict situations, the
exploitation, trafficking and illicit trade of natural
resources have played a role in areas where they
have contributed to the outbreak, escalation or
continuation of armed conflict. The Security
Council, through its various resolutions, has
taken measures on this issue, more specifically to
prevent illegal exploitation of natural resources,
especially diamonds and timber, from fuelling
armed conflicts and to encourage transparent and
lawful management of natural resources,
including the clarification of the responsibility of
management of natural resources, and has
established sanctions committees and groups and
panels of experts to oversee the implementation
of those measures.

"The Security Council emphasizes the
importance of improving the work of and
strengthening the contributions made by existing
sanctions committees and the various expert
groups and panels established by the Council in
dealing with the impact of illegal exploitation of
natural resources on conflicts in the countries
under its consideration. The Security Council also
recalls the work done by the Security Council
Informal Working Group on General Issues of
Sanctions (2006) and refers in this regard to its
report (S/2006/997).

"The Security Council recognizes that
United Nations missions and peacekeeping
operations deployed in resource-endowed
countries experiencing armed conflict could play
a role in helping the Governments concerned,
with full respect for their sovereignty over their
natural resources, to prevent the illegal
exploitation of those resources from further
fuelling the conflict. The Security Council
underlines the importance of taking this
dimension of conflict into account, where
appropriate, in the mandates of United Nations
and regional peacekeeping operations, within
their capabilities, including by making provision
for assisting Governments, upon their request, in
preventing the illegal exploitation of natural
resources by the parties to the conflict, in
particular, where appropriate, by developing
adequate observation and policing capacities to
that end.

"The Security Council recognizes, in
conflict and post-conflict situations, the
importance of cooperation, in shared
responsibility, among source, transit and
destination countries in preventing and combating
trafficking, illicit trade and illegal exploitation of
natural resources. The Security Council also
emphasizes the important contribution of
commodity monitoring and certification schemes
such as the Kimberley Process.

"The Security Council acknowledges the
crucial role that the Peacebuilding Commission,
together with other United Nations and non-
United Nations actors, can play in post-conflict
situations in assisting Governments, upon their
request, in ensuring that natural resources become
an engine for sustainable development. In this
regard, the Security Council recognizes the role
of voluntary initiatives aimed at improving
revenue transparency such as the Extractive
Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI). The
Security Council also stresses that the use,
disposal and management of natural resources is
a multifaceted and cross-sector issue that
involves various United Nations organizations. In
this regard, the Security Council acknowledges
the valuable contribution of various United
Nations organizations in promoting lawful,
transparent and sustainable management and
exploitation of natural resources.

"The Security Council recognizes the need
for the private sector to contribute to the good
governance and avoidance of illegal exploitation
of natural resources in countries in conflict. In
this regard, the Council also notes the important
contribution voluntary principles and standards
play in encouraging multinational enterprises to
adopt a responsible business conduct such as
provided for by the Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development (OECD)
Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises and the
OECD Risk Awareness Tool for Multinational
Enterprises in Weak Governance Zones and the
United Nations Global Compact.

the

"The Security Council stresses the
important role, in the context of security sector
reform in the post-conflict environment, of
transparent and effective national security and
customs structures for the effective control and
management of natural resources by preventing
the illegal access to and the trade and exploitation
of those resources.

"The Security Council emphasizes that, in
countries emerging from conflict, lawful,
transparent and sustainable management - at
local, national and international levels - and
exploitation of natural resources is a critical
factor in maintaining stability and in preventing a
relapse into conflict. The Council recalls in this
respect that it has welcomed country-specific
initiatives such as the Governance and Economic
Management Assistance Program (GEMAP) in
Liberia - resolution 1626 (2005) - and related
efforts such as the Liberia Forest Initiative.

"The Security Council reiterates the
important role of regional organizations in the
prevention, management and resolution of
conflicts in accordance with Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations as well as its
relevant resolutions 1625 (2005) and 1631
(2005), S/PRST/2006/39 and S/PRST/2007/7. In
this regard, the Security Council recognizes, in
armed conflict and post-conflict situations, the
need for a more coordinated approach by the
United Nations, regional organizations and
Governments concerned, in particular the
empowerment of Governments in post-conflict
situations to better manage their resources."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2007/22.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my

list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 4.05 p.m.
11
