Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): Let me first congratulate
you, Madam, on your presidency of the Council for
this month and, secondly, align my delegation with the
statements delivered by the representatives of Egypt,
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, and
Kazakhstan, on behalf of the Organization of the
Islamic Conference, respectively. I also wish to thank
Ambassador Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, for his briefing earlier today.

Malaysia has been closely watching recent
developments regarding the Palestinian question. We
welcome all attempts by the international community
to find ways and means to resolve that long-standing
issue. Those efforts include the Middle East Quartet
meeting of 11 April, as well as the efforts by Jordan to
revive negotiations between the two States. Malaysia
also welcomes and fully supports the Palestinian
efforts to restart meaningful negotiations with Israel, as
conveyed in a letter from President Mahmoud Abbas to
the Israeli Prime Minister on 17 April. Malaysia also
echoes the Non-Aligned Movement's call for
implementation of the recommendation made by
Ms. Valerie Amos, Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator,
to the Security Council on 18 January with respect to
the humanitarian situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory.

In support of all of those efforts, Malaysia will
continue to urge Switzerland, in its capacity as
depositary of the Geneva Conventions, in particular the
Fourth Geneva Convention, to convene a conference of
the high contracting parties, at the earliest opportunity,
to discuss issues related to the Convention in the
context of the situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory.

We have witnessed rapid and substantive
developments in the Arab world in the past 15 months,
which have become known as the Arab Spring. While
there have been positive outcomes, we have indirectly
and unintentionally neglected the people of Palestine,
who have been forced to live under the longest illegal
military occupation in modern history. Palestine has
recently been sidelined by other major events in the
Middle East. In that regard, Malaysia calls upon
Member States to refocus their attention on Palestine.

While most of the world's attention seemed to be
drawn to the Arab Spring, with particular regard to the
protection of human rights, the rule of law and
democratic principles, Malaysia wishes to draw the
attention of the international community to Israel's
continued violations of international law, including
humanitarian and human rights law, even as I speak
now. The situation in the West Bank, particularly in
East Jerusalem, is dire, with the growing entrenchment
of illegal Israeli settlers and unprovoked violence
committed by those settlers, often under the watch of
the Israeli authorities, who have themselves done little
or nothing to deter such violence.

I would not be doing justice to the Palestinians if
I failed to mention the illegal blockade of Gaza, which
is now entering its fifth year. Having witnessed its
effects during my visit there last July under the auspices
of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices
Affecting the Human Rights of the Palestinian People
and Other Arabs of the Occupied Territories, the illegal
blockade is a cruel case of the deliberate economic
strangulation of Palestine and a form of collective
punishment that fully violates international law. Seventy
per cent of the population of the narrow Gaza Strip, or
1.1 million inhabitants, have become dependent on
United Nations humanitarian assistance. To alleviate the
suffering, Malaysia calls on Israel to unconditionally
and completely lift the illegal blockade.

Obviously, the situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory is deplorable and appalling. In
order to salvage the two-State solution, where both
Palestine and Israel can live side by side in peace and
security, it is important that the international community,
particularly the Security Council, address the Palestinian
application for membership in the United Nations with
the appropriate urgency, and collectively strengthen its
pressure for an end to Israel's illegal occupation.

My delegation welcomes the recent adoption of
resolutions 2042 (2012) and 2043 (2012), aimed at
addressing the complex crisis in the Syrian Arab
Republic. We hope that, through the six-point proposal
of the Joint Special Envoy of the United Nations and
the League of Arab States and the Council's resolutions,
the loss of life will end and normalcy will return to
Syria. Malaysia also seeks a peaceful settlement
through an inclusive Syrian-led political process,
where the rights of all parties are protected.

In that connection, we also hope that the
international zeal that is visible on that issue can be
replicated in efforts to end the illegal Israeli occupation
of the Syrian Golan, in accordance with resolutions
242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 497 (1981).

On a similar note, with regard to Lebanon, we
call on all concerned parties to fully implement
resolution 1701 (2006).

We wish to reiterate that addressing the
Palestinian question requires that the international
community, particularly the Security Council, act
truthfully and sincerely to achieve a just peace in the
region. The Council should undertake immediate and
substantive actions to address the Palestinian question
by upholding its own resolutions.

To that end, Malaysia reiterates its call on
Member States that have yet to do so to recognize the
independent State of Palestine. We cannot continue to
deny the right of the Palestinian people to establish an
independent State of Palestine based on the two-State
solution, within the pre-l967 borders and with East
Jerusalem as its capital.

