Mr. Belinga-Eboutou (Cameroon) (spoke in French): My delegation wishes in turn to thank you,
Sir, for convening this third meeting of the year on
Kosovo.

My delegation wishes to express its support for
the very relevant points made by the Ambassador of
Singapore regarding the need in due course for a
comprehensive survey ofthe situation.

We welcome the Deputy Prime Minister of
Serbia. We listened very attentively to his message.
Cameroon has taken due note of his request for
multilateral assistance to establish a multi-ethnic
society in Kosovo - in other words, multilateral
assistance from the international community to
preserve the existence of Kosovo.

We thank Mr. Annabi for his very detailed
briefing at the start of the meeting on the latest
developments in Kosovo. Cameroon's position on the
question of Kosovo was outlined here on 21 January
and 25 February. On those occasions, we stated our
conviction that certain actions had to be undertaken as
a matter of priority if we wished to consolidate the few
achievements that had been made towards the revival
of life in Kosovo. Those actions, we felt, were
threefold: the strengthening of security, the
disarmament of all armed groups and encouraging all
minorities to return. We insisted on the point that these
actions were top priorities and we still deem them to be
so today because they can preserve Kosovo's very
existence, which entails preserving its unity.

We welcome the progress mentioned by
Mr. Annabi as having been made this month in those
priority areas, the most important being the formation
of a coalition Government. That was indeed of great
importance, and showed that the message sent by the
17 November 2001 elections has finally been heeded.
Every time we have addressed the question of Kosovo,
we have consistently said that the message is that what
is needed to govern Kosovo is inclusion, not exclusion.
What is needed is definitely to work together, and a
coalition bringing together all segments of society.
That is why we call on all parties, including the
Kosovo Serb Return Coalition, to participate in the
Government by nominating representatives.

We congratulate Mr. Steiner on his efforts, and
especially on the wealth of imagination he has drawn
on to achieve these results.

We call on all States in the region to respect all
territorial agreements. That is essential for the
maintenance of peace and security in the region.

We take this opportunity to deplore the violence
and crime that continue to cause terror and despair
among the people. Here, we welcome the anti-crime
campaign put in place by UNMIK regulation 2002/6 of
18 March 2002. In addition to the second weapons
amnesty, we welcome the transfer of prisoners to
Kosovo.

Those were the points we felt we needed to make
at today's open meeting on the question of Kosovo.

