Mr. Thorns (Germany): Germany aligns itself with
the statement presented by the observer of the European
Union.

Allow me to thank today's speakers for sharing
their expertise and insight. They have once again shown
that the situation of children in today's conflicts around
the world remains dire. The annex to The Secretary-
General's current report on children and armed conflict
(S/2014/339) lists 59 parties to conflict for having
committed grave violations against children in conflict
situations. Each and every one of them is one too many.

Despite the Council's significant progress on the
legislative side, as well as the increasing commitment
on the part of Governments to raise and tackle this
issue, implementation on the ground remains all too
often inadequate. Moreover, it seems that children,
along with other civilians, are increasingly being
deliberately targeted during conflicts, especially by
non-State actors. The current list of shame also shows
that dealing with non-State actors remains our biggest
challenge. Many of those groups have been listed for
far too long. The international community needs to
reinforce its efforts in that regard, and we need to find
new and creative solutions to deal with that kind of
violations.

Taking one current example, we are appalled by
reports from Iraq suggesting that the so-called Islamic
State has used sexual violence as a tactic of war, in
particular against children who belong to religious
minorities. Also, in Nigeria, the terror organization
Boko Haram regularly abducts, kills and maims
children and deliberately attacks schools and hospitals.
This year's report by the Secretary-General looks into
that conflict for the first time, and the findings are
shocking. Children in northern Nigeria grow up in fear
and are not safe even in their schools. In that regard,
we welcome the very specific and concrete Guidance
Note on Attacks against Schools and Hospitals that
was launched in May by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General in collaboration with UNICEF,
the World Health Organization and the United Nations
Educational, Social and Cultural Organization. The
latest report of the Secretary-General shows that eight
parties have been listed for attacks against schools and
hospitals in armed conflict.

We hope that the Guidance Note provides clear
instructions to those who carry out monitoring and
reporting in the field. The Note will contribute to an
ever more effective implementation of resolution 1998
(2011). In our view, it is of paramount importance that,
where relevant and feasible, a sufficient number of
child protection officers be deployed to United Nations
peacekeeping and special political missions to allow for
comprehensive monitoring and support. It is only when
we have a clear picture of what is happening on the
ground that we can take adequate action and advocate
to create change.

Germany fully supports the United Nations
Children, Not Soldiers campaign, and we welcome the
commitment of the listed armed forces to ending the
recruitment of children by 2016. Moreover, it would be
important to guarantee that the armed forces of those
States parties listed in the annexes to the Secretary-
General's annual report on children and armed conflict
be allowed to contribute troops to United Nations-
mandated missions only once the Secretary-General
has certified the full implementation oftheir action plan
with the United Nations to end and prevent violations
against children.

Ending grave Violations against children is
a task that requires joint efforts on the part of us
all - United Nations Member States, non-governmental
organizations and civil society. While specific
guidelines are developed in New York, the actual work
to implement them needs to be done on the ground.
Therefore, we would like to encourage all Member
States to support the United Nations and respective
organizations in their important endeavour to end
violence against children in armed conflict. Germany
will certainly remain committed to this issue.

