Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I would like to
reiterate our thanks to you, Mr. President, for your able
stewardship of the Security Council this month. I
should also like to express our appreciation to
Mr. Robert Serry for his comprehensive briefing to the
Council. As we approach the end of 2008, I would like
to take this opportunity to pay tribute and bid farewell
to the outgoing members of the Council. We would like
to express our deepest appreciation for their tireless
efforts and immense contributions to maintaining and
strengthening international peace and security.

We come before the Security Council two days
after adoption of resolution 1850 (2008), the first
resolution adopted by the Council with regard to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict in more than four and half
years despite the many serious issues and crises that
have arisen in that period requiring the Council's
urgent attention and action. The Council's inability to
pronounce itself on the situation has prevented it from
playing its rightful role under the Charter to address an
issue of central relevance to the maintenance of
international peace and security, thereby harming its
credibility and depriving us of its contribution, to the
detriment of our collective efforts to achieve peace.

The Security Council's efforts to address current
developments - including the intensification of illegal
Israeli settlements, the frustration of attempts to deliver
humanitarian assistance to the Palestinian population in
the besieged Gaza Strip, the rise of settler violence in
the occupied Palestinian territory and the status of the
Israeli-Palestinian peace process - are therefore
welcome and signal the Council's reassertion of its
authority and its intention to play a more active role in
advancing a peaceful settlement.

We have always appealed for the Security
Council's engagement and called upon it to shoulder its
responsibilities. Therefore, despite serious misgivings
about the exclusionary process and limited scope, we
welcome the adoption of resolution 1850 (2008).
Moreover, we again urge the Council not only to
remain seized of the matter but to actively follow up
and implement its relevant resolutions, including
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002), 1515
(2003) and now 1850 (2008), in order to contribute
tangibly to the achievement of a two-State solution that
includes a sovereign, independent, contiguous and
viable State of Palestine living side by side with Israel
in peace and security on the basis of the 1967 borders.
That must remain among the Council's priorities for a
just resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict that
most benefits the Palestinian and Israeli peoples. It will
also vastly enhance the prospects for regional and
international peace and stability.

In that regard, we join Arab ministers, the Quartet
and the many Council members who have emphasized
the importance of the Arab Peace Initiative and of
seizing the historic opportunity it provides to make
peace and coexistence a reality in our region. Along
with the resolutions of the Security Council and the
Madrid principles, which constitute the basis of the
peace process, the Initiative and the Road Map are
integral to the Annapolis process, which has received
wide international support and whose irreversibility the
Council has affirmed. All efforts and practical
measures must be exerted to advance that process in a
way that justly resolves all core issues - including

those of Jerusalem, borders, Palestinian refugees,
settlements, water, security and prisoners - and leads
to the conclusion of a peace treaty and the end of
decades of our people's statelessness, occupation and
suffering.

The Palestinian people, under the leadership of
their sole legitimate representative, the Palestine
Liberation Organization, remain determined to achieve
justice and to live in peace and security in their
homeland, side by side with their neighbours. Indeed,
since the declaration of independence 20 years ago, the
Palestinian leadership has consistently reaffirmed its
commitment to negotiations aimed at ending the Israeli
occupation that began in 1967 and achieving the two-
State solution for peace. Accordingly, the Palestinian
Authority has upheld its obligations in good faith under
all agreements reached and made every possible effort
to fulfil its Road Map and Annapolis commitments.

We all know what is needed to make peace, and
yet peace has for too long eluded us. Any impartial
examination of the situation on the ground in the
occupied Palestinian territory and of the peace process
in the past year leads us to the same conclusion.
Despite the high hopes and momentum generated by
the Annapolis Conference and despite some progress in
certain areas, the situation has continued to deteriorate
and minimal progress has been made towards peace.
Once again, the intertwined and mutually reinforcing
nature of the process and developments on the ground
has been harshly confirmed. Negative developments on
the ground have continued to undermine efforts to
advance the peace process. At the same time, the
failure to adhere to peace process commitments and to
undertake steps for building confidence and improving
the situation on the ground have continued to intensify
tensions and exacerbate already difficult conditions.

As we reflect on that reality, it is incumbent upon
us to ask the following questions. Why - despite the
international presence and the promises of Annapolis,
despite United States leadership, despite commitments
made and despite reaffirmation of the Arab Peace
Initiative and the various efforts exerted to support the
peace process - have we been unable to make the
required progress? What has happened in the year since
Annapolis that has prevented us from concluding a
peace treaty by the target date of the end of this year,
as we were promised?

We need a moment of truth, a reality check and
serious answers. Only that will enable us to pinpoint
what has gone wrong and to determine what needs to
be done henceforth to avoid the pitfalls, repeated
failures and deterioration of the past and to put the
process on an accelerated track towards the
achievement of its stated goals.

In that connection, we agreed to the Quartet
proposal for United States supervision and monitoring
of the process and developments on the ground. It is
our understanding that a report has in fact been
prepared by United States General Fraser, yet we have
not seen it. We believe that, at a minimum, it should be
shared with the Quartet and the Council, not for the
purpose of pointing fingers or blaming anyone but in
order to know what the obstacles before us are so that
they can be removed from the path of the process. The
following must be determined. First, who is upholding
his obligations and who is not? Secondly, what needs
to be done to create appropriate conditions on the
ground and between the parties to advance the process
towards the attainment of the two-State solution based
on United Nations resolutions, the Arab Peace
Initiative and the Road Map.

While we continue to await such a report, we are,
of course, all aware of what has transpired in the year
since Annapolis. Despite the commitments made, the
repeated calls of the Quartet and its very clear
obligations under international law, Israel, the
occupying Power, continues to behave on the ground as
if there were no peace process and no prior agreements
reached and as though it were immune from the laws
that govern international relations, including situations
of foreign occupation.

Even as the international community revelled in
the high of Annapolis, Israel continued its deviant
behaviour, persisting with its illegal policies against
the Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem. However, the
Security Council and the Quartet have remained
incapable of or unwilling to act to bring an end to such
Israeli policies and to constructively support the parties
in doing what must be done to truly achieve peace.

In the run-up to Annapolis and continuously
thereafter, Israel persisted in tightening its siege of the
Gaza Strip, in massive collective punishment of the
Palestinian civilians there, and continued, particularly
in early 2008, to use excessive force against the
population, deepening the tragic humanitarian situation
in Gaza. Here, we repeat that there is no justification
whatsoever for such illegal collective punishment of a
people.

We have appealed to the Council on several
occasions to act to compel Israel to cease its military
attacks, ensure protection of the civilian population and
cease the illegal, punitive measures by which it is
deliberately causing a human catastrophe in the Gaza
Strip. This has included repeated calls for the opening
of the border crossings and implementation of the
Agreement on Movement and Access. But the
international community has only been able to provide
desperately needed humanitarian assistance, which the
occupying Power also continues to obstruct with
impunity, and has failed to act decisively on the
political front to address this crisis and bring Israel into
compliance with its obligations under international law,
including humanitarian and human rights law.

Immediately after Annapolis, it was also revealed
that Israel was pressing on with its colonization
campaign, in grave breach of the Fourth Geneva
Convention. Indeed, contrary to United Nations
resolutions and the commitments made at Annapolis
and despite repeated calls by the Quartet for respect of
the Road Map obligation to freeze settlements and
dismantle outposts, Israel has done the exact opposite,
escalating the construction and expansion of
settlements and the wall, particularly in East
Jerusalem.

This obviously requires a concrete response by
the Quartet, which should put in place a mechanism to
bring Israel into compliance with the call to freeze all
settlement activities, including natural growth. The
inability to do so has sent the wrong message to the
occupying Power, on the one hand allowing it to
intensify settlement activities and on the other
providing fertile ground for the escalation of settler
terror, violence, harassment and intimidation against
Palestinian civilians and properties, as recently
witnessed in the appalling recent events in Al-Khalil.

Another area where the absence of such a
mechanism has undermined the process is the issue of
the checkpoints and movement and access restrictions.
Despite the Annapolis commitments and the Quartet's
numerous calls for the easing of movement and access,
we have witnessed an intensification of Israeli
restrictions under the pretext of security, with an
increase of at least 100 more obstacles in the West
Bank and the isolation of East Jerusalem in particular.
Paradoxically, this has occurred at the very same time
that reports from all concerned parties are praising
Palestinian Authority efforts to promote law and order,
particularly in cities like Jenin, in fulfilment of our
obligations and underscoring the importance and
benefits of such progress and cooperation on the
security front. Also, even as this cooperation continues,
Israel is still carrying out raids and arrests, which
undermine our efforts and which, despite the recent
release of some prisoners, ensures the continued
imprisonment of at least 11,000 Palestinians.

On the ground, all of this has resulted in further
fragmentation of the occupied Palestinian territory, the
imposition of deeper socio-economic deprivation on
the Palestinian people, the heightening of frustrations
and tensions, and a weakening of hope and belief in the
peace process.

With the persistence of such complexities and
behaviour completely contradictory to that required for
a just resolution, it is imperative to ask: how can we
bring the peace process to a successful conclusion in
the year 2009? We believe that that the responsibility
falls upon the Quartet and the Security Council to
devise a practical mechanism to address these issues in
a situation where one party repeatedly fails to respond
to calls and to fulfil its obligations, miring us in a
cyclical process with no end in sight. Such a
mechanism is necessary to help us overcome the
current obstacles and stagnation, avoid the same
mistakes and deterioration, and allow the peace process
to advance to a successful conclusion.

We have tried to be constructive by identifying
what has prevented us from achieving a peace treaty in
2008 and by calling for serious efforts to address the
issues that have repeatedly hampered the peace
process. This will be the greatest contribution in
support of the peace process and to assisting the parties
to advance their ongoing bilateral negotiations. This is
what we believe will enhance our chances for avoiding
the disappointment, failure and despair that the
continuation of this conflict would bring and for finally
realizing peace in 2009.

Thus, even during the current transitional period,
while we maintain our high expectations and hopes for
the Annapolis process, we expect the Security Council
and the Quartet to uphold their responsibilities and to
exert the needed practical measures to ensure that
obligations are met and that the parties refrain from
any steps undermining confidence or prejudicing the
outcome of negotiations.

In this regard, we reiterate our hope that the
ceasefire will continue to be upheld and will be
extended to the West Bank. Moreover, we express
appreciation to our Egyptian brothers and also for the
most recent Arab ministerial meeting for the efforts
exerted to help us achieve Palestinian reconciliation.
We will continue to work cooperatively with our
Egyptian brothers to regain Palestinian national unity
in all its aspects, a goal that is so essential for our just
cause.

In conclusion, I express our deep hope that 2009
will indeed be the year in which we bring an end to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict and the tragedy of our
peoples with the achievement of a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace, the cornerstone of which is the
two-State solution. We look forward to the day when
the Palestinian people will exercise their inalienable
rights, including their right to self-determination; live
in freedom and dignity in their independent State of
Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital; and when
we can together open a new chapter of peace, security
and coexistence in our region.

