Mr. von Pierer: It is a great and distinguished
honour to be here today and to have the privilege of
addressing you. Thank you for giving me this
opportunity and the memorable experience of joining
you here in this legendary Chamber, which I have
known so far only as a curious visitor.

I have been asked to say a few words about the
role of business in conflict prevention, peacekeeping
and post-conflict peace-building. This is a challenge
we at Siemens know well. In 157 years of doing
business around the globe we have gained extensive
experience working in different kinds of crisis
situations.

Today I want to address three themes. First, I will
make some concrete remarks about two conflict areas
that are the focus of public attention right now -
Afghanistan and Iraq. Secondly, what are the most
urgent needs for the process of rebuilding after a
conflict? Thirdly, what can be done over the long term
to secure stability and to avoid conflicts or at least
reduce their intensity?

First, concerning Afghanistan, less than two
weeks ago I met with President Karzai while he was in
Berlin for the International Afghanistan Conference.
Our talks concentrated on his country's reconstruction.
At his request, we jointly visited one of our Berlin
factories, the same factory that King Amanullah of
Afghanistan visited on his tour of Germany back in
1928. This shows that we have generations of
experience in Afghanistan, as we do in most other
countries around the world.

Our presence in Afghanistan was interrupted by
war. But when it ended, we took some very specific
steps to restart our activities and to help rebuild the
country. First of all, we wanted to reopen our office as
quickly as possible. We looked for a highly qualified
national to relaunch our business and found the right
man in our own company. He is fluent in Pashto, Farsi,
German and English and was eager to contribute to his
country's rebirth. We acted fast and reopened our office
in Kabul in February 2003.

Secondly, parallel to setting up our operations, we
critically analysed the most pressing infrastructure
needs in the country. From our point of View, the top
priorities were to restore power supplies, repair the
water system in Kabul and reconstruct the
communications network.

Thirdly, we were already on site when we
received the first orders in these sectors. One project,
for example, was to rehabilitate two hydropower plants
that we had built over 50 years ago. We simply pulled
original construction plans out of the archives and
began work immediately. Another project was getting
Kabul's water system back in working order. By the
way, we trained a large number of Afghans for this

special work at our facilities in Pakistan and India and
trained only a few people in Germany.

A fourth consideration was the social side, which
is always important for successful engagement. We are
helping to educate people. We are supporting
UNICEF's "Back to School" initiative as an important
investment in the country's future, with an emphasis on
girls, to ensure that they also participate in basic
education. I know that those efforts are just the
beginning, but they are visible. That is important and
that counts.

Concerning Iraq, we would like to pursue the
same basic strategy and to help restore, for example,
the country's power generation capacity, its power grid
and its communication networks. We would also like to
open local facilities, but, as we all know, the situation
is extremely difficult right now. Despite the security
risks, however, we have already started to help in
concrete projects - one is to set up mobile telephone
networks in northern Iraq and the other is to rebuild a
power plant. We all share the hope that the
reconstruction of Iraq can be accelerated as soon as
possible.
All countries and all situations are, of course,
unique, and there is no golden solution for all post-
conflict scenarios. One must analyse each situation and
tailor the response. In general, I would say there are
five basic factors that are critically important: security,
infrastructure, financing, post-conflict planning, and
visible progress.

The first and foremost factor, security, is obvious.
That has been a chronic problem in many regions, but
since 11 September we also know that violence can
strike anywhere, at any time. There are no more safe
havens in the world, and we have to live with that fact.
But now it is clear that in order for business to operate
there must be a reasonable level of security and enough
government control to provide basic law and basic
order. The risk factors must be reduced to a
manageable level - not to zero, perhaps, but to a
manageable level.

In critical regions, business follows some basic
rules - for example, a strong reliance on local
employees who best know their country, their culture
and the local circumstances. Also important are a few
expatriates to push the process. Our principle in such
cases is to send employees only on a voluntary basis.
These people are carefully chosen, after considering all
religious, ethnic and cultural factors, and they do not
necessarily come from Germany. Close cooperation
with local authorities is a must for taking all proper
measures. Above all, one needs good common sense,
caution, prudence and, also, courage. But
unfortunately, these rules may not always be enough. If
the risks are too high, we sometimes have to pull
back- only as long as necessary, I must add -
because our basic philosophy is: "We are here to stay".

To summarize my first message: local
government or provisional authorities must provide the
necessary minimum of security, and business should
draw on the experience of people who best know the
country.

The second factor is infrastructure. Nothing can
function without water, electricity, food, food supplies,
transportation and communication systems, particularly
in cities. One of the top priorities must therefore be to
reconstruct and to secure these services in order to
restore functional authorities, to meet the basic needs
of the population and to provide the foundation for
rebuilding the economy and the society. So my second
message is to begin as soon as possible with the
process of repairing and renewing the basic
infrastructure.
The third factor is financing. The success of any
reconstruction programme depends on getting funds.
The private sector must have partners - international
organizations such as the World Bank, bilateral
partners, development agencies, Governments and
local authorities. Business cannot bear the financial
burden, nor it can bear it only to a limited extent. As
we all know, the process of securing financing can be
complex and time-consuming, and sometimes
frustrating as well. But in post-conflict situations,
speedy financing is critical for restoring a viable
society. Therefore, my third message is that financing
instruments, including guarantees and public/private
partnerships, must be made available as quickly as
possible. Nothing is more dangerous to the peace-
building process than a lack of action.

The fourth factor is post-conflict planning, above
all, timely planning. If at all possible, post-conflict
plans need to be developed at the same time as military
or conflict-resolution strategies. There must be a
seamless and fast transition.

We have to be realistic. This means we cannot
always expect all procedures to run in the standard
forms that we know and are familiar with. For
example, there is the bidding process. Extraordinary
situations often demand extraordinary solutions, as
well as fast and uncomplicated decisions. One must
accept that this is sometimes more effective than
following the usual game rules, because time is of the
essence. So my fourth message is to plan as much as
possible in advance but do not waste critical time in
unique situations by relying on overly complex, overly
bureaucratic and time-consuming solutions.

None of the four factors I have mentioned are
effective without the fifth, that is, visible progress.
People must personally see that progress is being made,
that their own lives are improving, that they can begin
to support their families again, not with extralegal
activities but as part of a new civil order. That is
essential for regaining trust and long-term social
stability. My fifth message, therefore, is that we have
to give people a future, a future that must be quickly
tangible.

This leads me to my last point today: what can be
done over the long term to secure stability? One central
source of conflict is hopelessness, or the feeling or
being excluded from growing prosperity and from the
benefits of globalization, and of being overwhelmed by
a process that one cannot influence. Those fears, those
desperate outlooks, lead to desolation and anarchy.
People who have nothing to lose become unpredictable
and capable of any deed. We have to counteract those
trends by giving people hope and a way out of their
situation - not only for a brief moment, but on a
sustainable basis. I would like to give you three
examples of what can and should be done.

The first example is education. We must build
schools, educate children and provide vocational
training for youth. If we educate the children, we open
the future to them - a future in growing prosperity
and a future without violence and aggression. As the
President of the World Bank said, people want hope for
their children. That is expressed in the Asian proverb,
"One generation is planting the trees. The next
generation is enjoying the shade." Education for
prosperity and peace could be a broad programme for a
public/private partnership.

The next example is health care. Basic public
health services are a must, even in countries with
isolated communities. There are solutions like
telemedicine to provide better health consultations. It is
a tangible and effective way to bring part of the first
world to the third.

The third example is the transfer of knowledge
and technology. This is a key step to integrate local
economies with the world and to train people to help
themselves. This could be accomplished in
coordination with the local investment of global
players; this is the way to build up networks of local
business partners and suppliers and to create jobs. We
took such an approach years ago under the guidance of
Shimon Peres. We set up a joint venture software
company for Palestinian and Israeli developers in
Ramallah, in the West Bank. It was so important to me
that I personally took part in the inauguration
ceremony in Ramallah. It was a moving moment, as
you can imagine. It worked well and gave many people
a future. It was growing fast until the project was
tragically interrupted by the renewal of hostilities. But
this idea and many, many more like it can work. I am
convinced of it.

These examples show that development aid and
programmes must do and can do, much more than fight
poverty. They must also focus on solutions for ensuring
long-term benefits and stability, and they can be
provided by public/private partnerships. Again, most
important in my mind is education, education,
education.

Business alone cannot change the world but,
together with public partners, business can make
decisive contributions in the struggle against Violence,
against anarchy and against terrorism, and on behalf of
civilization, freedom and prosperity. I totally agree
with the Secretary-General when he said some minutes
ago that bottom lines cannot be separated from some of
the key goals of humankind: peace, development and
equity. We have certain projects under way and we are
ready to do much more.

