Mr. Insulza (Chile) (interpretation from Spanish): I
wish to begin by reiterating what I said yesterday in the
General Assembly. We state our deep concern at the
serious crisis in the Middle East peace process, a process
we have supported since its beginnings in Madrid and
Oslo.

Few international agreements have aroused so much
hope and relief in the international community. From the
beginning, this peace process was viewed as going
beyond the parties to the conflict, and proved that even
the most complex and difficult problems on the
international agenda could be resolved with political
courage, enabling age-old enemies gradually to become
partners in a new Middle East reality of security and
respect for all. We must not give up hope that this
remains possible. Unfortunately, the peace process has
recently faced many obstacles, and frustration was
building up until the recent eruption in Jerusalem, which
is the reason for today's meeting.

Jerusalem is a holy city for a number of cultures and
religions, and we all understand that a delicate balance
must be maintained. It is a highly sensitive place, where
history has shown us that there for every action there is
a reaction, and where subjective factors largely prevail
over objective analysis. The level of accumulated tension
was so high that a single spark sufficed to ignite the
flames we are regrettably witnessing. In the course of but
a few days, many have lost their lives, both Palestinians
and Israelis, and hundreds have been wounded.

It is essential for the Government of Israel and the
Palestinian Authority to reduce the tension that this new
tragedy has caused. We therefore call upon both parties
to do everything possible to calm the situation and resume
dialogue in the framework of respect for existing
agreements and for the beliefs of the populations
concerned.

A situation that a few months ago was ripe with
opportunity must not be allowed to become a mere
parenthetical interval. There have been men and women
of determination; statesmen who were able to see beyond
the limitations of the present and to break down the walls
that prevented Palestinians and Israelis from beginning a
peace process. In the light of this success, we cannot
permit the triumph of certain minority groups which are
against peace and which speak with the voice of
extremism and espouse a culture of death: a step
backwards in the peace process would only benefit them.
We in the international community must cooperate so that
the language of violence and intolerance does not

 

supplant that of dialogue and understanding in the long-
suffering region of the Middle East.

Chile is located far from that region, but the many
Chileans of Palestinian and Jewish origin live together in
peace and harmony. We have the largest population of
Palestinian origin in Latin America, and it pains us to see
it affected by the grave situation its people are facing.

Chile maintains good relations with Israel and with the
Arab countries and has a great wish to see the peace
process in the Middle East continue to move forward. To
this end we are willing to help in any way we can.

Chile shares some of the proposals that have been
formulated within the framework of this crisis and at this
meeting of the Security Council. It is necessary, of course,
to suspend use of the tunnel which gave rise to the
controversy, but above all it is necessary to renew the
process of implementing the peace agreements and the
resolutions of this Council on the Middle East.

