Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland): The debate that
the President of the Council has wisely instituted on
this subject is an excellent opportunity, both to review
where our focus should lie over the next six months in
following up the declaration of our heads of
Government and State last September and to listen to
the views of non-members of the Council on where
they want concentrated action. Under the pressure of
the demands put upon it, the Security Council is
gradually changing the way it acts. I should like that
change to accelerate. At the end of my intervention 1
shall make some comments in that area to follow up on
what the Ambassadors of Singapore and France have
said.

Much of the principle of the follow-up and quite
a lot of the substance have been covered by a good
European Union statement this morning. I will not go
over the same ground again. We are still dealing with
our business in fairly general terms, and before long we
are going to have to get down to some particulars. But,
I am not sure that we are getting there today. We may
have to continue this debate.

I would like to pick up not your four questions,
Mr. President, but your six questions in the second part
of your paper, before I come to some final comments.

First, how effective are we being in giving special
attention to Africa? There is no doubt of the answer to
that: less effective than Africa deserves. But the
Security Council's focus on African conflicts is being
maintained, and the special characteristics of African
conflicts, which you refer to, are being addressed more
directly, not least in the cases of Sierra Leone, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Angola. But,
more important than that in terms of recent
developments, Africans themselves are beginning to
take practical action to address the special
circumstances that have dragged Africa down and left
the continent lagging in development terms. A sense of
renewal and partnership is being created, both amongst
Africans and between Africa and the rest of the world.

Likewise, as Ambassador Levitte said earlier,
there has to be a partnership between the Security
Council and the parties to a peace agreement-so
there has to be a partnership between the outside world,
in particular the developed world, and the continent of
Africa. At last, in the view of the United Kingdom,
Africans and their non-African partners are beginning
to look forward to solutions to African problems, not
always backwards to blame and resentment. As an
organization, the United Nations needs to build on this
fast, not least in our approach to financing for
development and other Economic and Social Council
issues, as well as to peacekeeping.

Secondly, does the Security Council give equal
priority to all conflicts or crisis situations? Of course
not. The Security Council has no magic wand to wave
away all conflicts equally. We have to concentrate on
those that are most susceptible to treatment-and
even then we have immense difficulties. But slowly we
are becoming more professional and workmanlike in
our approach to conflict management. If that produces
a higher rate of success, then other regions or States in
conflict will be more likely to turn to the United
Nations for help, and the whole international system of
conflict prevention and peace-building will gain
confidence and coherence. For now, we have to be
selective.

Some speakers this morning and Ambassador
Mahbubani this afternoon raised the question of
inconsistency. We cannot get away from the problems
that are called inconsistency just by resolving to be
consistent. It goes deeper than that. I want to mention
to my Council partners and to the wider audience an
important point that my former Foreign Secretary,
Douglas Hurd, took up in a recent article about policy
decisions. He says that the fact that the international
community cannot intervene everywhere to protect
human rights or to lead to peace and security need not
be an argument against helping where we can. But, it is
an argument against too much philosophizing on the
subject.

It is also a reason for not trying to confuse
decisions of policy with obligations under international
law. Most of the time the Security Council is dealing
with decisions of policy, and not responding to an
obligation under international law. Having a primary
responsibility for peace and security is not an
obligation under international law; it is description of a
function. Douglas Hurd says that the moment those
who take such decisions try to buttress them by arguing
that they are a requirement of international law, they
are immediately exposed as hypocrites for not obeying
that same requirement in other tragedies across the
world, which they have no intention of putting right.
We should be modest in doing good, not only because
of the prudent limits to our own strength but because,
however much we do, there will be much evil in the
world about which we do nothing.

Thirdly, peacekeeping operations are now under
vigorous review, and we have a lot of work on our
hands, within the United Nations system generally, to
implement the Brahimi report (S/2000/809)
comprehensively. The Security Council has established
a working group to follow up its own responsibilities in
this respect. We must all be ready to act on the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations review when
it reports in May. And the Secretariat must take
forward the other work foreseen in the implementation
plan. This is the most important thematic area for the
Council to get right in 2001.

Fourthly, within the Brahimi framework, the
United Nations approach to conflict prevention needs
particular attention, because we all have so far failed to
find a really effective way of preventing conflict, even
when we know it is approaching. The Secretary-
General's report, due in May, is the next important
milestone. We have already discussed peace-building in
the Council and have recognized that coordination
between the Security Council and other parts of the
United Nations system is essential. But have we turned
that into practical action? No, we have not. It is time to
bring the Security Council closer together with other
parts of the system.

As a start, the United Kingdom will institute,
during its April presidency, a meeting between Security
Council members and the Bureau of the Economic and
Social Council, and with other major United Nations
players on conflict management, to discuss
coordination and coherent action on peace-building and
conflict management. I have the support of the
President of the Economic and Social Council for that
in principle. I shall discuss the matter with the
President of the General Assembly, and I ask for the
Council's support.

Fifthly, the idea of producing comprehensive
international strategies to address root causes of
conflicts is ambitious, because the root causes
themselves are disparate and complex. They can
include the collapse of state government, rebellion,
ethnic or cultural incompatibility, brutal and greedy
government, or sheer poverty and the collapse of
organized economic life. The Security Council cannot
dictate a comprehensive international strategy to cover
all these evils. But it can work with other parts of the
international system and with the affected regions to
develop a broad partnership in addressing the root
causes of conflict. In real life, political, economic and
social phenomena are seamlessly intertwined. So must
the United Nations response be.

As I have said, signs of this broad partnership are
just emerging in Africa, and it is time for the Security
Council and the African organizations -regional and
subregional - to start working together more
constructively. As you suggest in your sixth question,
Mr. President, we have made too little concrete
progress in this respect. Why, for instance, have the
Security Council and the Organization of African Unity
failed to establish a continuous and productive working
relationship? What is needed is not so much
institutional reinforcement, which you mentioned, but a
change of approach on both sides of the equation, to
reflect the recognition that both United Nations organs
and regional organizations have been too self-contained
and politically constrained to devote themselves to
really effective collective action. We must break out of
our unproductive mould on all sides, and a good sign of
that, perhaps, was our cooperation with the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) on the
Liberian resolution we adopted this morning.

A concluding note: the Security Council has to
raise itself up a level from the traditional way of doing
things. If, in doing that, we generate a bit of healthy
competition with the General Assembly, 1 see no
particular harm done, particularly if we all respond not
with criticism of each other but with action and results.

For our part in the Council, we have to
understand our real objectives and be realistic about
them; use our time more carefully and purposefully;
admit our failures or our inability to act, and
understand why; be more transparent, especially with
the non-members of the Security Council; and, perhaps
most of all, search more willingly for the collective
interest, an approach which need not be at the expense
of our national interests, if only we are prepared to
calculate the long-term benefits.

This morning the Secretary-General asked
whether our capitals were now engaged in following up
the Millennium Summit commitments at the political
level. I am under instructions from my Prime Minister
to act and not just speak, in this sense, because he
wants the declaration of 7 September 2000 to leave a
mark. It is time to test ourselves by this higher
standard, and I hope that this will be the result of this
useful debate.

