Mr. Tuy (Cambodia): First, allow me to congratulate
France on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of June and for organizing this
open debate on the protection of civilians in the context
of peacekeeping operations today.

I wish to associate myself with the statement made
by the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and with the
statement made by the representative of Thailand on
behalf of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN). I wish to deliver this statement in my
national capacity.

Armed conflicts that have spread across
continents, along with recurring terrorist attacks
throughout the globe, have exerted an unbearable
toll on civilian populations, making United Nations
peacekeeping operations obligatory. I wish to thank
you, Mr. President, for the thought-provoking questions
in your concept note (S/2016/503, annex), highlighting
how peacekeeping operations can do more to provide
protection to civilians.

Peacekeeping operations are becoming increasingly
complex and varied. Widespread terrorism, mass
displacements of populations, large-scale disease
outbreaks and climate change have strained international
resources and undermined the effectiveness of
peacekeeping efforts globally. As peacekeeping
components of multidimensional operations are
designed to protect the most vulnerable population,
they should show more caring and humanitarian
responsibilities in carrying out their duties. Cambodia
advocates zero tolerance of sexual violence against
children and of serious crimes committed by United
Nations peacekeepers and staff. The protection of
civilians should be the motto of their missions.

Protection should cover civilians in both conflict and
non-conflict areas where peacekeepers are stationed. In
this instance, it is necessary to promote the rule of law
at the national and international levels. States have the
primary responsibility to protect civilians. Therefore,
countries hosting peacekeeping operations should work
more to strengthen their national rule of law, particularly
as it relates to legislation on the protection of civilians.
In this light, the predeployment and in-mission training
of United Nations peacekeepers and staff are critical
to protecting the civilian population. Training should
focus on United Nations standards of conduct, the
obligation to observe the laws of the host country, and
the promotion of humanitarian legal principles.

Mine action makes it possible for peacekeepers to
carry out patrols and allow humanitarian agencies to
deliver assistance to ordinary citizens to live without
fear. For this reason, Cambodia has contributed more
than 3,000 Blue Helmet troops to United Nations
peacekeeping operations worldwide. Through its
National Peacekeeping Operations Centre, Cambodia
looks forward to hosting training sessions, jointly run
by national and international experts, in the field of
demining and the destruction of explosive remnants
of war. Moreover, the ASEAN Regional Mine Action
Centre was inaugurated in May in Cambodia as a centre
of excellence to address the impacts of landmines and
explosive remnants of war.

While coordinated actions among the military
and civilian peacekeepers and local authorities are
being conducted, it is important to closely monitor and
report on the evolving security situation on the ground
in order to ensure a prompt response. In this sense, if
peacekeeping operations are to succeed on the ground
they will require the involvement of all stakeholders,
ranging from international organizations to the Security
Council, which is the organ responsible for setting the
mandates peacekeeping operations.

My country well understands the challenges that
United Nations peacekeepers are facing. The lessons
learned from my country are that when rebellious groups
were not taking part in the United Nations-arranged
peace process, civilians in the most dangerous areas
were not adequately protected. Whenever, there was an
attack by the rebellious groups, either on civilians or
on peacekeepers, there was no effective response from
the United Nations, except to adopt a silent attitude that
only caused more trouble in the country. Therefore,
I believe that effective measures should be taken to
ameliorate such situations.

On a wider perspective, the lessons learned have
taught us that clear peacekeeping mandates, together
with political support, sufficient resources and
adequate financial and logistical support, are the key
elements necessary for the United Nations to effectively
safeguard and protect the most vulnerable civilian
population in conflict situations.

Finally, I cannot conclude without appreciating
the ongoing efforts of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Department of Field Support to
improve the performance of peacekeeping operations
by developing a conceptual framework and protection
of civilians strategies, as well as training courses for
personnel to be deployed.

