Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I thank you very much,
Madam President, for convening this meeting. I
offer you our full support during your presidency in
September. Allow me, as well, to thank our briefers,
Mr. Gonzalo Koncke and Mr. Felix Maradiaga, for their
briefings. I also welcome among us His Excellency
Mr. Denis Moncada Colindres, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Nicaragua.

Just a week ago, we discussed mediation and the
peaceful settlement of disputes in this Chamber (see S/PV.8334). More than 70 Member States reaffirmed
their commitment to preventive diplomacy and the
peaceful settlement of disputes, whether inter-State and
internal conflicts. Therefore, let me just remind members
of the Security Council that we strongly agree with
the Secretary-General's policy of prioritizing conflict
prevention and addressing the root causes of conflicts
before they escalate and have an irreversible impact.

It is our responsibility, as members of the
international community, to not turn a blind eye to
crises, such as the one occurring right now in Nicaragua.
Instead of shying away, we need to see - just as the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights calls us to see in its recent report on
Nicaragua - the current situation in a broader context
and realize what possible consequences it might
provoke in the region.

Poland is deeply worried about the recent
developments in Nicaragua. We are concerned about the
repression and violence, which have resulted in hundreds
of deaths and thousands of injured. The Nicaraguan
authorities must fully respect and comply with the
applicable human rights standards regarding the right to
peaceful assembly and freedom of speech. There is no
justification for the excessive and disproportionate use
of force against peaceful demonstrators, just as there is
no justification for the harassment and intimidation of
civil and political activists.

Regional organizations can often prove themselves
far more efficient in mediation. Their geographical
proximity to the actors involved in conflicts leads to the
deeper comprehension of the specificity of a particular
problem, and they are better prepared to identify key
nuances that we might simply overlook. They also
demonstrate an excellent ability to lay the foundation
for more profound and sustainable reconciliation.

That is why Poland takes note of the efforts
undertaken by the Organization of American States
(OAS) to resolve the crisis, followed by attentive
monitoring of the situation. We would like to express
our strong support for the work that is carried out by
the OAS, and we hope that the inclusive and fruitful
dialogue, with the participation of the Interdisciplinary
Group of Independent Experts for Nicaragua, will
commence. At the same time, we are very concerned
that the parties so far have demonstrated little will or
ability to participate in such a dialogue. We encourage
the conflicting parties to take up an open and genuine
dialogue, start cooperating with the OAS and take
advantage of the forum it offers. If they are unwilling
to do so, perhaps a need for an external peace broker or
dialogue facilitator should be recognized.

We have to once and for all leave behind the
delusion that we have the luxury of time to spend on
discussions or deliberations. Given the high stakes
in this case - such as the lives of our Nicaraguan
friends - time is a comfort we simply cannot afford.
Therefore, we call upon the Nicaraguan Government to
not perceive the discussion we are having today as an
attempt to stigmatize its country. We believe that our
meeting is not about any sort ofblame game or pointing
fingers, but rather about acknowledging the gravity of
the problem and offering a helping hand in solving it.

