Mr. van Walsum (Netherlands): We, too, would
like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Annabi for a
very useful and informative briefing. Before
commenting on some of the information we received
from him today, I would like once again to express my
delegation's appreciation for all the work that is being
done by the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) under very
difficult circumstances.

Let me begin by focusing on West Timor. My
delegation is concerned that many thousands of
refugees still remain there. I have a few specific
questions and would be grateful if Mr. Annabi could
give me equally specific replies, although I understand
that may not always be the case. My first question
concerns the process of the registration of refugees in
the camps of West Timor. We would like to know
exactly how this is carried out. Is the registration
merely a matter of counting the people, or will the
refugees be asked where in East Timor they are from,
whether they wish to return and, if so, why they have
not yet done so? The last question is of obvious
relevance.

My next question here is when the registration
process will be completed, and when its results will be
available.

Many of the remaining refugees were presumably
pro-Indonesian. Could the Secretariat elaborate on the
efforts made to convince these people that it is safe for
them to return, and tell us to what extent these efforts
have the desired effect? Of course, this leads to the
preliminary question of what is being done in East
Timor to ensure that it is indeed safe for these people
to return?

It is of deep concern to the Netherlands that,
according to our information, militia activity and
intimidation continue unabated, in particular in
Kupang, where the presence of East Timorese and
Indonesian military and militia leaders brought back
from East Timor is considerable. Apparently, personnel
of the Indonesian armed forces (TNI) are still not
reintegrated into the normal military command and
control structures, but remain stuck in the refugee
camps. We are convinced that the central authorities in
Jakarta are trying to rein in the militias, and we
appreciate the difficulties they may have in seeing their
instructions fully implemented on the ground.
Nevertheless, the Government of Indonesia has to step
up its efforts in this regard. In reminding Indonesia of
its responsibilities in West Timor, we are not
interfering in its domestic affairs.

Let me repeat the gist of paragraph 12 of
resolution 1272 (1999), which was adopted exactly
seven months ago today. On that occasion, the Security
Council stressed that it was the responsibility of the
Indonesian authorities to take immediate and effective
measures to ensure the safe return of refugees in West
Timor and other parts of Indonesia to East Timor, the
security of refugees, and the civilian and humanitarian
character of refugee camps and settlements, in
particular by curbing the violent and intimidatory
activities of the militias there. All of that continues to
be valid today, with the exception of the word
"immediate", which obviously has lost its meaning in a
resolution that is seven months old.

On the positive side, it is encouraging to hear that
cooperation between the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) and the TNI
along the border is developing satisfactorily. However,
the Council should be cautious in drawing from this the
conclusion that as a result the military component of
UNTAET may now be downsized. The Netherlands is
of the opinion that, as part of the process leading to a
possible decision to that effect, the Council should
receive a separate briefing on the military and security
situation in East Timor, including the state of the
militias in West Timor. On the basis of that briefing the
Council could then decide on the strength of the
military component required to enable UNTAET to
carry out that part of its mandate which concerns the
provision of security throughout the territory of East
Timor.

This is an important matter for my delegation. In
October, when we discussed the wording of resolution
1272 (1999), the Netherlands strongly defended the
figure of up to 8,950 troops, as had been recommended
by the Secretary-General. On 27 April, in the Security
Council, Mr. Annabi informed us that UNTAET was
then reviewing the possibility of reducing the strength
of its military component, and promised us that the
result of that review would be brought to the attention
of the Security Council. Today, we have not heard
anything that could be described as the result of the
review, but instead we have been informed of the
decision to reduce the strength of the military
component from 8,396 to 7,896 by October.

We had expected a somewhat different procedure.
If the peaceful conditions in the eastern part of East
Timor allow for some downsizing, there is also the
option of relocation which could have been considered.
At any rate, my delegation feels that the Security
Council should be given an opportunity to consider the
whole military and security situation, and we are
looking forward to a specific briefing, either in another
open meeting or in consultations of the whole.

We are looking forward to receiving the
independent expert study currently under preparation
on a possible national East Timorese defence force.
When can we expect it? Apparently, there have been
questions as to whether it is appropriate for the United
Nations to become involved in the establishment of a
military force. For its part, the Netherlands would
consider it entirely appropriate and in keeping with
UNTAET's mandate of nation-building in East Timor if
the United Nations also dealt with the establishment of
a military force for the purpose of self-defence.

Of course, expert assistance by friendly countries
could be sought, including perhaps that of some
countries members of the Association of South-East
Asian Nations, and not automatically excluding
Indonesia. We are very well aware of the sensitivities
involved, and these should of course be taken into
account. But we should also realize that an independent
East Timor will eventually establish a military force,
and it is better to have this done at a time and in a
manner which give the international community the
opportunity to ensure that the development of that
force, like that of the other indigenous East Timorese
structures for security, conforms to the standards of
civilian control, democratic accountability and
observance of international human rights norms and
standards.
A measure of the extent to which those standards
are met by those security structures could be included
in the benchmarks which, according to Mr. Annabi,
could serve to gauge East Timor's fitness for
independence. Are the East Timorese leaders in full
agreement with those benchmarks? Does the
Secretariat intend to develop the benchmarks further?

Finally, having mentioned the military
cooperation between UNTAET and the TNI, I should
like also to address the issue of cooperation in the area
of human rights and legal affairs on the basis of the
Memorandum of Understanding signed on 7 April. The
Netherlands would be very interested to hear how this
cooperation is taking shape in practice, in particular
with regard to investigating and prosecuting human
rights violations. Recently, the Indonesian Attorney-
General, Mr. Darusman, stated that the first trials
would take place perhaps as early as this month.

