Mr. Yafiez-Barnuevo (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I am grateful for the opportunity given to my
delegation to participate in this open debate, which
enables me to reaffirm Spain's commitment to the
people and the Government of Haiti in their ongoing
efforts to build stability - a necessary condition for
development. I take this opportunity to congratulate
former President Clinton on his recent nomination as
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Haiti and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and head of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH), Mr. He'di Annabi, and to express
to them the full support of the Spanish Government. I
also welcome the presence among us for this debate of
Mrs. Michele Duvivier Pierre-Louis, Prime Minister of
Haiti.

My delegation endorses the statement made
earlier by the representative of Sweden on behalf of the
European Union.

We share the View that it is necessary to continue
to help Haiti to become a viable State able to stand on
its own and Spain is working hard towards that goal
bilaterally and multilaterally. For example, Spain has
become the fifth largest bilateral donor, with an annual
contribution of some €20 million, as well as the third
largest donor at last April's Washington donors
conference, with a contribution of $37 million. 1 should
recall that Spain also actively participates by providing
44 police officers to MINUSTAH's police component.
As a member of the European Union, together with
France, Spain is providing the largest number of police
officers to that component. Spain is also a member of
the Economic and Social Council's Ad Hoc Advisory
Group on Haiti.

Although we know that the international
community must continue to support Haiti, we feel that
its support should not be limited exclusively to official
development assistance, as important as that may be.
For that reason, we are convinced that we need to
complement official development assistance by
promoting employment generation through investment,
in particular through private initiatives, as highlighted
in the report of Professor Paul Collier. In that respect,
the international trade mission of private investors,
which will visit Haiti in October led by the Special
Envoy, is particularly important.

Spain very much agrees with the decision of the
Secretary-General to appoint former President Clinton
as Special Envoy for Haiti. He is a person with a
comprehensive vision of the country's needs, and he
has shown his ability to act on both political and
socio-economic issues. Also, his work within the
United Nations will enable him to promote consensus
within the international community.

The process of institutionalization in Haiti is
essential for progress and for strengthening the
country. Pursuit of that goal must continue through
democratization of State bodies and by rationalizing its
institutions and making them more effective. Here, we
believe that the ongoing constitutional reform should
be supported by the holding of elections at the end of
the year. Once again, Spain is ready to provide its
support for these.

As part of the institutionalization process in
Haiti, Spain thinks that necessary efforts must continue
towards establishing a State based on the rule of law
worthy of the name. In that respect, it is essential to
prioritize the reinforcement and improvement of the
judicial and penal systems through close cooperation
between the Haitian authorities and the United Nations.

We express our support for the gradual
reconfiguration of MINUSTAH's dual military and
police component, as recommended by the Secretary-
General in his report (S/2009/439) dated 1 September
2009. I am referring to a reduction of 120 troops within
the military component, given the unlikelihood of new
large-scale security operations and the need to
strengthen rapid-deployment and monitoring capacities
in remote areas, including land and maritime borders.
Such a step would allow for an increase of 120 officers
in the police component, given the need to continue to
support the Haitian National Police in its efforts to
ensure public safety.

I reiterate the importance that my country
attaches to the reform of the Haitian National Police
with a view to ensuring the country's sustainable
stability. In that regard, Spain welcomes the
recommendation in the report of the Presidential
Commission on Public Security, issued on 6 August
2009, to establish an additional security force with a
paramilitary status that would be comprised of between
4,000 and 5,000 members to ensure border and rural
security, provide protection from natural disasters and
environmental degradation, and combat illicit
trafficking.

In conclusion, along with the European Union,
Spain supports the Secretary-General's recommendation
that the Security Council extend MINUSTAH's
mandate for an additional 12 months, until 15 October
2010.

