Mr. Djani (Indonesia): First of all, I would like to
begin by thanking Equatorial Guinea for convening a
debate on this important subject and by welcoming His
Excellency Mr. Simeon Oyono Esono Angue, Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea. Your presence, Sir, has certainly
set the tone for today's important discussion. I would
also like to thank Executive Director Fedotov and
Mrs. Ukonga for their presentations.

As the largest archipelagic State in the world, with
17,504 islands and strategically positioned between
the Indian and Pacific Oceans, Indonesia knows full-
well that there is no substitute for a strong policy
and swift enforcement response to any threat or act
that endangers the safety and security of its maritime
domains. We believe that transnational organized
crimes, wherever they are committed, may constitute
a threat to peace and security, and therefore need to
be comprehensively and collectively addressed by the
international community. The detrimental impacts of
transnational organized crimes are neither isolated nor
local, but are increasingly regional and global in nature.
The groups behind such crimes do not operate solely
in countries with weak law enforcement or governance
capacity. They also take advantage of the finer features
of the global economy, such as banking, trade and
communication networks, in order to fully expand the
scope their criminal activities. Technology has made
criminals more elusive. With regard to today's debate,
the Indonesian delegation would like to highlight the
following points.

First, we need a better understanding of the nature
and threat of transnational organized crimes, as well
as of their implications for international peace and
security. The 2010 report ofthe United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC) entitled The Globalization
of Crime noted a lack of available information
regarding transnational criminal markets and trends.
Now, nearly 10 years after the report was published,
it is important for the Security Council to consider all
options available in order to understand the threats
posed by transnational organized crime, particularly in
relation to threats of crime at sea. In that regard, the
Council may consider asking the Secretariat to prepare
a report identifying options to enhance cooperation
and coordination and make recommendations to better
prevent and counter transnational organized crimes at
sea, within the applicable legal framework, and report
to the Council on it regularly.

Secondly, Indonesia believes that national
prosecutorial and enforcement capability should be
strengthened. Almost every stage in the activities
of transnational organized crime at sea - from
the planning, execution and financial flows to the
keeping of the proceeds of crimes - could happen
in different jurisdictions simultaneously. Therefore,
Member States need to enhance their legal regime to
enable effective international cooperation in the field,
such as extradition, mutual legal assistance and joint
investigations. Jurisdiction should be a bridge, not a
barrier, to ensuring that wrong is redressed and justice
is ensured. Where the crimes occur beyond any national
jurisdiction, States are encouraged to resort to joint or
coordinated maritime operations to curb such crimes,
while observing the law of the sea.

Thirdly, Indonesia also strongly advocates the
critical role of regional mechanisms as first responders
to transnational organized crimes at sea. Numerous
mechanisms have been established in the Asia-Pacific
region to address the scourge of transnational organized
crime, among which is the Malacca Strait Patrols by
Indonesia, Malaysia and Singapore. In addition, the
Trilateral Patrol was initiated in 2016 by Indonesia,
Malaysia and the Philippines to counter and address
maritime crimes in the Sulu Sea. Such cooperation
envisages a coordinated naval patrol to secure the
important Sulu-Celebes maritime trade routes. We
also believe that everyone should be involved in the
discourse on maritime security and be supported by the
efforts made under the auspices of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) Maritime Forum,
the ASEAN Regional Forum, the Indian Ocean Rim
Association and others. International organizations
such as the International Maritime Organization and
the International Labour Organization should also
support regional efforts.
Fourthly, Indonesia would also like to mention at
today's debate an emerging transnational organized
crime, namely, crimes related to fisheries, which entail
not only criminal aspects with a transnational dimension
but a human rights facet as well. In our experience,
many vessels committing crimes related to fisheries are
also implicated in human rights violations, particularly
the forced labour of trafficked persons. Studies reveal
that crimes related to fisheries involve big business
players, high-ranking persons, political back-up and
massive financial resources. For Indonesia, the issue
of illegal, unreported and unregulated fisheries is a
crime that needs common action. Crimes related to
fisheries threaten not only the economy of the victim
countries but also the sustainability of their marine
environment. That concern is also highlighted in the
2011 UNODC report. It is high time for the Council to
discuss the issue.

Crime at sea is transnational, transboundary and
extrajudicial in nature. In the past the sea has been a
vast body of water where criminals could be elusive,
hiding behind waves and reefs. With the emergence of
technology, nowadays criminal ships become a dot on a
computer screen and are easily recognized on a satellite
map. What is needed now is collective responsibility
and a common approach and joint action by nations to
fight this centuries-old crime. The Council, in line with
its mandate, should be active to ensure peace at sea and
that ships sail safely.

