Ms. Amos: This is the fourth briefing to the
Council since the adoption of resolution 2139 (2014)
on humanitarian access issues in Syria. The resolution
demands action by parties to the conflict in a number
of areas, including ceasing attacks against civilians and
doing everything in their power to facilitate rapid, safe
and unhindered humanitarian access to people in need
of assistance. With its adoption, we had all hoped for a
significant improvement in the situation on the ground.
However, I again regret to inform the Council that
violence and attacks on civilians by all parties to the
conflict and human rights abuses continue unabated,
with devastating consequences for those affected.

There have been numerous examples of targeted
or indiscriminate attacks on civilians in densely
populated areas, in violation of the most fundamental
principles of international humanitarian law. The
failure to respect and protect the lives of civilians was,
for example, apparent on the morning of 18 June, when
barrel bombs were dropped on a camp for displaced
people in Al-Shajara in southern Syria, near the border
with Jordan. Around 350 families lived in the camp.
Dozens of people, including women and children, were
killed.

Countless others have lost their lives or been
injured as the conflict continues to rage in other parts
of country, including in the governorates of Aleppo,
Hama, Idlib, Dar'a, Rural Damascus and Deir eZ-Zor.
This morning in Aleppo, at least 17 civilians were
reportedly killed and more than 30 injured by barrel
bombs dropped near Halawaniyeh Square. Also this
morning, at least 15 civilians were killed by aerial
strikes targeting numerous neighborhoods in Ar-
Raqqa, including an educational facility and a library.
On 7 June, 10 people were killed and 55 others were
injured when a car bomb went off in Horns city.

Some 241,000 people continue to live under
siege conditions, unable to leave their communities,
and we are unable to get in to deliver much needed
humanitarianumanitarian assistance. Since my last
briefing to the Council, only 2,467 people - or 1 per
cent of those living in besieged areas - have received
much-needed food assistance. This level of obstruction
is inhuman and goes against the basic commitment to
human dignity and rights that United Nations Member
States agreed to in Article 1 of the United Nations
Charter, which reads in part:

"The purposes of the United Nations are
to achieve international cooperation in solving
international problems of an economic, social,
cultural, or humanitarian character, and in
promoting and encouraging respect for human
rights and for fundamental freedoms for all."

On 21 June, a truce in Yarmouk was agreed between
the parties. The agreement foresees the surrender of
weapons by non-State armed groups, the withdrawal
of foreign fighters, the return of Palestinian refugees,
the restoration of basic services and the provision of
humanitarian assistance. The United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA) was not part of the truce agreement and
has not been assigned a monitoring role. UNRWA is
seeking the support of all parties to ensure it is granted
unhindered access, as it has been unable to enter the
camp to deliver assistance since early June.

In recent weeks, attacks on civilian infrastructure
by armed opposition groups have increased, resulting
in significant damage or disruption to water, sewage
and electricity networks in the cities of Aleppo, Idlib
and Deir ez-Zor. In Aleppo city, as many as 1 million
people remain without safe drinking water after one
such attack. In Deir ez-Zor, ongoing fighting, with
the deliberate denial of access into the governorate by
various opposition groups, has made it increasingly
difficult for humanitarian organizations to bring
life-saving relief supplies to the area. Over the course
of the past two weeks, more than 40,000 people have
been displaced to eastern Deir ez-Zor city.

Once again, I remind the Council that targeting
or indiscriminately attacking vulnerable civilians
constitutes a war crime. There can be no justification
for such action. Deliberately obstructing humanitarian
access and depriving civilians of access to services
essential to their survival is unlawful and inhumane.

In 2011, I told the Council that 1 million people in
Syria needed humanitarian assistance. That figure now
stands at 10.8 million, 1.5 million more than there were
just six months ago. The number of people in need in
hard-to-reach areas now stands at 4.7 million, which
represents an increase of 1.2 million since resolution
2139 (2014) was adopted in February.

United Nations agencies and non-governmental
organization (NGO) partners continue their efforts to
meet urgent humanitarian needs. Staff have deployed
to difficult and dangerous locations to engage in
negotiations to secure access and to deliver much-
needed aid. Many have been killed, injured, detained
or taken hostage. Nearly 60 aid workers have lost
their lives in the course of their work so far. Countless
hours have been spent negotiating and facilitating
convoy movements, in compliance with complicated
and onerous administrative procedures. Despite all
these efforts, four years into this war we are unable
to sustainably reach nearly half of those identified as
being in the direst need.

Insecurity and active conflict play a role in
preventing humanitarian access to many locations.
However arbitrary restrictions and obstructions,
including bureaucratic procedures imposed by the
Government, limit or obstruct where, to whom and
how often we deliver aid. Some opposition groups have
also attacked, threatened and refused to cooperate with
humanitarian workers.

In April, the Government of Syria introduced new
truck-sealing procedures intended to streamline and
ensure safe passage of regular aid deliveries. This new
mechanism was poorly implemented and resulted in a

large backlog ofdeliveries. Food assistance fell by nearly
1 million in May and has yet to be restored to previous
levels, with only 50 per cent of planned food assistance
dispatched in June. On 9 June, the Government
announced additional requirements involving the
submission of monthly distribution plans and weekly
loading plans. In addition, the Government introduced
new procedures for the delivery of assistance to hard-
to-reach locations through United Nations hubs.

The new procedures require three levels of approval,
undermine previous agreements and have caused
two successive months of decline in aid deliveries. I
cannot describe to the Council the frustration felt by
experienced aid workers who have to spend endless
hours trying to get agreement for aid deliveries as
people's lives hang in the balance. The focus of the
Government of Syria remains on controlling the work of
the United Nations and its partners. Our focus remains
on the people who so desperately need our help.

Despite repeated calls for the free passage of all
medicines and surgical equipment in aid convoys, certain
items continue to be excluded or removed, depriving
tens of thousands of people each month of their basic
right to life-saving medical assistance. The Government
continues to prohibit the inclusion of medical supplies
in shipments intended for opposition-held areas. This
deliberate denial of essential medicine and medical
equipment undermines the very basis of humanitarian
actlon.

The ability of international non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) to operate in Syria also
remains severely constrained due to bureaucratic and
operational constraints. A proposed amendment to the
existing memorandum of understanding, regulating the
work of NGOs and aimed at reducing restrictions, was
submitted to the Syrian Government on 26 February. It
remains unanswered. Effective humanitarian assistance
cannot be delivered without NGOs, which remain an
essential partner in the aid effort.

The United Nations and its partners remain
committed and prepared to scale up operations and
provide life-saving assistance to men, women and
children in need throughout the country, despite the
challenging and dangerous operational environment
on the ground. Nearly 3.3 million people received
food assistance from the World Food Programme and
partners in May; more than 16 million people were
assisted with clean drinking water through the provision
of chlorination tablets by UNICEF and partners;
around 2.9 million children were vaccinated against
polio in the latest round; 2.3 million people received
critically needed non-food items from the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and its partners; and 4 million people received medical
assistance by the World Health Organization and
partners in the first five months of 2014.
However, needs continue to grow and are outpacing
our response efforts. We are still unable to provide
regular and sustained assistance to 4.7 million people in
hard-to-reach areas. The Council has demanded that the
parties to the conflict allow and facilitate humanitarian
access across conflict-lines and across borders.
Resolution 2139 (2014) is clear and unequivocal on
this point. We need a scale-up in cross-line and cross-
border deliveries to meet growing needs on the ground.
Approximately 1.3 million people could be reached via
border crossings we have requested with Turkey, Jordan
and Iraq. In previous reports to the Council, I proposed
the facilitation of cross-border deliveries through the
establishment of neutral monitors.

I emphasize once again the urgency we face.
Thousands of people continue to lose their lives every
month. In the continued absence of a political solution
to the crisis, humanitarian workers will continue to do
everything they can, but we recognize that we cannot
do it alone. We look to the Council to help us ensure
that the parties to the conflict abide by their obligations
under international law. Some 10.8 million women,
men and children depend on that support.

