I thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to make a statement at this open debate on sexual violence in conflict. The adoption of the women and peace and security resolutions, beginning with resolution 1325 (2000) 20 years ago, established a new path in protecting women and girls against sexual violence. The continued work of the Council, through the adoption of additional resolutions focused on protection from sexual violence in conflict, has made clear that preventing such violence and protecting women and girls, as well as men and boys, must be a priority. There is now global recognition that conflict-related sexual violence threatens international peace and security. The awareness that sexual violence perpetuates conflict and instability is now entrenched in our collective thinking, as is the understanding of the long-term destructive nature of sexual violence as a deliberate tactic of war and the devastating effect that this has not only on women and girls, but on entire communities. NATO understands that protection is at the core of the women and peace and security mandate. It has become central to our efforts to protect civilians in all our missions and operations. We recognize that understanding and responding to the grievous, systematic sexual abuse of women and girls in and around conflict are mission critical and essential to our operational effectiveness. NATO has military guidelines, as well as a supplementary directive, to guide the Alliance's response to conflict-related sexual violence. These also affirm to commanders their leadership responsibility in preventing and responding to sexual violence. To ensure that we are prepared to carry out our responsibility, we continue to integrate the prevention of and response to conflict-related sexual violence into our contingency planning, exercises, education and training. Developing standards for ourselves is important, and how we encourage high standards in other militaries around the world is also essential. In many of our partner countries, we have strengthened our training on human rights and the protection of civilians, including against conflict-related sexual violence. Earlier this year, NATO's Joint Forces Command Naples conducted a workshop focused on the Alliance's commitment to the prevention of and response to conflict- related sexual violence. We reaffirmed our international obligations to protecting women, girls, men and boys from sexual violence and highlighted the need to further develop clear political and operational guidance on how to respond to this heinous crime, including in relation to reporting. While we have seen an increase in the recognition and understanding of conflict-related sexual violence and the risks it poses to peace and security, the scourge of sexual violence in and around conflict remains a pressing global protection challenge. Despite the definitions, resolutions, commitments, endorsements and financing dedicated to eradicating sexual violence, this intolerable crime continues in numerous conflicts around the globe today, where the bodies of so many women, men, girls and boys are co-opted as part of the battlefield. It demoralizes, destabilizes and destroys individuals, communities and societies across the world. Where a culture of impunity exists, the many survivors of sexual violence in conflict may never see justice for what they have endured. Where such injustices go unpunished, they become part of the cycle of violence that perpetuates conflict. As the NATO Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg highlighted in his opening remarks at the NATO Digital Dialogue on Conflict-Related Sexual Violence last month, "We need legal instruments to reveal the atrocities, hold the perpetrators accountable and bring justice to the victims. Impunity is not an option. And we also need military means, to defeat [those] that have sexual violence as an integral part of their strategy." Preventing and responding to conflict-related sexual violence is not just a moral duty, it is critical to achieving durable peace and security. Actions that NATO has taken have made a real difference, but we all have a responsibility to do even more. That is why Secretary General Stoltenberg has highlighted the importance of reinforcing our policy framework to strengthen the political foundation for our continued commitment to eliminating sexual violence in conflict. This is an urgent task to create the conditions for security that will allow women and girls to live free from abuse and violence. And as with so many threats to peace and security, we can tackle this best by working together. Ultimately, in tackling sexual violence against women and girls, we do more than help individual victims; we set the tone for the respect for fundamental dignities and human rights that is the foundation for freedom and essential for peace. By doing this we can lay a foundation for lasting stability - a foundation that we can all play a part in building.
