Mr. Covic (Yugoslavia) (spoke in Serbian; interpretation provided by the delegation): Before I
address the Council, I should like to extend my
greetings to Mr. Kouchner, who has made a great
contribution to Kosovo and Metohija in the process of
the reconciliation of different ethnic groups.

There is a province on our planet where the old
truth that violence always goes hand in hand with fear
is being dramatically confirmed. That province is
Kosovo and Metohija.

There is a bus line in Kosovo and Metohija that
has no timetable. For the sake of the passengers'
security, departure dates and times are unknown; so are
arrival dates and times. Deputies of the Serbian
coalition Povratak come to the Assembly of Kosovo
and Metohija in armoured vehicles with a heavy
international security detail. In the end, the actual
choice of when they arrive or how long they stay in
Pristina depends not on them but on the whim of
KFOR and the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). Officials of Serbia and
Yugoslavia, the State of which Kosovo and Metohija
form a part, must provide information on their travel to
the province three days in advance, because it takes
three days to carry out the necessary preparations,
checks and complex security measures. Sometimes,
UNMIK and KFOR unilaterally decide that it is not
convenient to do so.

Kosovo and Metohija is, therefore, the only part
of the former Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
where people cannot move freely and where insecurity
and fear of violence and death have been persistently
and deliberately preserved. It would be unfair to say
that the current conditions are worse than those in the
past. I want to emphasize right away that I genuinely
and deeply respect the efforts of UNMIK and KFOR
and the results that they have achieved under very
difficult circumstances.

Once again, I would like to take advantage of this
opportunity to express my full support for Mr. Michael
Steiner and other international mediators and
protectors. I want to assure the Council once again that
Serbia and Yugoslavia will do everything possible to
help the inter-ethnic reconciliation process in Kosovo
and Metohija succeed.

We have proved our genuine intentions by
normalizing relations with all our neighbours, by
cooperating with the Hague Tribunal, and by having
considerably improved the political environment and
the inter-ethnic relations in southern Serbia, both in
multi-ethnic Serbo-Albanian communities and in
settlements with an Albanian majority. Of the total of
12,500 displaced persons, almost 10,000 Albanian
refugees have already returned to that part of the
country.

We have also proved our genuine intentions by
encouraging and supporting a strong campaign for the
registration and participation of Serbs in the elections
on 17 November 2001, by exhumation of all mass
grave sites in Serbia proper, by opening a DNA
laboratory centre in Belgrade in cooperation with the
International Commission for Missing People, and by
the expeditious transfer of ethnic Albanian prisoners
from detention facilities in Serbia proper to Kosovo
and Metohija. Although we have reached and signed a
precise agreement on the transfer of Serbian detainees,
not a single Serbian detainee has yet been transferred
from prisons in Kosovo and Metohija to prisons in
Serbia proper.

I cannot fail to note a few other disturbing facts.
The circulation of money made from prostitution and
the trafficking in drugs, weapons and human beings has
not been stopped. No steps have been taken - not
even symbolic ones - to facilitate the return of a
quarter of a million internally displaced persons and
refugees to Kosovo and Metohija. Furthermore, the
donors conference designed to address this problem has
been postponed.

Before the elections in Kosovo and Metohija,
when the Common Document was signed, the
international community seemed to have energetically
and enthusiastically advocated a plan for the
expeditious return of the internally displaced and
expelled. Regrettably, that enthusiasm evaporated
shortly after the elections, and the new Kosovo
Government has not earmarked even a single euro or
dollar for the return of refugees.

Little has been done for the preservation and
protection of property. Return of internally displaced
individuals and refugees cannot be limited to the
territory of north Mitrovica or a few enclaves. It is
essential that there be returns to cities as well and that
property from which certain groups of ethnic Albanians
have already made enormous profit be returned to its
legal Serbian and other non-Albanian owners.
Furthermore, unforgivably little has been done to
clarify the fate of 1,300 kidnapped and missing
individuals.

UNMIK has an historic responsibility to deal with
these and other issues. It is UNMIK's duty to continue
preparing ethnic Albanians for a dialogue. However,
UNMIK must work with the Serbs as well, and
regrettably that has not been the case. There is a
democratic Belgrade, and there are democratically
elected institutions of self-government in Pristina, but
there is no dialogue.

I can see a logical explanation for this tragic
impasse in the fact that extremism has been
marginalized in all parts of the former Yugoslavia
except Kosovo. The ideas of a greater Serbia and a
greater Croatia have been discarded and suppressed.
Yet the idea of another great, ethnically clean country
in the region has been neither discarded nor
suppressed: that anti-European and anti-civilization
project has been preserved and strengthened in the
presence of the international mediators. Extremism in
Kosovo and Metohija is an extremely powerful force,
and sometimes extremists themselves are in power. If
that had not been the case, we would have had
bilingualism, inter-ethnic tolerance, unbiased police
and an independent judiciary.

Some might say that conditions that have been
deteriorating for such a long time cannot be improved
in a day or in a year. I agree, but I can find no
reassurance when I analyse the Kosovo and Metohija
of today. Sometimes, even something that seems good
is not genuinely good. As reported, fewer murders and
attacks on Serbs and other non-Albanians were
recorded in the last year than in the year before. Unlike
some of my interlocutors, I emphasize that this is only
a result of the fact that Serbs and other non-Albanians
have been forced to live in enclaves or ghettos and that
they have learned to stay away from harm.

In the process of finding a solution to the security
issue in Kosovo and Metohija, we cannot make
assessments and evaluations based on the number of
security incidents. Instead, we should base our
assessments on progress made with regard to the level
of full freedom of movement. The reduced number of
attacks against the lives and the property of Serbs,
Turks, Romas, Goranis and other non-Albanians has
not resulted in the return of internally displaced and
expelled persons. That is a direct result of the fact that
UNMIK and KFOR have restricted freedom of
movement and the return of refugees in order to
prevent security incidents.

I am deeply concerned about the situation in
Mitrovica, which is a consequence of the existential
concerns of the Serbs and of profound inter-ethnic
distrust. In an effort to improve further the dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina, we offered the head of
UNMIK, Mr. Steiner, a draft agreement on the
principles for solving the crisis in the northern part of
that Kosovo-Metohija town. After Council members
have read the draft, they will see that we base our
policy and strategy on sustainable compromises and on
respect for the interests of all parties to the conflict.

Solutions that have come out of improvisation
and pressure have proved disastrous in the Balkans. Let
us not repeat previous mistakes. Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999) was not written for ethnic
Albanians only, to protect only them and to improve
only their position in Kosovo and Metohija; it was
written for Serbs and for all other ethnic communities
as well.

They say that there is no collective responsibility
in the democratic world. A few Serbs are being brought
to justice before international and domestic courts for
crimes and injustices committed against Albanians. We
have seen no signs yet that Albanians will also be
brought to justice for murders of those who did not
belong to their religion or ethnic group, for usurpation
of their neighbours' property, for destruction of Serbian
cultural heritage, or for ethnic cleansing of Kosovo and
Metohija.

Albanian extremism is in a hurry to draw Kosovo
and Metohija in its ethnic map as an island, isolated
from the region and populated only by ethnic
Albanians. Ethnic Albanian leaders, who had an alibi
and an excuse for their secessionist intentions during
the rule of Slobodan Milosevic, have been refusing a
dialogue with the new, democratic authorities in
Belgrade as well, as if they missed the old regime. You
will not find a single sign in the Serbian language
outside Serbian enclaves in Kosovo and Metohija, and
I am wondering whether the result of the proclaimed
and expected Europeanization would look like this.

I would like to assure you that this situation does
not boost democratic forces in Serbia and Montenegro;
on the contrary. Individuals from the old regime now
point to the situation in Kosovo and Metohia and say:
that is your reward for all the tolerance you have
shown and the concessions you have made.

As I have set out what we Serbs - and all the
citizens of Serbia and Montenegro - do not want and
are concerned about, it would only be fair to say what
we do want and hope for.

We want to see an end to media stereotypes
showing the Serbs as a threat to European and world
peace. We acknowledge that the former regime made
tremendous mistakes, and we have been trying hard to
explain how difficult it is to carry this burden that we
inherited from the past.

We want to see the international community's
clear position that the new Kosovo and Metohija must
not be built on results of ethnic cleansing and
widespread criminal activities in the society. We
recognize that now UNMIK and KFOR have
jurisdiction over peace and stability throughout the
territory of Kosovo and Metohija, and we shall take no
steps whatsoever that might result in the failure of the
concept of a multi-ethnic character for the province.

We will be ready to support the idea on creating
entities in Kosovo and Metohija, based on the model of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, but only if it is judged that
this idea, used as an interim step, will facilitate the
development of local self-government and the
protection of minorities, as well as a considerable
return of internally displaced and expellees. We will
oppose it firmly if there is a generally accepted feeling
that it would become an obstacle to a multiethnic
character for the province and would introduce a
territorial partition. We remain strong in our position,
as always, against any partition of Kosovo and
Metohija.

We do not want any of our neighbors to see us as
a threat or danger. We want to be seen as friends, ready
to help in good faith.

Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) on
Kosovo and Metohija provides that the province shall
be given "substantial autonomy". We do not see this
"substantial autonomy" as a mono-ethnic community,
divided by a high wall from the countries and the
nations of the region. Such a mono-ethnic community,
torn from its surroundings, would be a dangerous
precedent. It would increase the insecurity and
dissatisfaction of the people and the nations in the
Balkans to a distressing extent. It would dramatically
increase the level of insecurity and would jeopardize
the ongoing and future regional and European
integration.

We see this "substantial autonomy" as a part of a
democratic and stable state of Serbia and Montenegro,
which, integrated in the regional and European
organizations and initiatives, would be the key factor
and a pillar of peace and stability in the Balkans.

Recently, in two international conferences in
Belgrade, I talked about the conditions that need to be
met to achieve this peace that we have talked about and
have dreamed about so often. I said that none of the
Balkan conflicts should be viewed separately, but as a
part of the regional processes and problems.

Kosovo and Metohija, as the biggest and most
dangerous hotbed, should be addressed from the
regional perspective, because only such an approach
could claim stability. A reverse approach - addressing
the region from the Kosovo perspective - would not
tackle the integrity of the problem and thus would not
be fruitful or, even worse, would prove
counterproductive. The status of Kosovo and Metohija
cannot be addressed without constantly taking into
account the impact of any resolution on the
preservation of an integral Bosnia and Herzegovina and
on the peace in Serbia, Montenegro and Macedonia.

Solutions to all regional problems should be
sought in compromise and in self-sustainable stability,
and therefore all parties to the conflict should renounce
their maximum objectives. No party to the conflict
should get everything and no party should lose
everything.

It is necessary to eliminate the very possibility of
a battle for territories and to encourage a battle for
rights - the rights of people to work and earn, to
develop their language and culture, to live in peace in
their homes and on their land, on the hearths of their
ancestors and next to the historic and cultural
monuments they are undoubtedly heirs to.

I also called for a common approach among the
countries in the region that would efficiently take care
of regional peace and stability. I believe that such an
approach would be an interim step that would make all
members ready and eligible to join the European
Union.

Lastly, I said that it is necessary to make a plan
immediately and define a precise sequence of steps to
be taken in the coming months and years toward
establishment of a permanent and sustainable peace in
the region.

I have made all these proposals and comments
because I feel that we must be very cautious in our
efforts to improve the conditions in Kosovo and
Metohija as expeditiously as possible. There are some
international groups and organizations that have been
offering their "good services" without this caution.
They behave as if there had been no 5 October 2000, as
if there had been no changes in Belgrade at all, as if
Milosevic did not reside in The Hague. In this spirit,
some have recently formulated a proposal to grant
conditional independence to Kosovo and Metohija.

The whole world has rendered support to the
democratic changes in Yugoslavia and Serbia, to the
return of Yugoslavia to all international institutions and
to the readiness of its new authorities to seek solutions
to problems in the former Yugoslavia in peace, through
dialogue and tolerance, with full respect for the
interests of others and for protection of one's own
interests. Granting any kind of independence to
Kosovo, regardless of whether it is conditional or
unconditional, would drastically ignore Serbian and
Montenegran concerns and would punish the Serbs for
all they have done recently to join the family of worthy
nations.

The United Nations is responsible for and fully
capable of initiating a dialogue without imposing final
solutions. It has the power to make this dialogue
successful and worthwhile, and its participants
responsible.

I wish to point out that attached to my statement
are "Principles of a programme for return of internally
displaced persons from Kosovo and Metohija", the
"Report on the destruction of cultural heritage in
Kosovo and Metohija" and a letter from the local Serbs
from Kosovo Mitrovica addressed to the Security
Council.

