Mr. Dabbashi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like to thank you, Sir, for affording me this opportunity
to speak at this meeting. I congratulate you on France's
accession to the presidency of the Council for this
month. I also thank the Security Council for reaching
an agreement on the presidential statement that has just
been adopted (S/PRST/2013/21). Overall, it emphasizes
the Council's support for the Libyan people and
their elected authorities in their efforts to expedite
the democratic transition and the building of State
institutions on a solid footing and in a stable security
situation.

Although the Libyan Government has come to some
conclusions that differ from those on certain issues
addressed in the presidential statement, we understand
that the text is the result of lengthy consultations
within the Council and that it was necessary to take
the views of all members into consideration. We thank
the delegation of the United Kingdom for its initiative
in formulating the statement and for its subsequent
efforts. The presidential statement sends a new message
of Security Council support for our Government and
people.

I take this opportunity to highlight the principled
position of the official Libyan authorities with regard to
respect for human rights and the fight against impunity.
Our authorities have spared no effort to prevent
extrajudicial killings and inhumane treatment. Such
practices have abated significantly in recent months. To
be realistic, it is difficult to know for sure whether they
will end before the police force has been reinstituted
and the army has been trained to the extent that they
will be equal to all the challenges they face. I believe
that no one expects everything from an army of 30,000
that lacks training and weaponry and operates in a huge
country teeming with armed groups that consider those
institutions to be rivals.

However, the General National Congress and the
Government are resolved to strengthen State authority
and impose the rule of law. They believe that the
security situation is improving by the day, particularly
in the capital, Tripoli, and its environs following the
withdrawal of the armed groups therefrom. The Libyan
people insist on dismantling and disarming all armed
groups, and call on the official authorities every day
not to resort to the use of such groups and to cease
financing them in any way, including by providing them
with salaries or budgetary allocations. That task will
begin early next month, and we hope that the General
National Congress and the Government will enjoy all
possible support and backing from the Council.

I wish to thank the Security Council and the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya for their efforts and
support for our people.

The meeting rose at 3.10pm.
