Mrs. Albright (United States of America): Let me
join my colleagues in expressing my appreciation for the
Secretary-General's timely and thought-provoking paper on
ways to improve the peace and security role of the United
Nations. The Secretary-General's observations are
instructive, and they provide a useful summary of where we
now stand in our collective effort to make United Nations
peace-keeping a more effective instrument of collective
security.

I particularly want to echo the Secretary-General's
praise for the courage of United Nations peace-keepers,
both military and civilian. They have performed ably, under
what are often harsh circumstances and at considerable risk
and sacrifice. They have earned the gratitude of us all.

Today I want to expand on the preliminary assessment
I gave to the Secretary-General when he first presented his
report to us earlier this month. In offering my
Government's perspective on past lessons and future
challenges, let me begin by saying that the Secretary-
General has correctly pointed out that we are still in a time
of transition.

Transitions go on for a long time. Certainly we can all
hope that the upheavals in global politics triggered by the
end of the cold war several years ago will soon pass. But
the experience of the last six years suggests that,
unfortunately, turbulence, unrest and sometimes violent
change will be with us for a protracted period. This
means that all of us - the Member States, the Secretary-
General and regional organizations, as well as the
public - must learn to accept a new reality.

As much as we might wish it and need it, a new
order of international affairs is not just around the corner.
Our task is to make sense of the current era and learn to
adjust our policies so that we may pursue the goal of a
more secure world despite the turbulence we see around
us.

The 21 United Nations peace-keeping operations
established since 1988 - some of which have now been
shut down - attest to the leadership of the Council and
the willingness of the international community as a whole
to address security concerns. But the results of our efforts
to date have been mixed: success in Namibia, Iraq,
Cambodia, El Salvador and Mozambique;
accomplishments diluted by frustration in Bosnia and
Somalia; slow progress in Western Sahara;
disappointment, now overtaken by the beginning of hope,
in Angola; and grim tragedy in Rwanda.

Each of these missions has its own unique history,
with unique factors contributing to the outcome. But,
taken together, they provide a number of lessons which
we would do well to heed.

Perhaps the most important lesson is that peace-
keeping operations inside a country make different and
greater demands on peace-keepers than do missions that
separate two hostile States. Here the rules of peace-
keeping may be harder to apply. The contending parties
can be difficult to define or identify and are often self-
selecting. Their "consent" to the terms of a peace-keeping
mandate may be given and withdrawn; factional leaders
may be unable to control followers; peace-keepers may be
forced to choose between passivity in the face of
destructive breaches of a mandate and forceful responses
they are ill equipped to carry out.

As the Secretary-General has pointed out, these
conditions entail considerable risk to peace-keepers. They
complicate prospects for mission success and they may
result in missions that fail to meet expectations. The
reality is that we will continue to face situations in which
we will want to conduct peace-keeping in accordance

 

with the traditional rules but where there will be no
guarantee that operations so conducted will be adequate.

The recent successfully concluded mission in
Mozambique, however, may help point the way. An
extremely able and activist Secretary-General's Special
Representative was supported by a well-organized and
tightly coordinated donor community willing to apply
leverage at key points, by intense diplomatic activity on the
scene by a handful of influential countries with long-
standing relations with the parties, and by a strong and
supportive community of non-governmental organizations.

More generally, United Nations experience from
Angola, Liberia and Somalia, and elsewhere, suggests
additional adjustments in tactics. One of these should be a
willingness to delay the start of a mission until the parties
accept and observe for a trial period military and political
steps towards a negotiated settlement. Refinements in the
composition and resources provided to peace-keeping
missions in intra-State conflicts are also needed in order to
increase their political capacity while reducing costly and
sometimes less critical military elements.

Broadly speaking, this may mean more observers and
others with specialized skills, and less infantry. At the same
time, we must ensure that missions have adequate support
in the areas of transportation, communications and logistics
to ensure that timely and appropriate responses to
developments occur.

Another important lesson of recent years is the need
for rigorous decision-making in deciding whether, and how,
to initiate a peace operation. Over the past year, the
Security Council has begun, with my Government's strong
support, to ask tough questions about the cost, mandate,
scope, risk and duration of proposed operations before
Council action occurs.

The goal is to ensure that United Nations missions
have clear and realistic objectives, that peace-keepers are
equipped properly, that money is not wasted and that an
endpoint to United Nations action can be identified. The
new policy is working, and has resulted in fewer and
smaller new operations, and better management of existing
ones.

The success of our policy is the result of hard work by
the Member States, the Security Council and the Secretary-
General. All of us should be pleased. But I also believe we
need to work harder to define more clearly the relative
roles and responsibilities of the Security Council and the
Secretary-General in the area of peace operations.

There should be no doubt about the Security
Council's responsibility for peace operations. I cannot
accept the statement by the Secretary-General that the
Security Council is engaged in micro-management
because it seeks information about a peace operation. It
is the Council's responsibility to create peace operations,
to extend them, to alter them if necessary, and to
terminate them if warranted. Those decisions can be made
only on the basis of complete, accurate and timely
information provided by the Secretariat. There should be
no question about providing such information.

As I indicated in my original comments, we must
also guard against any inclination to suggest that every
time a United Nations operation succeeds it is due to the
United Nations as an organization but when a mission
runs into trouble it is the fault of the Member States.

A third important area of United Nations experience
in recent years relates to the appropriate use of force by
United Nations peace-keepers. The Secretary-General's
paper maintains, and we fully agree, that peace-keeping
and peace enforcement are not adjacent points on a
continuum.

The challenge of keeping peace is far different and
far simpler than the challenge of creating a secure
environment in the midst of ongoing conflict. The
precedent of the United Nations Protection Force
(UNPROFOR) in Bosnia, where peace-enforcement tasks
were given to a lightly armed force equipped only for
peace-keeping, should not be repeated. Instead, the
Council may continue, at times, to look to regional
organizations or to individual Member States or ad-hoc
coalitions when peace enforcement is required. The recent
French action in Rwanda helped to stabilize the situation
there and saved thousands of lives. In Haiti, the
multinational force led by the United States has restored
democratic rule, eased the humanitarian crisis and created
a stable and secure environment.

It is essential, of course, that when the Council does
turn to individual Member States or coalitions it retain the
capacity to monitor such operations to ensure that they
are conducted in accordance with accepted international
principles.

The Secretary-General's paper discusses only briefly
one element of enforcement action that merits more

 

consideration: the collaboration of regional military bodies,
such as the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO),
with United Nations peace-keeping forces, such as
UNPROFOR). Given the experience, it is important we
work together to develop reliable procedures for making
such coordination operate more smoothly and effectively in
support of Council objectives.

Another potential tool of conflict resolution is peace-
building: the use of economic and social measures directed
at the seeds of conflict. While a component of several
recent multi-functional missions and of various aid
programmes, the strategy has not been fully developed or
exploited. The obstacles are familiar ones. Reluctant
Governments may resist preventive measures or a
continuing United Nations role after a conflict. Independent
donor organizations must be persuaded to adjust policies
and programmes. When peace-building is an element of
peace-keeping, the task of coordinating human rights
activities, targeted aid such as jobs programmes, judicial
and other institutional reforms, development of social
organizations has been difficult for the United Nations.
Moreover, when a peace-keeping mission ends and there is
no special representative to serve as the focal point, the
continuity and coherence of peace-building efforts can be
lost.

None of these problems is insurmountable. We should,
however, be realistic in our expectations. Some situations
may require more assistance than the international
community can reasonably provide. But even seeking to
accomplish realistic objectives requires reorganizing the
way the international community responds to security-
related concerns.

We must widen the scope of related issues and
increase options for addressing them. A modest, but
consequential, step, which I proposed some 18 months ago,
would be to explore a mechanism whereby the Economic
and Social Council could work in partnership with the
Security Council to better identify and address economic
and social tensions before the outbreak of conflict or after
its conclusion.

The Secretary-General's paper contains also a
valuable discussion of the Security Council's use of
economic sanctions. My Government shares the concern
expressed in the paper about the desirability of avoiding or
reducing unintended and harmful collateral effects of
sanctions. It should be noted, however, that every sanctions
regime approved by the Council permits delivery of
humanitarian supplies. And if there is humanitarian
suffering as a result of sanctions, let us place blame
where it belongs - not on the Security Council but on
the Government whose policies caused us to act.

Procedures designed to mitigate the unintended
effects of sanctions should not be allowed to obstruct or
so mitigate their effect as to render them useless as a
means for influencing the behaviour of a Government that
is defying the international community and law. Sanctions
may be a blunt instrument, but they can be a useful one,
and they are less blunt than the alternative, which is, all
too often, the use of military force.

My Government hopes that this fiftieth anniversary
year of the United Nations will mark continued
improvements in the overall capacity of the United
Nations to conduct and manage peace operations. Much
has been accomplished over the last two years. We now
have a reinforced Headquarters staff, Offices of
Operations, and of Planning and Support, a 24-hour
Situation Centre, a Training Unit, a Policy and Analysis
Unit, a Mission Planning Service, peace-keeping stand-by
arrangements and a forward logistical base and storage
depot.

Despite these advances, further major progress is
required. Readiness, as our experience in Rwanda so
sadly demonstrated, is another. On this point, my
Government questions whether the rapid reaction force
proposed in the Secretary-General's paper is the right
course of action at this time. Setting aside national forces
for this exclusive purpose may result in high continuing
costs at relatively little benefit.

We do, however, welcome efforts to eliminate costly
delays in deploying United Nations missions once they
have been authorized. For example, we support a rapidly
deployable Headquarters team, a composite initial
logistics support unit and an effort to develop a contracted
standing lift capability.

We also look forward to improvements in the quality
and readiness of United Nations forces through regional
initiatives and bilateral cooperative arrangements, and for
improving United Nations public affairs support for
peace-keeping in theatre. The Special Committee on
Peace-keeping Operations has highlighted the need for
action in many of these areas.

Along with such enhancements in peace-keeping
capacity, further steps to assure more efficient use of
peace-keeping funds are necessary. In particular,

 

standardization of personnel costs and better systems for
peace-keeping mission cost control, accountability and
procurement must be adopted.

The question of finance is critical to the United
Nations ability to meet its peace and security
responsibilities. One important dimension of this relates to
the authorization of expenditures for new peace-keeping
missions. Since 1992 the Secretary-General and groups of
Member States repeatedly have emphasized the need to
streamline start-up funding in a way that preserves
accountability but avoids costly and dangerous delays in
beginning missions.

This remains essential; action should be taken this
year. We also hope to see further movement towards
annualization of peace-keeping budgets and the introduction
of a unified budget for all peace-keeping activities.

On a related matter, as my Government explained in a
detailed statement to the General Assembly on 12
December 1994, the United States will work with other
Members to devise a more fair and reliable system for
financing peace-keeping, including a reduction in the
United States share to 25 per cent.

These remarks on the United Nations peace and
security role would not be complete without underscoring
the importance my Government attaches to the issue of
proliferation. The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT) is the indispensable cornerstone
for assuring a more stable environment.

The NPT entered into force in 1970, and today, with
nearly 170 Parties, is the most widely adhered to arms
control agreement that is global in scope. As such, it serves
as the principle international legal and political barrier to
nuclear proliferation. It is my hope that those countries
represented here today will join in giving the strongest
support to the Treaty at the upcoming NPT Review
Conference by voting for its unconditional extension. Few
acts would go as far in promoting global peace and
stability.

In addition, as the Secretary-General indicates in his
report, we need to take steps to control the proliferation of
weapons that may kill in smaller numbers but contribute
hugely to the violence and destruction we see today in so
many corners of the world. In this regard, my Government
welcomed warmly the General Assembly resolution calling
for a global moratorium on and eventual elimination of all
anti-personnel landmines.

Finally, let me make a point that is sometimes
overlooked. While it is common to talk about the
dramatic rise in peace-keeping, beginning in early 1992,
the reality is that the growth has slowed and levelled off.
In 1994 total peace-keeping personnel peaked at over
90,000. But during the past year the Security Council
voted to end three missions, no major new operations
were begun, and by year's end peace-keeping personnel
had declined to 63,000. Nearly two-thirds of those now
deployed on peace operations are in the former
Yugoslavia. More than half of the current missions
consist of fewer than 200 observers or peace-keepers.

I emphasize this trend not because we expect peace-
keeping forces and costs to fall to historic levels. After
all, the imminent mission in Haiti and the potential one in
Angola will temporarily reverse this decline. Rather, I
want to stress that, as the Security Council has learned
some of the lessons of successful peace-keeping, it has
grown more determined to apply them to proposals for
new missions, or extensions of existing ones.

At the same time, other tools and options, such as
preventive action and diplomacy or regional initiatives
within a United Nations framework, are emerging, and
some have been effective.

This is the direction I see for the future: an
international community that has more and better choices
for peace and security action but that provides reliable
support for actions it asks the United Nations to
undertake.

In closing, let me say that I have listened carefully
to the comments of other members of the Council and I
will listen to those by other members this afternoon. I
would hope that our discussion of peace-keeping will
continue in both open meetings, such as this one, and in
informal consultations. Clearly, this issue will also
continue to be of great interest in my own Government.
Our national dialogue will continue, and I commit myself
to work to bring these discussions to the best conclusion
possible.

