The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.

The Somalia leg ofthe trip was co-led by the United
Kingdom and Nigeria. The visit focused on progress
towards elections in 2016, including the participation
of women; the security situation, in particular the
campaign against Al-Shabaab; and the humanitarian
situation. It was the first Security Council visit to
Somalia since 1994.

President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud, Prime
Minister Abdiwali Sheikh Ahmed and Speaker of the
Parliament Mohamed Osman Jawari warmly welcomed
the historic Visit and hailed the United Nations as a key
contributor to the protection of Somalia's sovereignty.
Council members welcomed the progress Somalia
had made over the past two years. We underlined
the importance of unity in the Federal Government
of Somalia. We reiterated the importance of the
Government of Somalia holding a referendum on the
Constitution in 2015 and democratic elections in 2016.
We look forward to the Government of Somalia adopting
key legislation, including on establishing the electoral
commission. We also underline the importance of
women's participation in the peace and reconciliation
process.

Turning to the military situation, Council members
were united in their praise for the bravery and sacrifices
that the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
and the Somali National Army had made in the pursuit
ofpeace in Somalia. We reiterated our determination to
end the threat posed by Al-Shabaab to Somalia and the
region. We underscored in particular the importance
of stabilization and the provision of basic services in
areas recovered from Al-Shabaab. AMISOM. and the
head of the Somali National Army briefed the Security
Council on plans for the next phase of their operations
against Al-Shabaab. The AMISOM. Force Commander
reminded Council members of the importance of
sourcing attack helicopters for their operations against
Al-Shabaab.

The Government of Somalia updated the Security
Council on the measures it had put in place to
manage the flow of arms in a more effective manner.
In response, the members of the Security Council
underlined the importance of complying with the
Security Council's requirements in the management of
arms and ammunition.

The United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia
briefed the Security Council on the humanitarian
situation in Somalia. Council members expressed
concern that the United Nations consolidated
humanitarian appeal for Somalia was significantly
underfunded, and committed to urging Member States
to make a contribution to the humanitarian fund.

Security Council members left Somalia with the
feeling of optimism. There are undoubtedly immense
challenges that remain, in particular on security. But
I think it is fair to say that, if the Government follows
through on its commitments to govern in the interests
of the people of Somalia and puts aside its differences,
then the Somali people could have the increased peace
and prosperity that they so richly deserve.

Finally, in my capacity as President of the Council,
I take this opportunity to thank the Secretariat and all
the co-leaders for their support in organizing the trip.
I know that it was a gruelling five days, but I think
that many of the themes, including around conflict
prevention and accountability, are vitally important for
our work here in New York. Travelling to South Sudan
and Somalia has given all of us added insight into two
conflict areas that we are directly addressing in the
Council.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 3.25 pm.
