Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, Madam President, I would
like to thank you and your delegation for having
organized this important meeting during the United
States presidency of the Security Council this month.
We wish you, Madam, the greatest of success. We also
congratulate the delegation of the United Kingdom
for the excellent way it conducted the business of the
Council during its presidency in November.

We welcome the excellent briefings by Ms. Jeanine
Hennis-Plasschaert, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq; Mr. Robert Martini,
Permanent Observer of the International Committee of
the Red Cross to the United Nations; and Monsignor
Bashar Matti Warda, Archbishop of Erbil. The
information they have just provided us help us better
grasp the prevailing situation in Iraq.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea is deeply
concerned about the recent events in Iraq. On
1 December, the Iraqi Parliament met in extraordinary
session and accepted the resignation of outgoing
Prime Minister Adil Abd Al-Mahdi as a result of the
tense protests in Baghdad's Tahrir Square since early
October that resulted in more than 400 deaths, no less
than 6,000 injured, including several members of the
security forces, as well as extensive material damage.
We offer our condolences to the Iraqi Government and
all the families afflicted by the tragic loss of life. We
regret that the protests have taken on such proportions.
We therefore call on all parties to refrain from taking
unnecessary actions such as those that aggravated
the situation. Citizens have the right to demonstrate
peacefully. The security forces must shoulder the
responsibility of protecting all people and their property.

We are sensitive to the concerns of those demanding
effective governance that is able to respond to the needs
of citizens and to function in manner that instils trust.
It is therefore time for all political parties in Iraq to
set aside their personal differences, prioritize the
national interests and avoid impediments to the normal
operations of the institutions responsible for resolving
the issues facing the population.

We cannot allow Iraq to boil over once again.
All parties must fight to safeguard the significant
gains that they have made in recent years, such as the
territorial victory over the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) and the subsequent successful outcome
of the national and regional electoral processes in the
country. Those achievements are extremely important
and serve as a foundation for the future development of
the country.

The delegation of Equatorial Guinea notes with
satisfaction the recent broad consultations held between
the executive branch and the political leadership,
which this year helped to overcome the months-long
stalemate that prevented the complete formation of
the Government, thereby underscoring the importance
of peaceful and inclusive dialogue among the parties
to move forward in the reconciliation process and in
building the Iraqi State.

We agree with the report of the Secretary-General that

"[t]he Government's agreement on an initial
package of measures and its commitment to
dialogue are steps in the right direction, but
swift implementation is essential to meeting the
legitimate and long-standing demands of the Iraqi
people" (S/2019/903, para. 90).

We welcome the high-level bilateral meetings between
the federal Government and the Kurdistan Regional
Government, which are in the process of negotiations
to resolve, inter alia, outstanding issues involving
oil, revenue-sharing and security arrangements. We
encourage them to continue working to reach mutually
beneficial agreements.

We commend the Iraqi security forces for their
persistent efforts to eradicate once and for all the ISIL
cells that continue to carry out frequent asymmetric
attacks against the population. The development of
political events in Iraq demonstrates that the country's
institutions are functioning normally and that
democratic principles are being upheld. The next step
must therefore involve the appointment of a new Prime
Minister to fill that important vacancy.

Before concluding, I would like to express our
satisfaction with the efforts by the Government of
Iraq with regard to issues concerning its neighbour
Kuwait. We appreciate the recent handover of books,
and we hope that the parties will continue to work in
that direction.

While my country condemns any initiative that
would undermine the process under way in Iraq,
Equatorial Guinea pays tribute to Ms. Jeanine Hennis-
Plasschaert and the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq for their outstanding work in supporting the
Iraqi people and authorities in their arduous and
complicated task of rebuilding the country.

