Mr. Wang Xuexian (China) (interpretation from Chinese): The Chinese Government has always attached
importance to, and supported, the peace process in Haiti
and the positive efforts made by the Secretary-General, his
Special Representative, the Organization of American States
and the United Nations Mission in Haiti (UNMIH) in
restoring peace and stability in Haiti. We are pleased to
note that substantive progress has been made in the Haitian
peace process, thanks to the help of the United Nations and
the international community. The task of creating a
National Police force in Haiti has been completed. The
security situation in Haiti has also improved markedly. At
present, there are no indications that the Government of
Haiti is faced with any organized threat, nor does the
situation in Haiti pose any threat to international peace and
security. Therefore, UNMIH has fulfilled its mandate in
Haiti and will successfully conclude its mission. The
Chinese delegation would like to take this opportunity to
thank UNMIH for its contribution.

In view of this situation, we have reservations about
the continued presence of United Nations military
personnel in Haiti. However, having carefully studied the
recommendation of the Secretary-General on the
establishment of the United Nations Support Mission in
Haiti (UNSMIH), and having taken fully into account the
urgent requests of the Haitian Government and the desires
of the Latin American countries, the Chinese Government
has made the utmost effort, and we agree in principle to
the establishment of UNSMIH. We have noted with
satisfaction that, thanks to the joint efforts of the parties
concerned, after friendly consultations, a consensus has
finally been reached on the text of the draft resolution.
The Chinese side appreciates the cooperative attitude
displayed by all parties. Therefore, the Chinese delegation
will vote in favour of the draft resolution.

The Haitian people have made unremitting efforts to
achieve lasting peace and stability and have made
remarkable progress. The primary task now facing Haiti
is rehabilitation and reconstruction. We urge the
international community, relevant United Nations bodies
and international financial institutions to take urgent and
effective measures to contribute to the economic
development of Haiti.

The Haitian people are industrious and brave, and
are masters of their own destiny. The maintenance of a
secure environment and economic development depend
ultimately solely on the Haitian people themselves, and
the help of the international community can only play a
supplementary role. We hope that the Haitian Government
will seize the favourable opportunity of the presence of
UNSMIH to further consolidate the hard-won peace and
intensify the professionalization of the police, thus
creating a favourable environment in which the Haitian
people can live and work in peace and contentment. We
sincerely hope that the Haitian people will start leading a
peaceful, tranquil and happy life at an early date.

