President Nujoma: Mr. President, I wish to
congratulate you on convening this important first
Summit of the Security Council in the new millennium.
Today many of the items on Council's agenda concern
Africa, and I am therefore grateful to participate in this
meeting chaired by you, my brother and colleague.

I would also like to reiterate here the pride and
confidence that Namibia continues to have in our
Secretary-General, another son of Africa. I commend
him for his tireless efforts in the interest of peace and
conflict resolution in the world. That is why the
thoughtful report of the Panel on United Nations Peace
Operations is so important and timely.

The topic on our agenda today has further
significance for my delegation. It was exactly 10 years
ago that Namibia attained independence, which was
preceded by a long and protracted liberation struggle
against apartheid colonialism. Our independence was
assisted by a very successful peacekeeping operation,
the United Nations Transition Assistance Group
(UNTAG). UNTAG succeeded, by and large, because
our people were ready for independence and change for
a better future.

There were, however, some failures. It is
therefore significant that the Council consider
constructive ways and means to further strengthen its
role in the maintenance of international peace and
security. Given the situation today, it is imperative that
special attention be given to Africa's many conflicts
and needs.

In the View of my delegation, the following are
some of the important matters that the Council should
pay close attention to.

First, the Council should, at all times, uphold the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. It should attach equal importance to and
undertake swift responses to breaches of international
peace and security in all regions of the world, and not
treat Africa only as an afterthought.

Secondly, recent events have demonstrated the
invaluable role that regional and subregional
organizations such as the Organization of African
Unity, the Southern African Development Community
and the Economic Community of West African States
can play in maintaining or restoring international peace
and security. The efforts of these organizations should
be supported on the basis of ensuring regular
consultations and cooperation.

Thirdly, the use of sanctions has had varied
success in maintaining or restoring international peace
and security. Their appropriateness should be
thoroughly reviewed for each situation. Sanctions
regimes should not be open-ended. However, they
remain a valuable tool to use in various situations
where wars and rebel atrocities are fuelled by the
illegal trade in diamonds and other natural resources.

The situations in Angola, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Sierra Leone are cases in
point. Sanctions can be used in the same way to curb
illicit arms flows to and in Africa, which endanger
lives and threaten peace and security as well as
seriously hampering development on the continent.

Fourthly, when peacekeeping operations are
approved, they should be provided with appropriate
mandates and adequate resources.

Fifthly, due attention should be given to the root
causes of conflict, such as poverty and
underdevelopment. The Council should join other
United Nations bodies in developing comprehensive
and integrated strategies to address the root causes.

There are many other issues that require attention,
but time does not permit us to discuss all of them here.
However, the reform and enlargement of the Security
Council should be expedited. An early decision on this
matter will greatly enhance the effectiveness,
transparency and democratic character of the Security
Council.

In conclusion, the Security Council, together with
the other bodies of the United Nations, can
undoubtedly achieve many more successes in the future
if it is properly reformed in line with the changing
times and the new demands for the United Nations.

