Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine): Ukraine greatly
appreciates Sweden's initiative to hold this open
debate, Mr. President, as well as your personally
presiding over it. We thank Ms. Virginia Gamba,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, and Ms. Henrietta
Fore, UNICEF Executive Director, for their briefings.
Ukraine welcomes the initiative of Sweden on adopting
updated resolution 2427 (2018), on children and armed
conflict. Byjoining as a co-sponsor, Ukraine once again
underscores its commitments on protecting children in
situations of armed conflict.

I am about to deliver a statement in my national
capacity, but I also would like to highlight that Ukraine
aligns itself with the statement to be delivered by the
observer of the European Union.

It is regrettable that, since the first Security
Council open debate on children and armed conflict
(see S/PV.3896), which was held in 1998, children
have continued to be disproportionately affected in
situations of armed conflict. As documented in the
Secretary-General's report (S/2018/465), the scale of
the violations committed against children is extremely
alarming. Behind the data lies enormous human sorrow,
which impacts children's lives and causes long-term
psychological trauma, thereby making violence and
insecurity permanent features of their everyday lives.

Let me therefore echo other speakers who took the
floor before me by saying that the right thing to do in
the face of these grim facts is to intensify our common
efforts to ensure enhanced protection for children in
armed conflict. In that context, enhanced cooperation
by the United Nations with regional and subregional
organizations at all stages of the conflict cycle could
make a substantive contribution.

It is equally important that adequate levels of
funding and support be provided to Governments to
assist them in carrying out reintegration programmess
aimed at children scarred by armed conflicts. Access to
education, psychological support and rehabilitation are
important building blocks in devising and implementing
effective strategies for preventing the escalation of
current conflicts and the emergence of new ones.

It is worth mentioning that monitoring is an
important preventive mechanism that can identify
risks of a sharp deterioration of a situation and
make respective recommendations for early action.
Unfortunately, despite existing preventive mechanisms,
we witness a lack of their implementation in situations
of emerging conflicts.
I would like to remind the Council that, despite
the existing resolution on the role of prevention in the
promotion and protection of human rights that was
initiated by Ukraine, long before the armed aggression
launched by the Russian Federation, the Human Rights
Council was unable to use the preventive instruments
on human rights violations at its disposal.

Twenty years ago at the open debate on children and
armed conflict, a permanent member of the Security
Council noted that

"Leaders of military factions are using children
ever more frequently in armed conflicts as cannon
fodder." (S/PV3896, p. 11)

Back then no one sitting at this table could imagine
that the same Council member would launch a full-
scale armed intervention against a neighbouring State,
illegally occupy parts of its territory and resort to the
same tactics it vehemently condemned, namely, shelling
densely populated civilian areas and endangering the
lives of civilians, including children.

As a recent example, on 28 May a lS-year-old girl
died after an artillery attack by Russian forces on the
city of Toretsk, in Donbas. Moreover, there are also
reports that children as young as 15-years-old have been
recruited into armed youth groups and are taking part
in active combat as full-fledged members of combined
Russian and Russia-led militant forces, including as
youth reconnaissance and sabotage groups operating in
the Government-controlled territory of Ukraine.

Another brutal examples is the detention of six
teenagers, citizens of Ukraine, in September 2016
in the city Yasynuvata by the Russian occupation
administration on charges of subversive activities.
Those children remain under illegal arrest in detention
facilities. The question of their release has been
discussed in Minsk at the Trilateral Contact Group.
Unfortunately, no progress has been achieved yet.

Approximately 200,000 boys and girls live within
the lS-kilometre zone along both sides of the line of
contact. They all long for peace finally to come to their
land, when they can go to school without worrying that
their classes could be interrupted by sudden artillery
shelling and be able to take a walk in the fields or
forests without fear of booby traps or mines.

This conflict has already claimed way too many
lives, including those of 80 innocent children on board
Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17, which was shot down
four years ago, in July 2014, by a Buk missile system of
the Russian fifty-third Anti-Aircraft Military Brigade,
which had been brought into the territory of Ukraine
from the Brigade's permanent base near the city
of Kursk.

Let me remind the Council that, in 2015, the
Security Council draft resolution (S/2015/562) aimed
at creating an international tribunal to prosecute
persons responsible for the attack on Flight MH-17
was vetoed (see S/PV.7498) by a country claiming that
"international legality is the main attribute of a stable
world and security". That country can easily contribute
to the resolution of conflicts by putting an end to its
practices of constantly and deliberately undermining the
international legal system, abandoning its aggressive
policies, withdrawing its troops from the occupied
territories of neighbouring States and ceasing to flood
the region with heavy weapons.

On our part, Ukraine has always been consistent
in its policy of ensuring the protection of children in
situations of armed conflict. With the endorsement and
ratification of basic documents such as the Convention
on the Rights of the Child and its Optional Protocol, as
well as the Paris Commitments and Paris Principles,
Ukraine has fully committed itself to the protection
of the rights of children. We also continue to attach
great importance to the Safe School Declaration, a
framework to ensure better protection for schools
and students. The Government of Ukraine intends to
endorse the Declaration after completing the necessary
internal procedures.

We note the absence in the report of the Secretary-
General to a reference to the situation concerning
Ukranian children affected by the conflict in the Donbas
region of Ukraine. Such a situation reflects the efforts
of the Government of Ukraine to protect and save the
lives of the children impacted by the armed aggression.
Ukraine pays special attention to the reintegration
of almost 240,000 children out of around 1.7 million
internally displaced persons.

As a member of the Council during the two previous
years, Ukraine strove to highlight the preventive role
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict. We welcome the
adoption today of resolution 2427 (2018), which will
allocate greater powers to the Special Representative
to implement her role in conflict prevention. We are
encouraged by the approach just set out by Ms. Virginia
Gamba when she said that we must "move to an era of
prevention". That is fully in line with the general vision
of the Secretary-General on the reform of the peace and
security pillar based on the concept of the prevention
of conflict. It is evident that preventive diplomacy
represents a major tool that the United Nations should
deploy more.

Ukraine, as an initiator of the aforementioned
resolution of the Human Rights Council on the role of
prevention in the promotion and protection of human
rights, firmly believes thatwithout a systematic approach
to prevention throughout the entire Organization, we
will not be able to succeed in preventing new conflicts
or the resumption of old ones. In matters of preventing
conflicts and gross violations ofhuman rights, the speed
and determination of the United Nations are crucial. In
1994, in Rwanda, and later in Srebrenica, the United
Nations failed to react promptly to prevent genocide. In
2014, neither the leadership of the United Nations at the
time nor the members of the Security Council managed
to stop Russia's military aggression and occupation of
Crimea and Donbas.

Finally, I would like to close my statement with
a quote of a notable Swedish scientist, Alfred Nobel:
"Good wishes alone will not ensure peace". It seems
like this is the right time to stop enjoying ourselves
or, as they say in English, this is the right time to stop
having a ball.

