Mr. Gokcen (Organization of Islamic Cooperation):
I shall be very brief. A longer version of my statement
will be circulated.

Let me start by conveying the deep gratitude of
the Secretary-General of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation (OIC), Mr. Iyad Madani, to His Excellency
Minister Fabius for the initiative he has taken and
for the thoughtful invitation. Unfortunately, due to
his attendance at the Arab Summit today, Secretary-
General Madani is not able to personally attend this
important open debate.

The alarming developments in Syria and Iraq should
not be seen as a civilizational or religious confrontation.
Tragedies and Violence have negatively affected every
single citizen in those countries and caused a massive
loss of human lives and great suffering. However, the
start of the terror campaign by Daesh, which targets
in particular Christian and Yazidi Iraqi citizens and
includes forced deportations under the threat of
execution, constitutes a serious threat aimed at tearing
apart the social fabric of the Iraqi people.

The OIC Secretary-General has on every occasion
publicly condemned the inhuman acts committed by
Daesh and the forced displacements, which he qualified
as a crime that cannot be tolerated. He has also been
very straightforward in stating that Daesh's practices
have nothing to do with Islam and its principles, which
call forjustice, kindness, fairness, freedom of faith and
coexistence.

Christians and other religious minorities in the
Middle East are a constituent component of their
nations as citizens who have or should have equal
rights to security, welfare and a decent life, like their
other compatriots. They have been an integral part of
the social fabric, culture, struggles and achievements,
as well as past and future narratives, of their nations.
Additionally, in line with the deep-rooted tradition of
coexistence in the region, Christian Clergy in Iraq and
Syria lived with honour and dignity and enthusiastically
shared the aspirations of their compatriots to peace
and prosperity. Religious and ethnic minorities in the
Middle East are valuable assets for their countries. It
would be a great loss for those countries as well as
for humankind as a whole if these precious examples
of religious pluralism, harmonious coexistence and
multiculturalism of the region were lost.

It is vital that religious leaders, as the moral
leaders of their communities, play a responsible role in
ensuring communal peace and harmony. In that regard,
let me underline two important initiatives supported by
the OIC whereby religious leaders from the region have
united in solidarity.

First, the Middle East and North Africa (MENA)
Regional Interreligious Council - the Religions for
Peace-MENA Council 4 remains the only regional
multi-religious mechanism that is led by the religious
leaders of the region's religious communities to advance
citizenship, religious freedom and the protection of
minorities.

As a result of a process involving a series of
consultations, it developed MENA-region-specific
but separate Islamic, Christian and Jewish religious
warrants in support of citizenship, and OIC-sponsored
Human Rights Council resolution 16/18, on the
protection of vulnerable minorities.

Secondly, in an unprecedented demonstration
of multi-religious solidarity, religious communities
from Iraq, Syria and the larger Middle East region
were convened by the King Abdullah bin Abdulaziz
International Centre for Interreligious and Intercultural
Dialogue at a conference held in Vienna, "United against
Violence in the Name of Religion", on 19 November
2014.

At the end of the conference, religious leaders
from Sunni, Shiite, Christian, Mandean and Yazidi
communities across the Middle East jointly issued the
Vienna declaration, entitled "United against Violence
in the Name of Religion", to denounce, with one voice,
all violence committed in the name of religion. They
called on the international community to protect
religious and cultural diversity in Iraq and Syria.
This was a praiseworthy occasion, when religious
leaders representing different religions from a crisis
region came together as one to denounce oppression,
marginalization, persecution and killings in the name
of religion.

In conclusion, I would like to say that recent
developments in the Middle East, Africa and South-East
Asia in particular have shown us that despite all of the
positive efforts towards deepening and transforming
interfaith dialogue into practical cooperation, we should
be mindful that the exploitation for political aims of
religious sentiments and perceptions of injustice and
past grievances might easily alter conflicts and cause
them to acquire religious connotations. We must
encourage interfaith initiatives to develop capacity and
mechanisms in order to play a preventive role in these
types of slippery situations.

