Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation wishes to thank the South
African mission for its briefing.

China supports the report of the Security Council
mission. In my capacity as representative of China, I
participated in the mission myself and personally
observed the situation in Timor-Leste after it had
experienced numerous setbacks and everything still
remained to be accomplished. I deeply sensed the

ardent aspirations of the people of Timor-Leste to
peace, stability and development, as well as the resolve
of the Government of the country to lead it to
continued successes.

Although Timor-Leste has achieved some
economic development, reconstruction and
democratization, as a young country it continues to
face great challenges. In that respect, I wish to raise
several issues.

First, the leaders of all the parties of Timor-Leste
should achieve reconciliation through dialogue and
address the security issue together. This year, Timor-
Leste successfully held elections, but the political and
reconciliation process has not been completed.
Meanwhile, the issues lingering after last year's unrest
remain to be resolved and continue to affect peace and
stability. The issues of internally displaced persons, the
petitioners and Major Reinado are interconnected. In
particular, the issues surrounding the petitioners and
Major Reinado are breeding a sense of insecurity
among the people, who have no choice but to remain
internally displaced for an extended period of time.
That in turn has exacerbated the instability in the
security situation.

If those three issues are to be addressed
effectively, the political forces of Timor-Leste -
particularly the Government and the main opposition
party FRETILIN - should reach a consensus and
cooperate fully with one another. The discord between
the Government and FRETILIN is the single issue that
poses the greatest potential threat to the security of
Timor-Leste. China calls on all the parties of Timor-
Leste to keep the interests of the people and the
stability of the country in mind and to seize this good
opportunity to restore peace and to achieve
development. They should resolve their disagreements
by communicating with one another, strive to resolve
the aforementioned issues affecting the security
situation in Timor-Leste, and lead the people in a
focused manner to promote the development of the
country.

Secondly, while pursuing its peacekeeping
mission in Timor-Leste, the United Nations should
increase its assistance so as to improve the country's
ability to govern itself. The history of the independence
and development of Timor-Leste has been closely
linked to the United Nations from the very beginning.
It is the unshirkable responsibility of the Organization
to ensure that Timor-Leste embarks on a path towards
success. At the same time, the country's future and
destiny are in the hands of its own people.

On our mission, we noted that the functioning of
certain institutions in Timor-Leste still depends on the
assistance and support of the United Nations and other
international agencies. In particular, the larger part of
the Timorese police force remains in the phase of
identification, verification and reappointment and in
some regions United Nations peacekeeping personnel
continue to participate in front-line law enforcement.
The United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
and other international agencies should devote greater
efforts in the next phase to helping the country to
improve its self-governing capacities. The United
Nations police should shift the focus of its work to
training and to transferring experience and skills to the
Timorese police force. With respect to political
reconciliation, the United Nations can continue to offer
constructive recommendations, but should avoid
bypassing the Timorese authorities and undertaking
activities on their behalf.

Thirdly, the achievement of sustainable peace and
security in Timor-Leste will depend fundamentally on
the development of the economy and on improving
people's lives. The fact that 40 per cent of the
population is living in poverty and that the rate of
unemployment has reached 40 per cent are the main
causes of the instability in the country. The
Government of Timor-Leste should identify a targeted
development plan as soon as possible and effectively
develop and exploit its rich gas, petroleum and tourist
resources. At the same time, efforts should be made to
utilize the benefits of development to improve people's
lives, with an accent on education and human resources
development, in order to continuously raise the level of
employment, especially among young people, so as to
restore their confidence in the Government and in their
own future and to undermine the factors of instability.
The international community should, of course,
continue to provide all manner of assistance to
expedite that process. China hopes that Asian countries
can extend a helping hand so as to achieve the common
prosperity of the region.

As a member of the Asia-Pacific family, China
has paid great attention to the development of the
situation in Timor-Leste, and sincerely hopes that the
country can achieve State development, social harmony
and the well-being of the people as soon as possible.
Within the limits of its abilities, China will continue to
provide support to Timor-Leste.

