Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me, at the outset, to commend
you, Mr. President, for having convened this meeting
and to congratulate you on assuming your presidency
for the month of April. You have the support of the
Dominican Republic, just as we extended to France
during the month of March, for the same values unite
our three countries.

It is more necessary today than ever to address the
problems and challenges involved in the protection and
defence of our humanity. I am referring to the sentiment
that we are, in the end, one single humankind. In the
Dominican Republic, our interpretation of that concept
is very simple. The suffering of any woman who has
fled violence more than once; the desolation felt by
any family that is gradually dying of hunger and the

lack of access to medicine; the girl who is forced into
marriage as the only way of surviving; the child who
has no access to education or the woman who has been
raped again and again - we cannot remain indifferent
in the face of all this. No human suffering is alien to us.

That was the case when, in the Second World War,
the Dominican Republic was one of the few countries
to welcome a group of Jewish families who found an
oasis of protection and tolerance in our small country.
We were no strangers to that principle when we were
the first to offer assistance to our brother country Haiti
after the devastating earthquake there in 2010. That is
why we are here today in the Council to help restore
optimism, hope and the desire to build a better future
to the millions of people affected by armed conflict or
other humanitarian emergencies.

I sincerely thank today's briefers and take this
opportunity to express to them and to thousands of
humanitarian workers and volunteers our gratitude
and admiration for the work they carry out day after
day, keeping alive those principles that mobilized
and promoted the adoption and subsequent universal
ratification of the Geneva Conventions.

Every day, we witness the tragic consequences of
multiple and diverse forms of violations of international
humanitarian law. In many cases, humanitarians are
called on to respond to new and more complex types
of violence and forms of warfare. However, far from
calling into question the relevancy of the principles
contained in the Conventions, we believe that these
violations have further deepened the need to defend
them and demand compliance with them by the parties
to armed conflicts. It is precisely the failure to comply
with these rules and principles that has led to a world
that is steeped in suffering but has fallen short in its
ability to enforce them.

The region of Latin America and the Caribbean has
not been unaffected by the consequences of conflicts
and other, non-traditional forms of violence. Many of
those did not exist at the time of the adoption of the
Geneva Conventions and perhaps do not fall within the
scope of application of international humanitarian law,
but they do have humanitarian consequences and raise
important challenges to the protection and alleviation
of the suffering of the most vulnerable among us.

The Dominican Republic, despite living in peace,
is concerned with the strengthening of humanitarian
action at the international, regional and national levels.
It therefore strives to increase the capacities of all
humanitarian actors, including their military assets. In
that regard, between 2001 and 2019, 34,315 Dominican
military personnel have completed 637 courses and
training classes in international humanitarian law
and human rights in our highest military academy of
strategic studies. Ofthose courses, 50 per cent focus on
human rights, the use of force and women and armed
conflict, among others. Another 12,836 personnel
have been trained in issues related to international
humanitarian law and human rights.

We also maintain significant cooperation with
our brother countries of Central America in the
framework of the Central American Armed Forces
Conference (CFAC), comprised of the armies of El
Salvador, Honduras, Nicaragua and the Dominican
Republic. Through that cooperation, 2,640 military
personnel from those nations have been trained in our
country in international humanitarian law. CFAC is a
regional organization founded, inter alia, to promote
the strengthening of peace processes, democracy and
development in the countries of Central America,
coordinate efforts to involve the population in
emergency situations, and participate in humanitarian
and peacekeeping operations in the framework of the
United Nations.

We believe that this is an excellent example
of a response to one of the questions posed in the
concept note prepared for this meeting, as it meets the
need to disseminate understanding of international
humanitarian law and humanitarian principles and
to create spaces for exchanges and the training of
humanitarian actors among the active military personnel
of our countries. We hope to expand this programme
even further and to create a platform for military and
civilian training that will improve the understanding
and implementation of international humanitarian
law, including the humanitarian principles involved
in achieving better and more effective coordination
in Latin America and the Caribbean, particularly
that aimed at meeting the needs of people affected by
natural disasters in the region.
In conclusion, it is our responsibility as States to
place people at the centre of all of our actions, as we
are all part of a single humankind. This includes those
who serve in humanitarian situations. We must seek to
establish mechanisms that will allow us to address the
new challenges around humanitarian action in urban
areas affected by new forms of violence. It is everyone's
responsibility to continue advocating vigorously and
tirelessly to ensure that the perpetrators of violations of
international humanitarian law pay the consequences of
their actions. Impunity is the reflection of indifference,
and indifference leads only to more violations, more
suffering and greater and worse consequences for the
peace and development of our peoples.

