Mr. Skoog (Sweden): It is highly regrettable that
the Council was unable to unite behind a technical
extension of the mandate of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations
Joint Investigate Mechanism (JIM), and that the draft
resolution (S/2017/884) before us was not adopted.

Sweden condemns in the strongest terms the
repeated use of chemical weapons in Syria. We offer our
full support for the JIM. and its objective, impartial and
independent investigations. There must be no impunity
for those responsible for chemical weapons attacks. The
JIM, which was unanimously set up by the Council,
plays a critical role in protecting the international
disarmament and non-proliferation architecture. Its
important work must continue.

The JIM's mandate expires in less than a month
and a timely renewal remains essential. Today's vote
is a temporary setback, but it does not signal the end of
the JIM. and its mandate.

(spoke in French)
Now is not the time to sit back.
(spoke in English)

There are some 60 cases of alleged use of chemical
weapons in Syria that are currently being examined
by the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons, which could later be referred to the JIM. One
can also not exclude the possibility of new attacks. If
the JIM. did not already exist, we would simply have
to invent it. Now is the time for the Council to roll up
its sleeves, come back together and speak with one
voice in support of the JIM. and accountability for the
use of chemical weapons in Syria. That will demand
good-faith negotiations on the part of everyone, but it
is not impossible.

We will continue to do our utmost over the coming
weeks to seek to ensure the continuation of the JIM
and the protection of its autonomous mandate. We will
support all serious and genuine initiatives that aim to
achieve that objective, and we stand ready to help in
facilitating efforts to find a way forward in the Council.
The Syrian people, who have been suffering for more
than six years of conflict, deserve no less from us.

