Mr. Oshima (Japan): I am very pleased this
morning to present an oral report to the Council on the
mission of Council members to Afghanistan last week.
The Security Council mission, comprising 10
members, visited Afghanistan from 11 to 16 November.
Based in Kabul, the mission travelled to provincial
cities - Qalat, near Kandahar, in the south, and
Mazar-e-Sharif in the north. The planned visit to
Kandahar city itself, for a meeting with the governor of
that province, had to be cancelled due to the prevailing
2

security situation. On its way out, the mission made a
stop in Islamabad for a meeting with senior Pakistani
Government officials.

In terms of its movement inside the country,
owing to security concerns and other logistical
constraints, members of the mission travelled in
military transport planes and, in some cases, military
helicopters under heavy protection, courtesy of the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF)
command and contributing countries. On behalf of the
mission, I wish to express our utmost appreciation to
the Governments of Afghanistan and Pakistan, ISAF
and the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) for their support, assistance
and hospitality during the visit.

In Afghanistan, the mission held extensive
discussions with President Karzai, Foreign Minister
Spanta and other key ministers, the newly appointed
Attorney General, elected parliamentarians and
provincial governors and other local leaders and elders.
We also met with representatives of UNAMA, United
Nations agencies, ISAF, the development community,
the diplomatic community, non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) and civil society representatives.
In those meetings and in encounters with the media,
the Council mission sought to convey to the Afghan
and other interlocutors a message consisting of the
following points, among others.

The first was to reaffirm that the Council will
make utmost efforts to ensure that the international
community will continue to support the Afghan
Government in its efforts to attain the stability and
reconstruction of the country, which is a long-term
process and for which sustained commitment will be
required.

The second was to emphasize that the Council
highly appreciates the Afghan Government's ownership
in the successful political transition achieved under the
Bonn process that led, eventually, to the Afghanistan
Compact, and that it encourages the Afghan
Government to transform its ownership into further
action for steady implementation of the Compact.

The third was to emphasize that a comprehensive
approach is needed to address the multiple challenges
facing Afghanistan, including the deteriorating security
situation, corruption, human rights, rule of law,
transitional justice and drug trafficking and cultivation,
06-62669
so as to meet the legitimate expectations and
aspirations of the population.

The fourth point was to affirm the central and
impartial role of the United Nations in Afghanistan,
including coordination of efforts in implementing the
Afghanistan Compact.

The fifth was to encourage the fostering of
mutual trust and the promotion of bilateral and regional
cooperation between the Government of Afghanistan
and the Governments of neighbouring and other
regional partners, in particular the Government of
Pakistan, as a matter of crucial importance in
addressing those challenges facing Afghanistan and its
neighbours in the region.

A full mission report is now being prepared and
will be submitted to the Council after consultation with
Council members. Following the practice, it will then
be circulated to all Member States as a United Nations
document in time for a public meeting on the matter,
tentatively scheduled for 6 December. Today, as the
Head of the mission, I wish to present my views and
impressions on some of the important issues.

I shall begin with an overall assessment. This
Security Council mission to Afghanistan was the first
in three years, the last one having been in 2003. The
Afghan partnership that began in Bonn in late 2001 and
that continued through the Tokyo reconstruction
conference in January 2002 and the January 2006
London Conference is largely on track. The
consolidation of gains over this period in establishing
and ensuring functioning democratic institutions and
the efforts to improve the welfare of the population are
moving forward, despite the inevitable fragilities and
challenges that are clear to the country's leaders and
outside partners.

Over the course of 2006, however - and this is a
worrying development - the rise in the Taliban-led
insurgency and other social ills including the upsurge
in illegal drug production and trafficking, against the
backdrop of still too weak and fragile State and
provincial institutions, most notably in the public
security sector and in the rule of law, and the
accompanying endemic corruption and impunity -
both real and perceived - have marred the post-Bonn
phase and appear to have given rise to widespread
despondency and disillusionment among the people. In
other words, the confidence of the Afghan public in the
institutions and processes appears to have been shaken
06-62669

of somewhat compromised, giving rise to a certain
sense of backsliding. The increasing insecurity in parts
of the country, particularly in the south and south-east,
is worryingly affecting rehabilitation and
reconstruction work done by the Afghans and by the
United Nations and other international partners.

In the circumstances, it is important to stress two
cardinal points: that the commitment of the
international community for support of Afghanistan
remains firm and sustained; and that the Afghanistan
Compact, owned and led by Afghans, is and will
remain the best strategic framework for cooperation
between the Afghan Government and the international
community, and that its steady and faithful
implementation therefore needs to continue to be
ensured.

Overall security is the major, number-one issue of
concern in Afghanistan. After an upsurge in the number
of security-related incidents in the country up to the
summer of this year, there are, however, some signs
that insurgent and terrorist-related violence, which
plagued much of the year, may have begun to subside
somewhat.

We were briefed by ISAF and told that armed
clashes between insurgents and the Afghan and
international military forces decreased in October and
November. The insurgency is more or less confined to
one third of the country, the south, south-east and
east- which is still a very large part - while the
remaining two thirds of Afghanistan are considered
relatively stable. The security situation, however,
remains precarious throughout the country, with the
threat of suicide attacks and other forms of terrorism
by the Taliban and other armed insurgencies and armed
groups posing a serious threat to the nation-building
process.

The insurgency and acts of terrorism must be
dealt with, where necessary, through robust military
and law enforcement measures. In this regard, I wish to
commend the efforts undertaken by the Afghanistan
Government, ISAF and the coalition forces, despite the
casualties being inflicted on them. ISAF's expansion
throughout the entire country now and its assumption
of the leading international role in the provision of
security, in the absence of reliable and strong Afghan
national military and police forces, should be welcome.
At the same time, it is important that the Afghan
Government, ISAF and the coalition forces observe
3
international humanitarian law, avoid civilian
casualties and respect local culture and traditions.

Measures must also be taken to address the
growing frustration among ordinary Afghans. President
Karzai has stated - and other Afghan interlocutors
have echoed this view - that the Afghan
Government's failure to show its capability to provide
security, as well as other economic and social services,
in the countryside, have increased disillusionment and
contributed in part to the surge in violence. The lack of
a capable police force and the widespread corruption in
the ranks of State and provincial institutions are of
particular concern in this regard, according to many of
our interlocutors.

The President also conceded that the continued
influence and tolerance of the activities of warlords
had also contributed to the loss of faith by the Afghan
people.

All interlocutors pointed out the seriousness of
the narcotics issue, which, according to President
Karzai, is a direct result of the desperation of the
Afghan people. It is necessary to address all these
issues as a matter of the highest priority. The
Afghanistan Government, with the backing of the
international community, should take immediate and
effective steps, with a view to re-establishing trust
among the people.

My third point is that of reconstruction work. As
President Karzai put it, Afghanistan had to start on its
reconstruction, not merely from zero but from below it,
with deep minuses due to years of conflict and the
damage sustained by the country. Against this
background, the efforts and achievements made so far
by the Afghan Government and people are to be highly
commended.

In facing the mounting challenges, as we have
noted, the Afghanistan Compact remains the best
framework for cooperation and promise. It is essential
to maintain the principle that Afghans keep their part
of the commitment in the Compact in fighting
corruption, establishing the rule of law and building a
culture of respect for human rights, especially women's
rights. They must be encouraged to own the process
and take responsibility at this critical stage of
consolidating peace after years of war and misery in
their recent history.
At the same time, it is abundantly clear that
Afghanistan needs additional and sustained support and
assistance from the international community, both for
quick gains and for sustained progress over the long
term. That is the other side of the Compact pledge, and
without such support there is no guarantee that
Afghanistan, with all the vast investment made by the
international community - that is, the price paid,
including in terms of human lives - will not slide
back into conflict and become a failed State again.

In this context, the Afghan Compact
implementation mechanism, the Joint Coordination and
Monitoring Board (JCMB), is expected to play a key
part. The mission members attended the third meeting
of the J CMB, in which the first mid-term review report
was presented and discussed. We agree with the views
expressed by many participants in the meeting that the
Afghanistan Compact should now move to serious
action and consistent implementation efforts through
the overall political guidance of the J CMB.

The next aspect I wish to mention is that of
human rights. Members of the Human Rights
Commission and non-governmental organizations
raised concern over the negative impact of the
deterioration of the security situation on human rights
conditions, including in particular those of women. The
Afghanistan Government, as well as the international
community, must sharpen the focus on human rights.

As regards the issue of a regional approach, it is
clear that the solution to the Afghan problems requires
a focus on the regional dimension of the problems,
whether in the security sector or elsewhere. The
Second Regional Economic Cooperation Conference
on Afghanistan, just held in New Delhi following on
our mission to Kabul - although it falls outside the
Council's immediate mandate - is timely and of
particular importance. Our hope is that this meeting
and other similar initiatives will further strengthen
regional cooperation for the reconstruction of
Afghanistan.

The regional approach is particularly important
from the security perspective. Fostering trust and
cooperation between the Afghan Government and its
neighbouring partners is highly relevant and of critical
importance for peace and security in the region, as our
many Afghan interlocutors repeatedly pointed out.
While the issues involved here are complex and
sensitive, we felt reassured by the comments of
President Karzai and Foreign Secretary Khan of
Pakistan. The President stressed that Afghanistan wants
optimal relations with Pakistan, while Foreign
Secretary Khan repeated that Pakistan wants stability
in Afghanistan.

This cross-border relationship needs close
monitoring in following the developments in the
Afghanistan situation. We were encouraged by both
sides' willingness to work together for the holding of
cross-border jirgas, as agreed by the Presidents of the
three countries: Afghanistan, Pakistan and the United
States.

We reaffirmed the importance of the role of
UNAMA, especially in coordinating the
implementation of the Afghanistan Compact. I believe
that UNAMA's coordination role should be further
strengthened with a view to accelerating the
implementation of the Afghanistan Compact. In this
context, we give our full support to the ongoing
expansion of UNAMA into the provinces.

We pay tribute to the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Tom Koenigs, his UNAMA staff
and other personnel who work on the ground daily, in
the very difficult, insecure and highly stressful
environment that is Afghanistan today. We thank them
for their dedication. I wish to commend their tireless
efforts and commitment to their mission.
06-62669

Finally, I wish to express my own appreciation to
all members of the mission for the cooperation
extended to me personally and for their input in the
course of our discussions with the Afghan interlocutors
and others. I am particularly grateful for their patience
during the travails of the mission, not least of which
was travelling in military helicopters and aircraft
wearing heavy flak jackets and helmets all throughout.
I also thank them for their good company during the
mission.

That was my short oral briefing. As I have
indicated, we will prepare a report to the Council, with
a certain number of recommendations for a full
discussion early in December.

