Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. I wish you every success in your task. I
thank you for holding this open debate, and I thank the
Secretary-General for his statement.

This meeting is being held in the shadow of
continuing challenges to the world, resulting from
terrorist acts. No entity, whether State or community,
can handle the phenomenon of terrorism alone. Current
international developments have shown that terrorism
has no religion, nation or identity. It comes in different
forms and with different levels of severity, and it
disturbs and threatens international peace and security,
unless efforts to combat it continue at all levels.

In the light of the current events - and the facts are
before us - we must work together to combat terrorism,
as it is a dangerous phenomenon that endangers all of
humankind. We must recognize the fact that terrorism
has not emerged in a vacuum. It grew and developed
in fragile environments where the conditions were
conducive to the growth of extremism and terrorism;
such environments might include policies that dealt
with popular grievances using repressive force alone,
without taking up the root causes of those grievances.
That has enabled terrorist groups to claim that they
are defending the rights of the people. They play the
sectarian and religious cards. We must, therefore,
respond to the aspirations of peoples of various groups
for social justice. We must strengthen cooperation in
order to reach the objective that we have sought for
so long.

The State of Qatar believes that terrorism is a
scourge for all societies. When confronted with all the
events that have taken place, we do not hesitate to express
our position and condemnation of the use of violence,
whatever its nature. We also believe that combating
terrorism requires a comprehensive approach in order
to prevent terrorist acts and to address the root causes
of terrorism, which are economic, social and political
in nature.

We renew our commitment to international
cooperation aimed at combating the scourge of terrorism.
We shall spare no effort to cooperate in international
efforts in that regard, and we commit to all agreements
arrived at by the international community to combat
terrorism. Personifying the vision of the leadership
of the State of Qatar, represented by His Highness
Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad Al-Thani, my country has
committed to making efforts at all levels, in particular
within the framework of the United Nations and
regional mechanisms, to uproot terrorism and address
its root causes, as well as the factors that have led to
its development, because terrorism threatens national
unity and societies.

Cooperating with the international community in
this regard, my country has continued to strengthen
national legislation on combating terrorism in
order to adapt to the new challenges presented
by the phenomenon. We have set up specialized
national institutions that have an effective role to
play in implementing mechanisms approved by the
international community in order to uproot terrorism,
dry up sources of financing and facilitate cooperation
with United Nations bodies. Based on this vision, we
give special attention to combating violent extremism
because it leads ultimately to terrorism. On 3 June, we
will be holding a high-level thematic conversation on
children and youth affected by violent extremism, with
a view to reintegrating them into society.

The State of Qatar stresses the importance of
respecting religions and civilizations as well as the
importance of tolerance. Religions fundamentally do
not call for terrorism. In religious texts there are many
teachings on peace, tolerance and coexistence. We must
choose our words carefully when confronting terrorists,
terrorism and extremists. We must avoid generalized,
erroneous nomenclatures. We must not link individual
acts of violence and extremism to a particular religion.
Also, defaming religious symbols gives extremists a
pretext to violence.

In conclusion, the success of the international
community in uprooting the causes of terrorism will
not only be ofbenefit to the very States confronting the
challenge. It will also reflect directly on strengthening
international peace and security. The international
community as a whole will reap its fruits. My country
will remain an effective party to international efforts
devoted to achieving this objective.

