Mr. Rapp: In beginning my presentation, let me
echo the sentiments of President Winter and thank the

Council for its decision to convene this briefing on the
Special Court for Sierra Leone.
In resolution 1315 (2000), the Security Council
responded to a request that came from the Government
of Sierra Leone, and it also recognized the serious
crimes committed against the people of that country, in
requesting the Secretary-General to negotiate an
agreement to create an independent special court. It
was to be a credible system of justice and
accountability that could hold individuals criminally
responsible for serious violations of international
humanitarian law and, in doing so, contribute to the
restoration and maintenance of peace.

For the victims - the thousands who had been
mutilated, the tens of thousands who had been
murdered, indeed the hundreds of thousands who had
been subjected to sexual violence - the Special Court
offers justice by holding to account those alleged to
bear the greatest responsibility for these crimes.

As President Winter has reported, the Special
Court has completed three multiple-accused trials in
Freetown. Two of those cases have now been finalized
on appeal, and the appeals proceeding in the third
should be concluded by October 2009. Members will
recall that the last time that the principals of the
Special Court addressed this body, in June 2007 (see S/PV.5690), we reported that the fourth trial had just
commenced with the presentation of the prosecution's
opening statement. That was the trial of Charles Taylor,
the former President of Liberia.

Since then, some 91 individuals, almost all of
them from Sierra Leone or Liberia, have travelled to
and from The Hague to present their testimony. They
were able personally to bear witness in this historic
proceeding because their presence in the Netherlands
was made possible by the Security Council in
resolution 1688 (2006), which facilitated the conduct
of this trial away from the seat of the Special Court in
the interests of regional security.

Since the witnesses began their testimonies in
January 2008, the Taylor trial has proceeded smoothly,
with a high level of transparency, efficiency and
fairness. This very week saw the commencement of the
defence case, with the presentation of its opening
statement, followed by the accused himself, former
President Taylor, taking the stand to begin his
testimony. Thereafter, other defence witnesses will
testify, and the accused will be assured of his right to
fully contest the indictment against him. We feel
confident that the trial will be conducted and managed
to allow for the entry of judgement by mid-2010 and
for finalization on appeal by very early in 2011.

As President Winter has mentioned, the
proceedings in Freetown have resulted in historic
developments in international humanitarian law. Most
well known was the groundbreaking precedent
recognizing that the use of child soldiers - persons
under the age of 15 - in armed conflict was an
international crime, followed thereafter by the
convictions - the first in history - of five individual
defendants for that offence. The Special Court also
pronounced the first-ever conviction on the charge of
acts of terrorism in a non-international armed conflict.
The recent trial judgement in the Revolutionary United
Front (RUF) case included the first convictions in
history for the specific crime of attacks on United
Nations peacekeepers. This was an offence that was
defined in the 1994 Convention on the Safety of United
Nations and Associated Personnel. This precedent
sends a clear message in the conflict zones around the
world, wherever the United Nations, through its
Member States, has provided and today is providing
forces to maintain peace and security.

The Special Court continues to make a significant
contribution to bringing justice to victims of sexual
violence and gender-based crimes, of which there were
so many during the Sierra Leone civil war. The Court
pronounced the first-ever convictions on the charge of
sexual slavery, both as a war crime and as a crime
against humanity. It further recognized forced marriage
as an inhumane act constituting a crime against
humanity and rendered in February the first
convictions on that charge.

In pursuing this wider range of offences, and by
alleging that they were among the acts of terrorism, the
prosecution was able to present a case showing that
these acts of sexual violence were committed as part of
a strategy for dominating and instilling fear in the
civilian population. In the recent RUF trial judgement,
again for the first time, leaders of an armed movement
were held responsible for these offences, whatever
their physical distance from the actual acts, because the
commission of these crimes was part of a common
scheme or plan.

The Court's work has helped implement Security
Council resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008),
which recognized that the protection of women and
girls in armed conflict can significantly contribute to
international peace and security, called on parties to
protect them from gender-based violence and
emphasized the shared responsibility to end impunity
and prosecute those responsible for such crimes.

All of these accomplishments have been achieved
by the Special Court for Sierra Leone, an institution
that represents a partnership between an African nation
and the international community. It is a court in which
60 per cent of the workforce is Sierra Leonean, and in
which Sierra Leone citizens hold senior positions in
every organ, including my own Deputy Prosecutor,
Joseph Kamara. It is also the court that has placed the
highest priority on outreach, in providing accurate
information about its proceedings to the population
throughout Sierra Leone, and, for the Taylor case, to
Liberia as well. For as important as it is to do justice,
for all those that the Court intends to serve it is also
important that justice be seen to be done.

As the Special Court concludes its proceedings,
we must address the need for a mechanism to deal with
residual issues. President Winter mentioned several of
these issues. Let me focus on one that falls directly
within the responsibility of the prosecution.

This concerns the case of the Court's one
indictee-at-large, Johnny Paul Koroma. Witnesses in
the Taylor trial have testified to hearing reports that
Koroma was killed in Liberia not long after he was
indicted. However, despite significant efforts, the
prosecution has not been able to find and identify his
remains, and rumours persist of his whereabouts in the
subregion. Mr. Koroma was head of the Armed Forces
Revolutionary Council (AFRC) and served as the
effective chief of State during the nine months in 1997
and 1998 that an AFRC-RUF junta ruled in Sierra
Leone. Three other leaders of the AFRC have been
tried and convicted. It would be unacceptable for the
country and for international justice were Koroma to
surface after the closure of the Court and never have to
answer for his alleged crimes in a court of law.
Therefore, the prosecution has been in discussions with
authorities in Sierra Leone and two other States and
will take steps before the Special Court concludes its
active proceedings to ensure that Koroma can be
prosecuted thereafter within a national system.

President Winter spoke of the need for State
cooperation in the enforcement of our sentences. It is
well accepted that the prison sentences of the Court's
convicted persons must be served in facilities that are
secure and that meet international standards. The
Government of Sierra Leone expressed its wish that
these sentences be served outside of Sierra Leone. We
in the prosecution share that view because of our
concern for the safety and the security of the witnesses
and also for the personnel of the Special Court. It is
therefore necessary to reach agreements with States for
enforcement of sentences that provide that the
enforcing State will cover the cost of caring for the
prisoners, or to provide funding through the residual
mechanism to meet these expenses on an ongoing
basis.

Those are but two of the challenges that must be
met during the post-closure period. The Court and its
Management Committee are working on proposals for
a very small residual mechanism that may provide a
model for the other international courts that will close
after us. However, even if it is very small, we will still
need a secure source of funding that will remain in
place until all prisoners have served their sentences and
all the challenges have been managed.

While the future funding of the residual
mechanism must be addressed, the Court's immediate
financial situation may now be fairly characterized as
an impending crisis. Even if all pledged donations from
donors for this year come in early - and that is as yet
uncertain, as the President told the Council - at the
moment, the funds on hand will be exhausted in
August. If those contributions come in early this year,
our funds will nonetheless run dry early next year,
before the next round of donations. The Special Court
will not have the resources necessary to complete its
work.

We are deeply appreciative of the support of
Member States that have provided the voluntary
contributions that have permitted the Special Court to
reach this point, when its mission is so close to
completion. We all wish to express our profound
gratitude to the Secretary-General for his letters to
Member States on our behalf, most recently on
16 March 2009. At this point, while we recognize that
the Security Council is not directly involved in
financial issues, we would respectfully request the
Council and its President to consider urging Member
States to pledge and to contribute so that the Special
Court can conclude the RUF appeal in Freetown and
the historic proceedings in the Charles Taylor case in
The Hague.

The commission of serious crimes against the
civilian population of Sierra Leone motivated the
creation of the Special Court. We ask for the
cooperation and support necessary to complete its
mandate, so that justice can be achieved for the Victims
of those crimes. As envisioned by the Security Council
in resolution 1315 (2000), that will contribute to
reconciliation and respect for the rule of law. It will
also send a powerful message that the international
community strongly supports institutions established to
hold to account those responsible for such atrocities,
and by doing so deter their perpetration in the future,
thus saving others from the violence, the injury, and
the death visited on the innocent people of Sierra
Leone.

