Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the Presidency of the Security Council
for this month. We are confident that, under your
guidance, the success of the Council's work is more
than guaranteed. I am also certain that you will have
the cooperation of all the members of the Security
Council, just as we did during our presidency in April.

I would like to thank Ms. Karin Landgren,
Representative of the Secretary-General in Nepal, for
her detailed briefing today on the situation in the
country and the work of the United Nations Mission in
Nepal (UNMIN). My delegation is grateful to Ms.
Landgren, who has assumed, with great
professionalism and sense of responsibility, the duties
that the Secretary-General has conferred upon her as
she succeeds Mr. Ian Martin. We trust that
Ms. Landgren will continue to make efforts to contribute
to and achieve normalization in the political situation
in Nepal, as well as to finalize pending matters in the
peace process.

Until just a few days ago, the report (S/2009/221)
before us today could have been read against a
backdrop of optimism as a result of the significant
progress made in recent months with regard to the
peace process in Nepal. The Special Committee, which
is charged with overseeing the integration and
rehabilitation of the Maoist army, met for the first time
on 16 January, shortly before the adoption of resolution
1864 (2009). It has since held various meetings to
begin fulfilling its mandate and established the
Technical Committee, which will be entrusted with
supporting the Special Committee. Likewise, there has
also been progress in the drafting of the constitution
and the establishment of the Constitutional Council and
the National Security Council, which have held their
first meetings after several years of deadlock on this
issue.
Despite all that, events in recent days have led to
a political crisis in Nepal that could jeopardize the
peace process as a whole. As other members of the
Council have done this morning, my delegation would

also like to express its great concern at the events that
have taken place, whose consequences are yet to be
fully known. We therefore call on all the parties
concerned to resume dialogue as soon as possible, so
as to continue to strengthen national unity and
successfully conclude the peace process.

In the light of the current crisis between the
President and the Prime Minister, we believe it
particularly relevant to recall that recruitment by either
of the two former opposing armies constitutes a
violation of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement. We
support the work that UNMIN has done in that regard.
In order to emerge from the current stalemate and
avoid the risk of a more serious crisis, it is necessary to
have the cooperation of all actors and political parties
involved in the process of reconciliation and national
unity in Nepal.

Addressing pending aspects of the peace process -
such as the establishment of a new constitutional order,
the integration and rehabilitation of Maoist army
personnel and the demobilization of minors involved in
the conflict - requires constructive coordination
among the parties and the support of the international
community.

Similarly, given the central place of human rights
in the peace process as indicated in the report of the
Secretary-General, my Government calls upon the
Government of Nepal to continue its cooperation with
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights.

Finally, my delegation believes that the adoption
of the draft presidential statement that has been
prepared is extremely timely and appropriate.

