Mr. Moura (Brazil): The position of the
Brazilian people and Government is well known. Iraq
must be disarmed peacefully. Iraq should fully abide by
Security Council resolutions. Force should be used
only as a last resort and only when fully authorized by
the Council.

Today, the Brazilian Minister of Foreign
Relations, Mr. Celso Amorim, met with Secretary-
General Kofi Annan in The Hague. He delivered to him
a letter from President Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva, in
which the President restates that Brazil stands ready to
cooperate with any initiative towards finding a
peaceful solution to the crisis.

As we said before, as there is still hope for peace,
we must insist on it.

As stated by many speakers at last Friday's
debate, the decisions to be taken by the Council have
acquired a dimension that goes beyond the question of
Iraq. They could have adverse and longstanding effects
on the structures of international peace and security.

It is thus essential that the voice of Member
States non-members of the Security Council be heard
once again. Brazil is following the situation with great
concern. As indications mount that we are heading
towards a war, we are compelled to consider the
enormous costs involved.

War always takes a heavy toll on human life and
is not, at this stage, a plausible alternative to
diplomacy. Any military conflict will require the
expenditure of an immense amount of resources. In
global economic terms, a war will certainly aggravate
the recession, which is already victimizing economies
worldwide, especially those of the most vulnerable
developing nations. In humanitarian terms, a war could
bring enormous desolation and suffering. A war could
also further destabilize the volatile situation in the
region.

Our collective effort in the war against the
scourge of terrorism would be severely hampered by
radical reactions. Even more so if actions are taken
without regard for decisions arrived at by the Council.
The reports presented to the Council by Mr. Blix
and Mr. ElBaradei indicate that some progress has been
achieved. The presentations also stressed the fact that
more time- not an indefinite period of time- is
needed to properly carry out the responsibilities
entrusted to them by the Security Council. Some
proposals have been put forward in this regard and
should be fully explored so that inspectors can finalize
their work and present their conclusions to the Council.

The members of the Security Council have upon
them a very crucial decision to take. We can only hope
that once a decision is taken, it will be respected by all
of us. It is the only way to ensure the authority of the
Organization.

