Mr. Tiendrebeogo (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): I should, of course, like to thank Mr. Pascoe
for his briefing and to welcome Foreign Minister Riyad
Al-Malki as well as the Permanent Representative of
Israel. We thank them for their significant contributions
to our deliberations.

The situation in the Middle East, including the
question of Palestine, remains at the centre of our
attention. Peace and stability in this region lie at the
heart of peace and security in the world. Unfortunately,
2009 began under the worst possible circumstances,
with the heightened violence of the months of
December 2008 and January 2009, the painful scars of
which Gaza still bears and will, unfortunately, continue
to bear for a long time. In this context, Security
Council resolution 1860 (2009) offers an acceptable
basis for a way out of the crisis, requiring only that the
parties engage one another in good faith.
Unfortunately, we are forced to admit that this
resolution, like previous ones, has yet to be
implemented, and that the situation on the ground
continues to be a source of great concern. Also of great
concern is Israel's continuation of its policy of
colonization, settlement and the demolition of homes.
Our concern also includes the very strict Israeli
blockade of Gaza, despite the regular appeals on the
part of the international community. We urge Israel to
hear these calls and pay heed to the suffering of
women, children and all the innocent civilians of Gaza,
who are deprived of basic necessities, and to permit
access to the territory so as to ensure the reconstruction
and economic development of the area.

Finally, another aspect of great concern is the
attacks to which Israeli towns are regularly subjected.
We urge Hamas and other extremist Palestinian groups
to put an end to such attacks, or else they risk
continuing to justify acts of reprisal. This situation is
made even more complex by the ongoing disagreement
among Palestinian brothers.

These are the principal elements that undermine
the credibility of the actors and drain the energy from
all efforts and initiatives for peace. There is no lack of
efforts or initiatives aimed at breathing new life into
the peace process, including those developed by the
American Administration and by Egypt, which has
worked tirelessly to bring about Palestinian
reunification and reconciliation. Burkina Faso supports
those efforts.

We should like once again to urge the parties to
put dialogue and negotiation first, and to exclude the
military option, which has no other effect than to
distance the parties even further from the prospect of
resolving their dispute. We continue to believe that the
Quartet Road Map, the 2002 Arab Peace Initiative and
the relevant resolutions of the Security Council provide
the best possible framework for realizing our common
objective - that of a Middle East at peace, with a
Palestinian State living within secure and
internationally recognized borders, side by side with
Israel in peace and security.
The present meeting of the Council is being held
in a particular context, with the publication of the
report of the United Nations Fact Finding Mission
established by the Human Rights Council
(A/HRC/12/48). In this regard, my delegation reiterates
its strong condemnation of the violations of human
rights and of international humanitarian law
perpetrated during the conflict last December and
January in Gaza. Burkina Faso has always hoped that
light could be shed on those violations so that the
international community could determine the
responsibilities of all the parties. It was as a response
to that need that the Fact Finding Mission was
established by the Human Rights Council. Burkina
Faso followed the work of the twelfth session of the
Council very closely and we await the conclusions of
the deliberations within the special session with great
interest.

We note the recommendations addressed to the
Security Council by the Fact Finding Mission and, in
this regard, we urge the parties to undertake all the
necessary actions to establish the truth and to prosecute
those responsible.

Burkina Faso longs to see further reinforcement
of political stability in Lebanon. We call on the
Lebanese political class as a whole to come to an
agreement, as soon as possible, which would pave the
way for a government of national unity and for genuine
national reconciliation. At the same time, we reaffirm
the need to respect the independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Lebanon.

My delegation welcomes the progress achieved in
Syrian-Lebanese relations and cherishes the hope that
the efforts aimed at fostering a rapprochement between
Israel and Syria may be crowned with success.

We will never tire of repeating that the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict is the Gordian knot of the situation
in the Middle East. This is why we must continue to
work tirelessly to bring about a comprehensive, just
and durable solution to this conflict. It is up to the
parties themselves to demonstrate a greater
commitment and a more resolute political will to
resolve their dispute. It is the duty of the Security
Council, the League of Arab States and all the
countries in the region and beyond, as well as the
international community as a whole, to step up their
efforts to better assist the parties in doing so.

09-5573]
