Mr. Pressman (United States of America): The
Security Council has watched the situation in South
Sudan particularly closely over these past three months.
In early March, as the targeted sanctions established
by resolution 2206 (2015) were due to be renewed,
the Council extended them for 45 days. We proposed
that somewhat unconventional approach because
we wanted to keep the fluid situation on the ground
under continuous review. In early April, seeing some
tentative signs of progress but still no national unity
Government, the Council extended the sanctions for
another short period and simultaneously adopted
presidential statement S/PRST/2016/3, reinforcing the
steps the Security Council expected the parties to take.
We expressed our intention to review progress on those
benchmarks before the Security Council considered
next steps on the sanctions regime. Finally, just over
a month ago, the Transitional Government of National
Unity was formed, fulfilling a key provision of the
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in South
Sudan. Obviously, however, much more remains to
be done.

While we have now adopted resolution 2290 (2016),
extending the sanctions framework for a year, we will
be no less vigilant or focused on South Sudan as we
have been for the past 90 days, and we will be no less
prepared to augment or modify the sanctions regime as
the situation on the ground demands and the conduct of
the parties necessitates. We have all watched too much
bloodshed in South Sudan. We have watched leaders
prioritize power over peace, and we have watched the
very real human consequences of their craven policies.
As the Secretary-General has stated, the people of
South Sudan have "been betrayed by those who put
power and profit over people". He went on to refer to
"epic corruption".

There is no time to delay tackling these challenges.
Now is the time to fully implement the Peace Agreement,
which, as the Security Council has emphasized
today, includes establishing the hybrid court and the
mechanisms outlined in Chapter V of the Agreement
in order to hold accountable those whose actions have
cost so many - too many - lives needlessly. Today's
resolution should remind South Sudan's leaders that
there is no other path and no other choice but full and
expeditious implementation of the Peace Agreement.

The return of Rick Machar, his appointment as
First Vice President, and the subsequent formation of
the Transitional Government of National Unity are
indeed significant steps forward, but they are only the
beginning ofa long path towards peace and healing, and
a long path towards justice. So long as there continues to
be no meaningful progress on the other core elements of
the Peace Agreement - which includes upholding the
ceasefire, improving humanitarian access and ending
attacks on humanitarians - the severe suffering of the
millions of South Sudanese impacted by this conflict
will continue.
To convey a sense of the scale of the suffering,
a report of the United Nations Deputy Humanitarian
Coordinator in South Sudan states that in just five
counties in South Sudan's Unity state, there were over
7,000 violent deaths in a single year. Injust five counties
ofjust one state of South Sudan in just one year, there
were as many violent deaths as there have been in all
of Yemen since March 2015. A survey by the United
Nations Development Programme also found that the
levels of post-traumatic stress disorder are on a par with
some of the worse conflict zones in modern history.

The leaders of South Sudan must redouble their
efforts to build a better future for their people by
fully implementing the Peace Agreement, including
the four reform pillars, drafting and adopting a
permanent consitution, restructuring the security
sector, establishing transparent management of public
finances, and advancing transitional justice, including
meaningful reconciliation and accountability.

At the same time, we, as members of the Security
Council, must renew our commitment to carefully
monitoring the situation in South Sudan, including
information we have received from the Panel of
Experts about the arms flow that poses such a serious
threat to the success of the Peace Agreement and the
stability of South Sudan and the region. In light of
the Panel of Experts' reporting that the parties were
continuing to acquire arms even after they signed
the Peace Agreement, in resolution 2290 (2016) the
Security Council has, significantly, asked for a special
report from the Panel of Experts on arms procurement
since the formation of the Transitional Government of
National Unity. We must continue to watch this closely,
and we must continue to uphold our responsibility to
use the full range of tools available to us when such
action is necessary for the maintenance of international
peace and security.

