The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I propose to invite the members of the
Political Committee for the Implementation of the
Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement, as well as Zambia, the
Representative of the current Chairman of the
Organization of African Unity and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to participate in this
meeting.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

In accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Abdelkader
Messahel, Special Envoy of the President of the
People's Democratic Republic of Algeria, Mr.
Abdelaziz Bouteflika, current Chairman of the
Organization of Africa Unity, to take a seat at the
Council table.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Messahel
(Algeria) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in French): I invite the
Vice-Minister for External Relations of Angola, His
Excellency Mr. George Chicoti, to take a seat at the
Council table.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Chicoti
(Angola) took a seat at the Council table.


The President (spoke in French): I invite the
Minister of State for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
His Excellency Mr. Yerodia Abdoulaye Ndombasi, to
take a seat at the Council table.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ndombasi
(Democratic Republic of the Congo) took a seat
at the Council table.


The President (spoke in French): I invite the
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Regional Cooperation
of Rwanda, His Excellency Mr. Andre Bumaya, to take
a seat at the Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Bumaya
(Rwanda) took a seat at the Council table.


The President (spoke in French): I invite the
Minister of State for Foreign Affairs and for Regional
Cooperation of Uganda and Chairman of the Political
Committee, His Excellency Mr. Amama Mbabazi, to
take a seat at the Council table.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mbabazi
(Uganda) took a seat at the Council table.


The President (spoke in French): I invite the
Minister for Presidential Affairs of Zambia, His
Excellency Mr. Eric Silwamba, to take a seat at the
Council table.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Silwamba
(Zambia) took a seat at the Council table.


The President (spoke in French): I invite the
Charge d'affaires of the Permanent Mission of
Zimbabwe, His Excellency Mr. Misheck Muchetwa, to
take a seat at the Council table.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Muchetwa
(Zimbabwe) took a seat at the Council table.


The President (spoke in French): I welcome the
presence at the Council table of His Excellency Mr.
Theo-Ben Gurirab, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Namibia and President of the General Assembly, who
represents the last of the States signatories to the
Lusaka Agreement and whose country is also a member
of the Security Council.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Dominique
Kanku, Head of External Relations of the Movement
for the Liberation of the Congo (MLC), to take a seat at
the Council table.

I invite Mr. Claver Pashi, head of the delegation
of the RCD-ML to take a seat at the Council table.

I would like to inform the Council that Mr. Emile
Ilunga, head of the delegation of the RCD-Goma, who
at this moment is still on an aeroplane, will be joining
us this afternoon.

I now invite Mr. Kamel Morjane, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, to take a seat at the

Council table.

I should like to acknowledge and welcome the
presence of the Secretary-General at this important
meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

As President of the Security Council, I now have
the honour of addressing the Council as well as the
members of the Political Committee.

I should like warmly to welcome the Ministers
members of the Political Committee for the
Implementation of the Lusaka Agreement; the Minister
for Presidential Affairs of Zambia; the Special Envoy
of the Chairman of the Organization of African Unity
(OAU); and Mr. Kamel Morjane, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General.

I should like, with the agreement of the
Secretary-General, to ask the Special Representative to
convey to all of the observers and teams now working
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, our feelings
of admiration and solidarity. They are doing admirable
work in particularly difficult conditions. I hope that
Mr. Morjane will express to them, on behalf of the
Council, the extent of our admiration for them.

I would particularly like to thank the Secretary-
General for his presence here. He has delayed his
departure on an important trip to the Middle East so as
to be here today. I would also like to thank him for his
full and courageous report, which will enlighten our
work and serve as a work of reference.

Those present will recall that the idea for this
meeting came out of a meeting that took place on 6
May in Lusaka between the members of the Political
Committee for the Implementation of the Lusaka
Agreement and the seven members of the Security
Council who undertook the Council's first-ever visit to
Africa. That 6 May meeting followed the Security
Council meeting that was held in this Chamber on 24
January, attended by representatives of the countries
signatories to the Lusaka Agreement. Ambassador
Holbrooke took the initiative to hold that dialogue. The
dialogue between the Security Council and the
signatories to the Lusaka Agreement attests to the will
of the Council to actively respond each time the United
Nations is called upon to contribute to a settlement of a
crisis in Africa.

The United Nations is not abandoning Africa. On
the contrary, as we are aware, the main part of the
Security Council's agenda is devoted to Africa.
However, it must be said that the context that we find
ourselves in today is particularly difficult. It is
difficult, first of all, because the United Nations
Mission in Sierra Leone is now confronting serious
problems. It is also difficult because everyone has in
mind the war being waged between Ethiopia and
Eritrea, which has inflicted suffering on two peoples
and caused heavy losses to the two countries involved
in the conflict. Of course, each crisis has its own
specific characteristics, but we must be aware that the
difficulties in Sierra Leone are causing reluctance on
the part of the troop-contributing countries to commit
themselves in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

What kind of analysis can we make today of the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo?
One very positive element is the fact that there have
been genuine efforts on the part of all the countries of
the region to achieve a settlement- the Lusaka
Agreement. I would like to pay tribute to the
outstanding role that President Chiluba of Zambia
played in that respect. The Lusaka Agreement was
signed almost one year ago, on 10 July 1999. The
Agreement provided for a settlement of the crisis in
360 days. Where are we now, almost two years after
the beginning of the conflict and almost one year after
the signing of the Lusaka Agreement?

Unquestionably, efforts have been made in the
right direction. On the part of the belligerents
themselves, a ceasefire was declared, and a
disengagement agreement was concluded on 8 April in
Kampala. Here in New York, the United Nations
fulfilled its part of the contract. The Security Council
decided, on 24 February last, on the establishment of
the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC), with
500 military observers and a force of 5,000.
Unfortunately, despite that unquestionable progress, the
bad news has been increasing, and today the global
balance sheet is dramatically negative in five areas.

First, hostilities are continuing. They are
continuing in the province of Equateur. They resumed
there at the end of last year and have been taking place
on a regular basis ever since. Fighting has also been
continuing in Kasai since March. There has been
uninterrupted violence in Kivu. Finally, in Kisangani,
fighting broke out in August last year, at the beginning
of May and again, in a particularly bloody manner, at
the beginning of this month.

Secondly, the cost in human life of this conflict is
ever higher. The Secretary-General's report has
emphasized the tragic situation of the displaced
persons and the enormous food needs. We are receiving
information through non-governmental organizations
and religious organizations regarding violence and
massacres, particularly in Kivu. These organizations
are also indicating to us that there are inter-ethnic
clashes in the north-east.

Last week the international press published the
results of a study by humanitarian organizations, which
says that in two years of war, 1.7 million individuals
have perished in the east of the Congo. They have been
the victims of massacres, or have died attempting to
flee violence, or have perished because humanitarian
assistance could not reach them due to conditions of
insecurity. We are not trying to get into a war of
statistics and figures here, but we are trying to see
reality as it is. For two years now, hundreds of
thousands of deaths have been recorded in the eastern
provinces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Thirdly, as regards the process of reconciliation
between the Congolese themselves, the national
dialogue provided for by the Lusaka Agreement
remains blocked. To be sure, the facilitator of the
national dialogue, selected by the Congolese parties,
with the assistance of the OAU, has made some
preliminary assessments. Preliminary consultations
have taken place. The Security Council, which
welcomed the facilitator in New York in January and
again in April, expressed its full support to him, and
we will be having a meeting tomorrow with his
representative, Minister Archibald Mogwe.

But today the Council is deeply concerned by the
impasse in the national dialogue and by the lack of
cooperation on the part of the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo with the facilitator.
The events in Cotonou are particularly alarming to us.
The settlement of the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo must be based on genuine
reconciliation among the Congolese within the
framework of the national dialogue.

Fourthly, the lack of security and the parties' lack
of goodwill is hampering the deployment of MONUC.
The continuation of hostilities is endangering the
deployment of phase II of the Mission. The failure on
the part of the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to respect the commitments undertaken in
the framework of the status-of-forces agreement, but
also on the part of the rebels through their blocking of
the movements of the force, is unacceptable. This runs
counter to the commitments that have been undertaken.
Finally, the recent manifestations of hostility to
MONUC in Kinshasa are not acceptable. The United
Nations is in the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
help bring about peace, and the United Nations must be
helped in turn.

Fifthly, the resumption of hostilities on 5 June
between Ugandan and Rwandan troops in Kisangani
was a brutal aggravation of the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. These hostilities
seemed to toll the bell for the Lusaka Agreement; they
pitted two formerly friendly countries against each
other. The particularly unjustifiable nature of the
confrontations between two foreign armies on the soil
of a third country - namely, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo - must be emphasized. These hostilities
have caused numerous Congolese civilian casualties.
At least 300 have died and 1,500 have been wounded.
Two foreign military presences, motivated by security
reasons, are today becoming a major source of
insecurity.

I must state that these events have deeply shocked
the entire international community and prompted an
immediate and unanimous response: "Enough fighting.
Withdraw your forces from Kisangani. Implement
immediately the Agreement that your Presidents
concluded in the presence of the Security Council
members."

We see perfectly well that we are now at a
decisive moment. In his report to the Council on
Tuesday, the Secretary-General set the tone, and
everyone is familiar with that report. The war must
cease immediately, he told us, and he is right. With
regard to Kisangani, from bad events perhaps
something good can emerge. The tragedy of Kisangani
must serve for all of us as an electric shock that will
trigger the total, rapid, even accelerated
implementation of the Lusaka Agreement. That
Agreement remains our touchstone. At this moment, I
express the hope that all of the prisoners of war will be
released even before the end of our work, to
demonstrate that, yes, the will does exist, and that
movement in the right direction is possible.

On behalf of the Security Council, I say to the
members of the Political Committee for the
Implementation of the Lusaka Agreement who have
come to join us in New York that we hope to consider
the situation in depth with you. We hope together to
provide a new impetus to the Lusaka peace process and
to find a way, with you as partners, to overcome the
present crisis. You had hoped that the United Nations
would be your partner, and we have agreed to be that
partner. Together, during these two days, let us take the
necessary decisions. Let us restore hope, and let us
bring peace to the people of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and to all of the peoples of Central Africa
who are waiting so desperately for that peace. Together
let us manifest that will. As our British friends say,

(spoke in English)
"Where there is a will, there is a way".
(spoke in French)

I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr.
Amama Mbabazi, Minister of State for Foreign Affairs
and Regional Cooperation of Uganda in his capacity as
Chairman of the Political Committee.


