Mr. Sipaco Ribala (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): As on previous occasions and on behalf of the
delegation I represent, I would first of all like to thank
Mr. Michael Keating, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Somalia and Head of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM),
and his team for the clear and detailed briefing on the
most recent developments in the country. His briefing
reflects a situation that is of concern, in particular with
regard to issues of State-building, the strengthening of
security institutions and economic fragility.

Somalia has made very significant progress since
successful parliamentary and presidential elections
transferred power to the current President, Mr. Mohamed
Abdullahi Mohamed Farmajo, nearly a year ago. He
outlined a political programme that convinced his
own people, as well as the international community,
and encouraged international partners to continue to
support the process of national reconstruction. The
Republic of Equatorial Guinea would like to take this
opportunity to express its gratitude and appreciation
to the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia,
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and
other international actors for their contributions to
address the major challenges encountered during this
important political process.

In spite of international support, Somalia continues
to face monumental challenges, first and foremost
the mighty threat posed by the Al-Shabaab terrorist
organization, which, despite financial pressures and
counter-terrorism activities, including air strikes,
continues to commit murders and detonate bombs
throughout the country. That ongoing threat could be
linked to the country's socioeconomic ills, such as the
lack of educational and work opportunities for young
people, unfulfilled demands flowing from unresolved
disputes, a weak national justice system and the
interests of third parties.

The differences between some leaders of a number
of federal states and the federal authorities constitute a
major obstacle to reforms seeking to promote national
reconciliation and reconstruction. To that end, Somali
politicians should commit to understanding each other
in order to create a healthy political environment
that encourages support from, and collaboration
with, international actors. Nonetheless, we commend
President Farmajo and other politicians on their efforts
to promote national reconciliation, as demonstrated by
the smooth election of the former Minister of Defence as
the new Speaker of Parliament following the resignation
of his predecessor, ending weeks of political crisis that
could have increased the security threat. However,
more must be done. We also commend the President,
who, in spite of insecurity in the country, decided to
visit the federal states of Puntland and Gamuldug in an
attempt to address their problems.

Despite all that, and according to reliable reports
on the situation, Somali security and State institutions
are not yet able to provide proper security and
socioeconomic conditions throughout the country in
the short and medium term. Therefore, the work and
support of UNSOM, AMISOM. and the United Nations
Support Office in Somalia continue to be indispensable.
We believe it is important to secure prior funding to
enable efforts to continue.

