Mr. Akylbayev (Kazakhstan): We thank the Italian
presidency for convening this important briefing
and commend its effective stewardship in preparing
resolution 2382 (2017), which we adopted today. We
also thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and the
Police Commissioners for their valuable input. In
regard to the topic of today's briefing, our delegation
offers the following observations.

First, in light of the overall United Nations reforms,
and especially in peace operations, as recommended by
the 2015 reports, United Nations policing also demands
our attention. To sustain peace, we need to develop
clear mandates and directives for police contingents,
with strong units for the rule of law, security sector
reform, the protection of civilians, human rights and the
empowerment of women and youth. Such an approach
will lead to the national stability of host countries, with
the main focus on capacity-building to prevent new
conflicts or the recurrence of existing ones. It is equally
important to attract investments for future economic
recovery and development.

Second, the United Nations police's main task
should concentrate on strengthening national police,
justice and corrections institutions, and those that
hold them accountable, especially at a time when most
mechanisms have been destroyed as a result of conflict.
Those processes require the fair and efficient delivery
of justice by a sufficient number of competent, ethical
and independent officials with adequate training and
educational support.

Third, national ownership is imperative, with
priorities identified by State authorities and civil
society. They should be consistent with the cultural
and legal traditions of the host country, yet not in
conflict with international norms. Those must operate
without causing greater tensions, thereby worsening
the situation on the ground.

Fourth, restoring and maintaining peace and
stability is a long-term process. It therefore requires
close and long-standing consolidation and cooperation
among national, regional and international partners,
as well as donors and all other relevant stakeholders,
such as the private sector, academia, civil society and
the media.

Fifth, support for the police and other personnel
is just as vital to the success of our peacekeeping
operations as it is for our military forces, and so we
must strengthen the ability of police-contributing
countries (PCCs) to speedily prepare and deploy
qualified personnel to new missions.

Sixth, a critical issue to resolve is the role of the
United Nations police when involved with the military
in the protection of civilians. That also calls for areas
and modalities of coordination between the police
and the military in various overlapping protection
situations, based on the type of violence and other
community-based variables.

Seventh, we will also need to address broader
capability and training gaps by expanding the number
of PCCs with high capabilities. It would also be helpful
to encourage further political engagement between
PCCs and troop-contributing countries to understand
mutual responsibilities in various tasks from conflict
prevention and resolution to peacebuilding and
sustaining peace.

Finally, Kazakhstan is committed to the United
Nations police playing a vital role in promoting lasting
stability, peace, security and development, and is
willing to explore the ways in which we can engage
the capabilities of United Nations policing within
peace operations.

