Mr. De Rivero (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): The
delegation of Peru would like to congratulate you, Sir,
as you preside over the Security Council, for having
convened this debate on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.

First, my delegation considers that, under
international law, the primary responsibility of
protecting civilians lies with the belligerents, whether
they be States or armed groups. Any violation of
international law, particularly the Convention on the
Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide,
and the Geneva Conventions, should receive a strong
and immediate response from the Security Council.

My delegation supports the recommendations of
the High-level Panel on Threats, Challenges and
Change that in order to protect civilians, all Member
States of the United Nations must, at the very least,
sign, ratify and, above all, implement the humanitarian
conventions, particularly the Geneva Conventions, and
the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of
the Crime of Genocide.

If it is seen that human rights are not being
defended under those conventions in any struggle in
which there are new global threats to international
peace and security, such as terrorism and transnational
crimes, not only will we be weakening the ethical
norms upon which civilized life is founded, but the
struggle against these new threats of the twenty-first
century will lose all legitimacy.

It serves no purpose to ratify humanitarian
conventions to protect civilians if peacekeeping
capacity is weakened, as it is now, by difficulties in
recruiting and by the lack of effectiveness on the part
of the recruited troops.

This is why the Security Council should endorse
the recommendations of the High-level Panel that call
upon the countries that have the greatest military
capabilities to make available to the United Nations
autonomous stand-by battalions that are highly trained
and self-sufficient; such stand-by units could be as big
as a brigade.

If we do not improve both the quantity and the
quality of the United Nations troops, we will be unable
to protect civilians, unless the Organization were,
hypothetically, ready to take the absurd step of
contracting private military firms, which have no
obligations under international humanitarian law and
today provide a mercenary alternative to the armed
forces of States.
Another fact that should be considered, if, in fact,
we do want to protect civilians, is the increasingly
casual use in some strategic circles of the concept of
"collateral damage". In many cases, this concept is a
euphemism used to refer to the many civilians who are
going to die, or have already died, in order to justify
military objectives.

If the United Nations does not react against this
concept of collateral damage, it will be following the
military logic of the belligerents that accepts the
inevitablity of injury to civilians as a principle. If we
intend to protect civilians, this line of reasoning cannot
be accepted by the United Nations. One of the primary
tasks of the Security Council must be to investigate the
loss of civilian life in conflicts by sending special
missions. This is the only way that one can find out
whether the belligerents have complied with
humanitarian conventions or not.

The ability of the United Nations to protect
civilians and put an end to conflict is also related to the
protection of United Nations personnel.

My delegation, again, agrees with the
recommendations of the High-level Panel that the
security of United Nations staff in the field must be
strengthened by creating a Security Directorate that
should be given all due priority to help the Secretary-
General implement a new security system for staff next
year

However, when I address this point, I feel
obliged, like others, to refer to cases in which there has
been a lack of respect and protection of civilians on the
part of United Nations staff in peacekeeping
operations. It is lamentable that there have been
accusations against elements in the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. I can remember that, many years ago, there
were questionable events in Cambodia as well. It is
necessary to investigate these alleged abuses fully and
inform Member States of the investigations under way
and action that is taken in that regard, with a view to
ensuring that the United Nations does not give a
picture of impunity.

Finally, we must acknowledge the fact that, in
order to consolidate the protection of civilians after the
conflict has come to an end, determined action must be
taken to build a new State that can assume
responsibility for protecting its citizens. Otherwise, we
will only be incubating a new conflict situation, as a
result of the weak institutions that never were able to
protect its own citizens.
