Mr. Dejammet (France) (interpretation from French): The countries of the Great Lakes region are
threatened by a humanitarian catastrophe. The
disturbances that have taken place in eastern Zaire have
caused the exodus of 1.2 million refugees and displaced
persons. Humanitarian agencies have left the region.

Since the beginning of these tragic events, the
French Government has called for an urgent response
from the international community. It proposed the
deployment in eastern Zaire of a multinational force for
strictly humanitarian purposes. On 7 November 1996 the
Secretary-General sent a letter to the Security Council
recommending the deployment of such an operation. The
Organization of African Unity came out in favour of such
a project.

Resolution 1078 (1996), which was adopted on 9
November 1996, actively committed Member States
urgently to make the necessary preparations for the
formation of this force. That resolution marked the
starting point for the mobilization of the international
community. The draft resolution that we shall adopt today
will finally authorize the establishment of this
multinational force, and we hope that its first elements
will be deployed over the next few days.

This force, in which France will participate, has a
strictly humanitarian mandate. Its principal mission is to
allow the effective delivery of humanitarian assistance for
refugees and displaced persons and, to this end, to
promote the return to eastern Zaire of the humanitarian
organizations. The objective of this force is also to
facilitate the voluntary return of refugees and displaced
persons; indeed, the ultimate goal is the free return of
refugees and displaced persons to their country and region
of origin.

 

The establishment of this multinational force would
not have been possible if Canada had not made the
courageous decision to agree to lead it and to begin
preparations to that end. As others have done and will do,
we commend Canada's generous offer, which, we are
pleased to say, will bring together under its command
several American, European and African contingents.
France is particularly concerned that resources be provided
to the Africans so that they can fully participate in this
humanitarian mission. It is for this reason that we have
continued to call for consultations with the Organization of
African Unity.

The multinational force will be in place for a
maximum period of four months, which can be reduced if
the Council so decides. The force should be followed by
another operation, most likely a United Nations operation,
whose mandate will be specifically to pursue the
humanitarian work that will begin in the next few days. We
hope that all of these efforts will provide such help as is
necessary to stabilize the region and to begin, finally to
bring about a lasting solution to the problems that have
afflicted the Great Lakes region for more than two years
now.

But everyone has become aware of the need to deal
with all the region's problems at the negotiating table, with
the support of all interested countries.

I have heard at that table rather passionate
arguments - an understandable emotional reaction to a
great deal of injustice. But I have also heard measured and
responsible comments. It is this exchange of views that
allows us to hope that dialogue among the countries of the
region will be fully resumed and that understanding and
reconciliation will replace incomprehension, psychosis and
devastation.

We can also work together for reconciliation - a
hope that was expressed earlier by one of us at this table.
Europe has known its share of war, and now it is
experiencing a period of reconciliation and pacification.
Why not do for Africa, through an international conference,
what was done for Europe, which restored peace to
devastated areas? That is why the French Government, as
everyone is well aware, has repeatedly called for the
convening of an international conference on peace, security
and development in the Great Lakes region. We are pleased
to note that this proposal has been formally endorsed, and
on the terms I have just cited, by the Organization of
African Unity. The Security Council - in the draft
resolution that is before us and of which France is a

 

sponsor - has once again emphasized the need for such
a conference. The Secretary-General's Special Envoy,
Raymond Chretien, has been mandated by resolution 1078
(1996) to speed up preparations. We hope that the Special
Envoy's efforts, as well as our own, will allow for the
early convening of this conference. It is the only truly
peaceful and reasonable means for finally, as each of us
hopes, bringing about the reign of peace and
understanding in the Great Lakes region.

