The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Croatia in which she requests to
be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Ms.
Ognjanovac (Croatia) took a seat at the Council
table.

The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Guehenno to take a seat at the
Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2002/l34l, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission
of Observers in Prevlaka (UNMOP).

Members of the Council also have before them
photocopies of a letter dated 10 December 2002 from
the Permanent Representative of Yugoslavia and the
Charge" d'affaires ad interim of the Permanent Mission
of Croatia to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council, transmitting the
Protocol between the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
and the Republic of Croatia on the Interim Regime
along the Southern Border between the Two States
signed on 10 December 2002 by the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of Yugoslavia and Croatia. That letter
and its annex will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/2002/ 1348.

At this meeting the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, to
whom I now give the floor.


