Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, we thank the Director of the Coordination and
Response Division of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) for his briefing on the
humanitarian situation in Ukraine.

We regret the worsening humanitarian situation
in eastern Ukraine as a result of the escalation in the
fighting, particularly in the Donetsk and Luhansk
regions. Chile is very concerned about the security
of those who are trapped in the conflict zone and the
increase in deliberate attacks on civilian facilities,
including basic infrastructure such as electricity and
water, as well as housing and public buildings. It is
worrying that access to drinking water in those zones
has decreased, with an impact on the population.

The worsening situation is also reflected in the
increase in the numbers ofinternally displaced persons
and people who who have crossed borders. We are
particularly concerned that this group of individuals
are mainly made up of women, boys and girls. We
reiterate that any response strategy must address the
special needs of girls and adolescents, as they are
doubly vulnerable.

In that regard, we support the recommendations
made by the United Nations in connection with the need
for the Ukrainian Government to establish a unified
and centralized registration system to document the
movement of internally displaced persons and to assess
in the best way possible how to meet their needs.

We reiterate that there is also a need for the United
Nations to be present on the ground in support of
national authorities. In that connection, we welcome
the development by OCHA and other members of the
humanitarian community of a preliminary response
plan that will lay the foundations for the future
humanitarian response in Ukraine. We hope that the
donor community will support that appeal.

In conclusion, we urge the parties to find a peaceful
solution to the crisis through direct political dialogue, to
act with moderation and refrain from taking unilateral
measures, which could increase the tension, and to
participate in international mediation efforts.

We would like to reiterate our appreciation for the
ongoing efforts of the Secretary-General and the United
Nations, through its various agencies to put an end to the
situation being experienced by Ukraine. We also trust
that the various independent international mechanisms

will be able to continue to contribute towards the search
for a solution to the crisis.
