Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Mark Lowcock,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs,
for his briefing today. The Security Council has been
preoccupied, especially of late, with the situation in
Syria, which has seen dangerous and accelerating
developments. That is why we need to address all these
developments in an appropriate manner and further our
efforts to reach a comprehensive political solution to
the crisis in Syria.

Resolution 2401 (2018), adopted unanimously by
the Council less than two months ago, addressed the
humanitarian situation across Syria. The resolution
demanded a cessation of hostilities for at least 30 days
without delay in order to allow the United Nations
and its partners to deliver humanitarian assistance
and ensure the evacuation of the sick and wounded, in
accordance with international law. We underscore once
again the Council's demand in resolution 2401 (2018)
for unhindered and sustained access for humanitarian
convoys, including medical material. We remind
all parties of their obligations under international
humanitarian law and international human rights law,
and we call for an immediate end to all attacks on
civilians, residential areas and medical facilities, in
accordance with the resolution.

We are deeply frustrated by the failure of
compliance with resolution 2401 (2018). We call on
the parties with influence to work with the Syrian
authorities in particular and to urge them to implement
resolution 2401 (2018), pursuant to international
humanitarian law. We expect the guarantor countries
of Astana agreement - Russia, Iran and Turkey - to
ensure progress on that front, in accordance with the
declaration issued by the tripartite summit held in
Istanbul on 4 April.

We agree with the statement to be delivered by the
representative of Sweden regarding our concern over
the humanitarian situation in eastern Ghouta and Idlib,
in northern Aleppo. We also express our concern at the
increasing obstacles facing the United Nations and its
efforts to reach civilians who had fled eastern Ghouta.
We call on the Syrian Government to facilitate the
access of United Nations staff to camps for internally
displaced persons.

Regarding Raqqa, we thank Under-Secretary-
General Lowcock for his update today following the
recent humanitarian assessment visit. We welcome
the efforts of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs to prepare the necessary
humanitarian plans in order to provide assistance to
Raqqa and remove all mines and explosive devices,
which pose a threat to the safe return of internally
displaced persons and refugees.

Concerning the situation in Rukban, we stress the
need to ensure sustained humanitarian access to camps
in the area from inside Syria. We urge the United
Nations and its partners to deliver this assistance as
soon as possible.

In closing, we urge Member States to participate
actively in the donor conference on the humanitarian
situation in Syria which will be held in Brussels
next week, given the conference's important role in
alleviating the situation of the Syrian people, whose
suffering is now in its eighth year, with no serious
settlement in view.

