Mr. Al Khalil (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): The Syrian Arab Republic regrets the
continued tendency of the Secretary-General's report
(S/2019/509) to give primacy to political considerations
over human rights issues, thereby failing to provide an
objective perspective on the situation in the Syrian Arab
Republic. The recent developments on the ground cited
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict in her latest briefing
are characterized by several fallacies, most notably the
erroneous legal perspective that the counter-terrorism
operations being carried out by the Syrian Arab Army
and its allies - which constitute a legitimate right under
international law 4 are on an equal footing with the
Turkish aggression and occupation of Syrian territory,
which represent a clear Violation of international law,
particularly in terms of the allegations of recruitment,
detention and sexual violence.

The Special Representative of the Secretary-
General has once again sought to indict the Syrian
Government in the face of those violations. We wish
to recall that on several occasions, we have asked the
Special Representative to inform us in advance of the
cases, names and details in the report so as to enable
us to validate them and conduct our own investigations
to verify whether they were true. However, she has
ignored our request and insisted on her own perspective.
We wish to remind the Special Representative that all
relevant Syrian legislation is based on the principle of
providing special protection to children, in line with
the Syrian Constitution. That is also something we have
repeatedly pointed out in response to her reports.

With regard to the implementation of our legislative
framework, Law No. 11/2013 allowed us to establish
measures in line with our national efforts to help
children recruited by armed terrorist groups with a view
to saving them from exploitation by those groups and
in order to ensure their rehabilitation and reintegration
into society. Children are also covered under our
Juvenile Act No. 18/1974, which is based primarily on
corrective measures and includes procedural rules and
special courts that treat children as victims, regardless
of their actions. Our laws prioritize the best interests
of children in terms of physical and psychological care
as well as their rehabilitation and reintegration into
society. All forms of physical abuse and sexual violence
are punishable by severe penalties under criminal law.
Moreover, with regard to the management of military
operations, we wish to reaffirm the commitment of
the Syrian Arab Army to the rules of international
humanitarian law in the context of our counter-
terrorism efforts, particularly with regard to the
principle of proportionality, the distinction between
civilian and military targets, precaution and the non-use
of prohibited weapons.

In the light of the fabricated allegations made by
the representative of the Turkish regime, my delegation
wishes to reiterate that the Turkish Government is a key
partner of the armed terrorist groups currently deployed
in Idlib. Despite the Turkish regime being one of the
guarantors of the Astana process, Syria does not believe
that it is earnestly implementing the agreements, which
were designed to ensure the removal of terrorist groups,

together with heavy and mid-sized weapons, from the
region. On the contrary, the number ofterrorists in Idlib,

especially foreigner terrorist fighters, has increased.

The Turkish regime is not only financing and providing
weapons to terrorist groups, such as the Al-Nusra Front

and Hayat Tahrir Al- Sham, it is even carrying out direct
military aggression exercises against Syria, with 10,655

soldiers and officers deployed on Syrian territory, as
well as 166 tanks, 278 armoured vehicles, 18 rocket

launchers, 73 mortars, 73 vehicles equipped with heavy

machine guns and 41 anti-tank missile launchers.

Other violations being committed by the Turkish
regime are no less dangerous than its military
deployment. The Government of the Justice and
Development Party of Turkey has appointed a Turkish
governor to Afrin, and the Minister of the Interior of
Turkey has appointed officials to the cities of Azaz,
Jarabulus and Marea. The Turkish language has also
been imposed on schools and educational curricula.
Telecommunications towers have been built in Idlib.
Syrian agricultural products such as olives are being
stolen and sold by the Turkish regime at international
markets around the world. Terrorists who support the
Turkish regime are stealing artefacts from Ain Dara
and other areas such as Afrin and its suburbs before
being transported to Turkey.

In the light of everything I have just mentioned,
Syria considers the Turkish regime to be a partner
to the terrorists against Syria and an aggressor. We
believe that we have a right to take all necessary actions
to defend our sovereignty.

The meeting rose at 7pm.
