Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006) and its Chair, as well as the Panel of Experts, for
their continued work in supporting implementation of
the Council's resolutions on Iran.

This briefing comes at a crucial moment for
Iran. Negotiations between Iran and the E3+3 on a
comprehensive agreement on Iran's nuclear programme
will reach their conclusion in the coming days. We
hope that a deal can be reached by the deadline on
next Tuesday. The E3+3 and Iran agreed on the key
parameters for a comprehensive agreement in Lausanne
on 2 April. That was a major milestone and formed the
basis for what could be a very good deal - one that is
durable and verifiable and will, if fully implemented,
address our proliferation concerns.

There is, however, much to be done in very little
time. Important political and technical issues still
need to be resolved before we have a final agreement.
Diplomats and technical experts from the E3+3 and
Iran are currently meeting in an effort to finalize
a comprehensive agreement by 30 June. In parallel
to those negotiations, the E3+3 and Iran have been
implementing their commitments under the Joint Plan
of Action. I thank my fellow E3+3 members for their
support in that effort.

But as this report reminds us, while negotiations
continue, the bulk of sanctions remain in place and
must continue to be enforced in full. That includes all
United Nations sanctions and all obligations on Member
States arising from Council resolutions on the issue.
The lifting of sanctions should act as an incentive for
Iran to conclude the negotiations on a comprehensive
agreement.

Turning to the work of the Committee, I am
grateful for the crucial role that it plays in supporting
the enforcement of the relevant Council sanctions
measures on Iran. We also welcome the ongoing work
of the Panel of Experts and the Council's decision to
extend the Panel's mandate until 9 July 2016.

We support the Committee's continued guidance
and assistance to Member States and international
organizations. But we are disappointed at Iran's
continued failure to respond to past requests from
the Committee for information on various incidents
of concern. Once again, we urge Iran to engage
constructively with the Committee on those requests.

The United Kingdom remains committed to
finding a peaceful and lasting negotiated solution to the
Iran nuclear issue. A negotiated settlement with Iran
that is durable and verifiable and that addresses our
proliferation concerns is the best way to stop Iran from
developing a nuclear weapons capability.

A comprehensive deal with Iran is in all our
interests. For the international community it would
provide reassurance that Iran's nuclear programme is
exclusively for peaceful purposes at a time of great
instability in the region. For Iran, it would mean,
ultimately, the lifting of all sanctions imposed as a
result of Iran's nuclear programme. This would have
a huge impact on Iran's economy and would improve
the day-to-day lives of ordinary Iranians over time.
Furthermore, it would present a real opportunity to
reset relationships with the international community.

Should it fail to seize this opportunity, Iran faces
further years in isolation, to the detriment of its people,
its economy and its standing in the region. We hope that
will not be the case.

In order to help secure a better future for Iran,
we will continue to make every effort to find a
comprehensive agreement. We look to Iran to do the
same.

