Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): First
of all, I would like to welcome the new Permanent
Representative of cote d'Ivoire, His Excellency
Ambassador Adom, to the Council in his new capacity. I
look forward to our fruitful cooperation in the Council.

The South Sudan political process is currently
at a crucial stage. With the mediation efforts of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD),
the African Union (AU), Ethiopia, the Sudan, Uganda
and other regional organizations and countries, the
South Sudan political process has recently made positive
and recognized progress, clearly demonstrating that all
the parties in South Sudan have the will to pursue peace
and resolve issues through political channels.

In today's context, the Security Council must play
its constructive role to the full and continue to lend
all possible support to the mediation efforts of IGAD,
the AU and the countries of the region. While they
are working hard, we must continue to maintain our
confidence and patience so as to help to facilitate the
political process in South Sudan.

China has always maintained that sanctions should
serve only as a means, not an end in themselves. Any
measures taken by the Council should be conducive
to ensuring the political settlement of relevant issues,
not the reverse. The AU and IGAD have indicated on
several recent occasions that it is neither advisable nor
helpful to impose additional sanctions on South Sudan.
The Security Council must listen to the legitimate
aspirations of regional organizations and countries in
Africa and take a cautious stance when it comes to
imposing sanctions.

We have noted the fact that the penholders made
certain improvements to resolution 2428 (2018) at the
joint request of China and some other Council members.
Now, however, the resolution still insists on imposing
sanctions on South Sudan, including an arms embargo,
that could complicate the situation and work against the
advancement of the peace process. China abstained in
the voting on the resolution for these reasons.
I would like to reiterate that the Chinese Government
has consistently supported the peace process in South
Sudan and has provided support to the country's efforts
to restore national stability and development. Together
with the rest of the international community, China
stands ready to fully support the efforts to pursue peace
being made by South Sudan, regional organizations and
other countries of the region, and to make a constructive
contribution to achieving lasting peace and stability in
South Sudan and the African continent.

