Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, my delegation would like to
thank Ambassadors ngsj, Mayoral and Burian for their
briefings.

We welcome these public Security Council
meetings to discuss this important issue. Syria
condemns international terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations. Syria was a victim of terrible terrorist
acts and was one of the first countries to call attention
to this grave danger. We called for developing national
and international strategies to combat it.

Syria carries out its obligations with regard to the
Consolidated List, both electronically and through
hard-copy documents, which were distributed to all of
our ports and borders. We also note with satisfaction
the fact that the 1267 Counter-Terrorism Committee is
making great efforts to fulfil its mandates. However, in
spite of those efforts, the Security Council did not pay
serious attention to what the General Assembly called
for in the context of the outcome document at the
September summit - that is, the need to tackle the
issue of including and reviewing names in the
Consolidated List, as well as delisting, and the
problems related to enforcing bans, especially the
similarities between names, the duplication of names
and the incorrect spelling of names.

We also welcome the briefing on the work of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) and its Executive Directorate relating to
resolution 1624 (2005), on incitement to terrorist acts.
The Committee has considered the reports submitted
by States; here we wish to recall that a month ago Syria
submitted an additional report supplementing its fourth
report, which made reference to matters related to
money-laundering and the financing of terrorism, in
connection with recent legislation formulated by Syria
to address money-laundering and the financing of
terrorism. Syria is enhancing transparency in the areas
of finance and banking related to investment and
banking privacy. We have established a committee to
develop legislation in these areas.

While we support resolution 1540 (2004) and the
work of the Committee established pursuant to that
resolution, we consider that the Committee's activities
should not be seen as replacing those of the
multilateral disarmament machinery. They should not
infringe on the powers of the General Assembly. Syria
has submitted its report under the resolution, along
with addenda requested by the Committee. The
addenda include references to laws on money-
laundering, the financing of terrorism and nuclear
materials.

Syria is committed to cooperating with the
Security Council Committees in the sphere of counter-
terrorism. It is putting in place national legislation and
undertaking effective measures to fight terrorism and
fulfil its commitments in this area. We welcome the
efforts of the three Committees to coordinate their
work to fulfil their mandates. Here, we call on the three
counter-terrorism Committees to avoid duplication of
work, both among themselves and vis-a-vis bodies
established by the General Assembly. We call upon the
Security Council, as it addresses international
terrorism - which poses a threat to international peace
and security - not to interfere in matters falling within
the exclusive purview of the General Assembly, in
particular legislative matters. That would affect the
legislative weight of measures adopted by the Security
Council and would call the Council's credibility further
into question. We attach great importance to the role of
the Security Council and to international counter-
terrorism efforts. We call upon States members of the
Council to avoid double standards in the fight against
terrorism, because these undermine the Council's
credibility and the action it takes.

The United Nations provides a unique framework
for our collective pursuit of international cooperation
and coordination among all States in fighting terrorism
and preventing the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. My delegation attaches great importance to
international counter-terrorism conventions and notes
that States are shouldering their responsibilities under
such instruments. In that regard, we will make an
effective contribution to the forthcoming discussions in
the General Assembly's Ad Hoc Committee on a
comprehensive convention against international
terrorism, with a View to finding a way to put an end to
that scourge. We call for agreement on a legal
definition of terrorism encompassing the work that has
already been done and drawing a distinction between
terrorism and the legitimate right of peoples to fight
occupation and to liberate their lands. We call upon the
General Assembly to achieve this within the
framework of a comprehensive counter-terrorism
strategy in conformity with the September 2005 World
Summit Outcome (General Assembly resolution 60/1).
This should promote peace and development, and
should confront State terrorism.

Our Arab region is a victim of terrorism in
general, and State terrorism in particular. This is seen
in the daily terrorism that has ceaselessly, for decades,
been carried out by Israel through its continued
terrorist occupation of occupied Arab territories, its
ongoing killing of thousands of innocent Palestinians,
its destruction of their property, and its construction of
a separation wall on their territory. We believe that the
Israeli representative's exploitation of this Chamber in
an attempt to sell his Government's terrorist policies
and to cast doubt on what other States are doing to
fight terrorism is intended to cloak Israel's terrorist
acts. We should not be silent about this matter, which
has serious negative consequences. Over the past few
days, Israel has killed dozens of innocent civilians; we
are waiting for the Security Council to condemn those
acts and to adopt measures to put a stop to them.

Damascus is the capital of peace and
understanding, whence the prophet Paul spread
Christianity; Damascus was the base from which that
great religion was launched. Damascus is also the
capital of Islamic culture and the starting point of
many other great cultures. No one can deny this, least
of all someone who practices terrorism day and night
and who practices hatred day and night.

The work of the three Committees is of great
importance for the international community. We all
hope that the Security Council will continue to enhance
multilateral international cooperation in safeguarding
international peace and security and in eradicating
terrorism in all its manifestations.

