On behalf ofthe Chairperson of the African Union Commission, His Excellency Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, I would like to congratulate France on presiding over this Security Council meeting and I thank all the members of the Council for having invited the African Union to participate in this important debate on the Secretary- General's report on the situation in Mali and on the prospect of renewing the mandate of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). Today's debate is taking place amid a difficult context in Mali and throughout the Sahel region. That part of Africa is currently going through a triple crisis - health, economic and security - due to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). Given the long-standing prevailing political and security situation in the region, we must bolster the system put in place to ensure security in Mali and in the Sahel, with MINUSMA at its core. The security situation has deteriorated drastically, especially since the second half of 2019 in the Liptako-Gourma area, known as the three-borders area. The actions of armed terrorist groups have increased in number and intensity. Intercommunal violence in central Mali continues despite the various strategies implemented by the Government. The persistence of such clashes has resulted in a significant number of civilian casualties in recent weeks. The difficult security situation has exacerbated the humanitarian situation and weakened respect for human rights, in the form of a growing number of displaced persons and the lack of basic social services, such as education and health care. In response, Mali has launched a new military initiative, Operation Maliko, with tangible results. The Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) has grown in strength and the cooperation and coordination mechanism set up in Pau seems to be working properly. Other initiatives have been under way since the second half of 2019, notably that of the Economic Community of West African States, which has provided significant financial support to the G-5 Sahel. Similarly, at its February summit, the African Union expressed its solidarity with the countries of the region by deploying a force of 3,000. That force is being assembled. Of course, to that security dimension we must add multiple interventions in the area of development within the framework of the Priority Investment Programme of the Group of Five for the Sahel and the Alliance for the Sahel. On the political plan, the holding of an inclusive national dialogue in Mali raised many hopes. We congratulate Mali, which, following the dialogue's conclusions, successfully organized legislative elections that helped establish the new National Assembly. That important step can facilitate even more important reforms, especially constitutional reforms. We also take this opportunity to encourage the Malian authorities to organize partial elections in the districts where they could not be held. Withregard to the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, progress has been made on the deployment of the reconstituted Malian army. We encourage the Malian authorities to pursue their efforts to complete the accelerated disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process, as only the total disarmament of the armed movements and militias can help restore peace in Mali. We also welcome the installation of interim authorities in the regions of Taoudenit and Menaka and we encourage the Government of Mali to complete that process this year. We also welcome the transfer of skills and resources to local authorities and the operationalization of the territorial police. Finally, today's debate comes at a time when a new Government is expected to be formed in Mali. Our hope is that the next Government will be able to create new momentum in the implementation of the peace agreement by adopting a new timetable for completing the priority actions that have already been identified. In conclusion, the political and security situation in Mali and in the Sahel region as a whole remains difficult and requires sustained efforts by the entire international community, particularly for the optimal implementation of the Mali peace agreement, which is the guiding framework and means for the resolution of the multidimensional crisis that the country is experiencing. MINUSMA's role in the implementation of the agreement and in the stabilization of the country is essential. Accordingly, the African Union supports the proposed renewal of the mandate of MINUSMA with its current staffing.
