Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
delegation of Senegal thanks the Egyptian presidency
for having taken the initiative to organize this
important debate on the theme "United Nations-
African Union peace and security cooperation: Chapter
VIII application and the future of the African Peace
and Security Architecture". We also commend you, Sir,
on the concept note (S/2016/428, annex) that you have
provided to guide our work. We also thank you briefers,
who insightful statements have helped to illuminate
our debate.

This debate is timely and offers us a decisive
opportunity to deepen our reflection on the
implementation of the recommendations of the
reviews of the United Nations peace operations. One
of the most consensual of those recommendations is to
strengthen cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations, particularly the African Union,
given its special status as a strategic partner of the
United Nations.

In that regard, I am pleased to welcome the
positive development in the framework of cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union
over the course of the past decade, in particular the
operationalization of the United Nations-African Union
Joint Task Force on Peace and Security. In addition,
since 2010, the United Nations has had a liaison office
at the African Union, while the finalization of a joint
framework for an enhanced partnership on peace and
security has been announced for the end of this year.

The Security Council and the African Union Peace
and Security Council, which are currently holding the
tenth session oftheir annualjoint consultations, have in
practice demonstrated a pragmatic approach by working
together in the area ofpeacekeeping operations, whether
it be in Somalia, Darfur, Guinea-Bissau, Central
Africa, Mali or in the early stages in Burundi. Those
are just some examples among many that demonstrate
the vitality of the partnership. However, we also need to
point out that the potential of this cooperation has not
been sufficiently explored, mainly because of several
obstacles that need to be overcome in order to enable
the African Union to carry out its noble function of
tackling the challenges to peace and security on the
continent.
The disturbing trend of conflicts we are
witnessing with the emergence of new cross-cutting
and asymmetrical threats bring into question the very
foundations of our collective security system. They are
objective reasons to start thinking strategically about
strengthening the partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union on matters of peace and
security. Of course, it is up to the Security Council,
first and foremost, given its primary responsibility
in maintaining international peace and security, to
respond to crises, but it is clear that it cannot handle
that heavy task alone.

It is therefore necessary, in accordance with
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, to
strengthen cooperation with regional organizations and
to encourage the development of regional responses
to crises. Regional organizations have the advantage
of being closer to the ground and they know the local
realities and the dynamics of conflict better and can help
identify the most appropriate intervention policies. In
that regard, as a strategic partner of the United Nations
in the area of peace and security, the African Union
has the skills and legal framework required to provide
a first response to crises. It also has demonstrated
its ability to conduct operations in support of peace,
particularly in Mali and Somalia, to name just those
two few examples.

The African Union remains a major player
in collective security that is trying to refine its
structures and consolidate in its area of responsibility.
In furtherance of that aim, the African Union has
already put inplace a Peace and Security Architecture
that provides a comprehensive framework aimed at
preventing, containing and managing conflicts across
the continent. The development and implementation of
the Architecture is, without a doubt, an illustration of
the unwavering commitment of the African Union to
tackle head-on issues linked to peace and security on
the continent. In the same vein, the African Standby
Force showed its full operational capacity following the
smooth conduct of the Amani Africa II exercise, which
was carried out in November 2015. We must also note
the adoption of the 2016-2020 road map, which aims,
among other things, to prevent and remove obstacles
to fully operationalizing the African Union Peace and
Security Architecture.

While evidence shows that the Peace and Security
Council and the mechanisms of the African Peace
and Security Architecture have been active in various
crises since 2004, including Burundi, Cote d'Ivoire,
the Comoros, Darfur and Somalia, their efforts were
often limited by various factors, including the nagging
problem of financing.

On the occasion of the tenth session of annual
consultations between the Peace and Security Council
of the African Union and the Security Council, and
as we prepare to celebrate the establishment of the
Organization of African Unity, which is today the
African Union, as well as given the major challenge
posed by the funding of the Peace and Security
Architecture, with its growing demand for resources,
in addition to logistical and operational constraints,
both bodies need to find a new funding mechanism
that is sustainable and predictable in order to meet the
challenges of peace and security in Africa and ensure
that the peace and security architecture in Africa is
operational.

In that connection, Senegal strongly supports
the recommendations contained in the report (see S/2015/446) of the High-level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations relating to building the capacity
of the African Union in the areas of prevention and
peacekeeping. We look forward with great interest
to the implementation of the measures and initiatives
announced by Secretary-General in his report on the
future of peace operations (S/2015/682). We believe
that the presidential statement (S/PRST/2016/8) that
we have we just adopted is a very good document for
strengthening the partnership between the African
Union and the United Nations, but we must also
broaden our perspectives with regard to the relationship
between the African Union and the United Nations by
developing other synergies, in particular between the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1) and the African Union's
Agenda 2063. Senegal believes that we cannot have
sustainable peace without inclusive and sustainable
development.

