Mr. Burian (Slovakia): I would like to thank
Mr. Gambari for his briefing and observations on his

recent visit to Burma. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General and to express our strong support for
his continued good offices and efforts towards
promoting democracy and reconciliation in Burma. We
encourage him to remain vigorously engaged in that
process and the Government of Burma to use that
assistance and window of opportunity, as the Secretary-
General put it, to take bold action towards democratic
change in the country.

Slovakia is concerned about the deterioration of
the situation in Burma. We condemn the violent and
repressive action of the military leaders in Myanmar
against the peaceful civil demonstrations which began
last month in response to the escalating tensions,
human rights violations and the deteriorating
humanitarian and social situation in that country. We
are shocked and dismayed by the reports of death and
serious injuries among the protesters and are deeply
concerned about the fate of hundreds of activists and
ordinary people who have been detained or are
missing.

Slovakia calls on the authorities of Burma to
immediately cease all hostilities and human rights
abuses against its own citizens, to free the arrested
demonstrators and all prisoners of conscience,
including the democracy leader and Nobel Prize
Laureate Aung San Suu Kyi, and to commence a broad-
based and all-inclusive process of political
transformation and national reconciliation while
respecting the multi-ethnic and multireligious nature of
its society.

Burma has an appalling human rights record that
includes the use of child soldiers and forced labour,
torture and other cruel, inhuman and degrading
treatment. For decades the military regime has waged a
war against ethnic groups in which its security forces
have razed villages, raped women and killed civilians,
causing hundreds of thousands of people from Burma
to seek refuge in neighbouring countries. We fear that
if the violence and gross human rights violations
continue, the situation in Burma might turn into a
major and dangerous intra-State conflict with dire and
unpredictable consequences for the whole region.

In that regard we reaffirm our call to the
Government of Burma to cooperate fully with the
United Nations, to address the political and
humanitarian situation in the country and to
implement the recommendations of the Secretary-
General, as presented by Mr. Gambari, and the
provisions of the road map of transition to democracy.

We strongly support the role and efforts of the
regional partners in helping to find ways for Burma to
respond to the situation and achieve a sustainable,
peaceful, democratic and political solution to the crisis.
While reiterating our full support for the role and good
offices of the Secretary-General and his envoy
Mr. Gambari, we believe that the Security Council
must also take appropriate steps to tackle the situation
by considering a strategy that might help to facilitate
national reconciliation and a genuine transition to
democracy in Burma.

