Mr. Hoang Chi Trung (Viet Nam): Let me first
of all thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2008/709) on the situation in Somalia. We also wish
to thank Assistant Secretary-General Menkerios for his
update on recent events, both inside and outside

Somalia, and for his views on the way forward. We are
also very grateful for the statements and briefings
made today by the Director of the Africa II Division of
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the
Secretary-General of the International Maritime
Organization, the Permanent Observer of the African
Union and the Permanent Representative of Somalia.

My delegation notes with appreciation the
significant progress made by the Transitional Federal
Government (TFG) and the Alliance for the
Re-liberation of Somalia in the implementation of the
Somali peace process, notably the signing on
26 October in Djibouti of two important documents:
the modalities for the implementation of a cessation of
armed confrontation and the joint declaration on
common political aims. It is our sincere hope that they
will pave the way towards a good-faith dialogue and
mobilize the needed international assistance to help
form a Somali unity Government, as outlined in article
9 of the Djibouti agreement. We are confident that this
is a crucial step towards securing peace and stability in
Somalia.

However, we remain concerned by the increasing
insecurity in and off the coast of Somalia. On land,
serious fighting among insurgent groups and against
both the Ethiopian forces and African Union
peacekeepers in the south-central regions and
Mogadishu has resulted in the heavy loss of civilian
lives. At sea, the surge in piracy and armed robbery
against ships along the coast is truly alarming. Two
recent cases of greatest concern to us were the capture
by the pirates of the Ukrainian vessel MV Faina,
carrying a large quantity of heavy weapons and small
arms, and of an oil tanker belonging to Saudi Arabia.

We share the Secretary-General's assessment in
his report that the deterioration of security and stability
in Somalia poses an immense challenge not only to the
ongoing peace process, but also to the delivery of
humanitarian aid that is highly critical to the TFG's
efforts to address the humanitarian crisis in Somalia.

Against that backdrop, simultaneous action on
both the political and the security fronts is imperative.
We therefore call upon the Somalis to engage in the
peace process and faithfully to implement the Djibouti
agreement and the agreement on the cessation of armed
confrontation. We urge the international community to
continue its efforts to develop a common approach to
addressing the challenges facing Somalia. In that

connection, we commend the African Union Mission in
Somalia, the International Contact Group on Somalia,
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
other regional organizations on their active role in the
reconciliation process and their readiness to support
the implementation of the Djibouti agreement.

If further progress in the political situation and
improvements in the humanitarian situation in Somalia
are to be achieved, we hold that the United Nations, in
coordination with regional organizations, the African
Union in particular, should extend the necessary
financial, logistical and technical assistance to the
TFG. My delegation also supports steps undertaken to
achieve the early deployment of an international
stabilization force in Somalia, as requested by the TFG
and the African Union. In that regard, we welcome the
Secretary-General's recent efforts to introduce a
detailed plan for such a deployment and to begin
identifying and approaching potential contributing
Member States and to encourage them to participate in
that multinational force.

