Mr. Chavez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation is grateful for the presentations of
Ambassador Loj, Ambassador Mayoral and
Ambassador Burian, chairs of the subsidiary bodies
established pursuant to resolutions 1373 (2001), 1267
(1999) and 1540 (2004). We congratulate them for their
work in charge of their respective subsidiary bodies of
the Council. We also thank the experts and staff
working for those Committees.

As for the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999), we feel that the
change in procedures for listing and de-listing should
be completed as soon as possible. We must take into
account not only the expectations concerning this
review process but also the fact that a delay in reaching
agreement risks affecting the credibility and legitimacy
of the Committee and the sanctions regime. Peru feels
that that agreement must overcome existing limitations
and take into account that any steps to combat
terrorism should be based on full respect for
international law and human rights.

As for the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, my delegation is still expecting the
transition from the system of reports to the use of
preliminary implementation assessments, or PIAs.
Proper use of this new tool should allow the
Committee to gain more complete and detailed
information on implementation of resolution 1373
(2001) by the Member States. It will establish solid
bases for better understanding of national realities, for
better dialogue between the Committee and the
Member States and for the determination, in each case,
of the most appropriate assessment.

We feel it is essential that the Committee's study
on the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) by
each country - the preliminary implementation
assessment - be shared with that country. Real
dialogue can be established only if we use the same
basis. For that it is necessary to have a common
understanding of reality within a framework that
promotes confidence and cooperation.

The report on the implementation of resolution
1624 (2005) that the Counter-Terrorism Committee has
presented to the Council describes progress by the
Member States. I would like to report that in Peru for
many years now, penal legislation criminalizes anyone
who by any means incites someone to commit any act
that includes the crime of terrorism and anyone who
publicly praises the crime of terrorism or someone who
has been condemned as an author of or participant in
that crime.

As evidence of its commitment to the question of
the proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons, Peru will host a seminar on implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) in Latin America and the
Caribbean on 27 and 28 November 2006. This event is
co-sponsored by the European Union, with the support
of the United Nations Department for Disarmament
Affairs and the United Nations Regional Centre for
Peace, Disarmament and Development in Latin
America and the Caribbean, whose headquarters are in
Lima.

This seminar is similar to that held in Beijing and
those that will be held in Accra and Vienna. We feel it
is a useful tool for disseminating the considerations
raised by resolution 1540 (2004), promoting awareness
of the seriousness of the problem of proliferation and
orienting countries in fulfilling the obligations under
that resolution.

Likewise, we welcome any help that countries
can provide to each other at the bilateral level for
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) or to
exchange information that improves their own
legislation and reinforces their means of control within
the framework of respect for the rights and obligations
of the States parties to the Treaty on the Non-
proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the Chemical
Weapons Convention and the Biological Weapons
Convention.

At the beginning of this month, the General
Assembly took a landmark step by adopting by
consensus the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy (resolution 60/288). Peru has zero
tolerance for terrorism and energetically and
unequivocally condemns terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations. Peru hopes that implementation of the
Strategy, under the auspices of the General Assembly,
will encourage international cooperation in all aspects
of the fight against this scourge. In the same spirit, we
reiterate our hope for the early completion of the
negotiations on a draft comprehensive convention on
international terrorism.

