I wish to thank Martin Griffiths and Mark Lowcock, of course, for their briefings, but, more importantly, for their unceasing work on this file and for that of their teams. The very last thing that Yemen needs is a major outbreak of COVID-19, as Mark set out the impact that could have through the communities there. The United Kingdom is providing $930 million to support the response to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic globally, and we are assessing how we can support Yemen directly to prepare and respond to an outbreak of COVID-19. I will just note that the United Kingdom gave $300 million in the last financial year and has given $1 billion since the conflict began. As we face COVID-19 in Yemen, we encourage the Government and the Houthis to continue engaging with United Nations bodies and agencies, including the World Health Organization and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, which were leading the response, in particular, of course, with Lise Grande on the ground. A total of 24 million people are currently in need of some form of humanitarian and permanent assistance in Yemen, and this will help the World Health Organization to identify requirements, procure equipment and ensure supplies, and reach those in need. I think that there are three important steps that the parties must take to mitigate the worst effects of the COVID-19 outbreak: first, agree to a ceasefire; secondly, engage with the United Nations-led political process; and, thirdly, improve humanitarian access. Now, a ceasefire and cooperation with the United Nations political process is the best defence we have against the most devastating effects of COVID-19. Mr. Griffiths was clear in his statement about the urgency that the Yemeni people, from wherever they might come, feel for their leaders to come and make peace. The Saudi ceasefire announcement following the Secretary-General's call on 25 March is a rare opportunity to deliver peace in Yemen. And as we endorse that global call by the Secretary-General, we as the Security Council need to apply it in specific country contexts. In that respect, I call on all parties to seize this opportunity. This ceasefire needs to be made permanent so that the United Nations-led political process can resume and we can achieve a political solution to this terrible conflict. I welcome the Government of Yemen's positive response to Saudi Arabia's declaration and its willingness to engage in peace talks to achieve a nationwide ceasefire. And I know, too, that the Houthi responded positively to Secretary- General Guterres's call for a nationwide ceasefire in Yemen, but it is disappointing that they have not yet seized the opportunity to make this a reality. So I urge the Houthis to show the international community and, more importantly, show their own people, that they, too, are serious about ending this conflict by immediately ceasing hostilities, engaging constructively with Martin Griffiths's proposals, including on confidence-building measures, of course, for more parties to commit publicly to attending a meeting of the Yemen parties under United Nations auspices as soon as possible. We need to be clear, as an international community, that any refusal to engage with the Special Envoy's proposals or any attempt to undermine his efforts through military action is an attempt to frustrate the efforts of the United Nations to end this awful conflict, and will be viewed internationally as such. 23/28 24/28 On the humanitarian side, I think Mr. Lowcock's message was clear: COVID-19 could have a huge and devastating impact on Yemen. The equation is simple: the more food, the better fed the people; the more medicine, the fewer infections and the fewer deaths. So we just have to get humanitarian access and supplies in. It is deeply disturbing to hear Mr. Lowcock used words like "non-permissive environment" in this circumstance. The Houthis must now deliver on the minimum operational requirements that the international community has clearly set out. They include allowing independent needs assessments, signing principal and sub-agreements and allowing humanitarian agencies to operate independently and freely. That last point is vital. It will ensure aid gets to the right people. I know that the World Food Programme has already been forced to alternate monthly food distributions in the north because it could not implement biometric registration beneficiaries. If these minimal operating requirements are not met, then assistance will be scaled back elsewhere. At the same time, picking up on what Mr. Lowcock said, let me call on the Government of Yemen to grant the necessary approvals and complete the necessary bureaucratic requirements, as Mr. Lowcock set out elsewhere. I have raised the significant risk posed by the FSO SAFER oil tanker a number of times before. A substantial oil leak from the FSO SAFER tanker would have a devastating effect on Yemen in the Red Sea. And while negotiations are under way to find a diplomatic way forward, I urge the Houthis to allow either the removal of the oil or a repair mission to proceed. Their continued inaction on this issue is reckless. Huge environmental and humanitarian damage must be avoided. We remain extremely concerned that the Central Bank of Yemen will run out of foreign currency reserves in the next few weeks, threatening a major economic collapse with humanitarian and political consequences. Significant external assistance to the Central Bank is urgently needed to keep imports coming in. We call on the Government of Yemen to urgently come up with a credible and transparent plan that reassures potential donors of their investments to the Yemeni people. Like Mr. Lowcock, let me echo my gratitude for the announced contribution by Saudi Arabia. I conclude by noting that in the Council we have said for some time now that it is self-evident that no one party can win a military victory in Yemen. Over the years, we have called for political talks and the peace process to take effect, most recently in our press statement on 10 April (SC/14159). Now is that moment. We should all send a strong message of support from the Council to Mr. Griffiths and his team for their efforts, and to the parties to get behind those efforts and to seize this opportunity for the sake of the people of Yemen.
