Mr. Lambertini (Italy): At the outset, I wish to
align myself in full with the statement that the observer
of the European Union will deliver later.

I wish to thank the Assistant Secretary-General
Jenca for his comprehensive briefing.

After three years of internal divisions that have
taken a toll on Palestinian unity, the most recent
talks between the Palestinian parties seem to mark an
important step towards resolving the all of Palestine
under a single, democratic and legitimate Authority.
Italy notes with interest the meetings that took place in
Cairo last week. We encourage both Palestinian parties
to work together in good faith in order to achieve the
long-needed reconciliation. At the same time, any
agreement will need to respect Israel's right to exist and
its legitimate security concerns. I commend Egypt for
its mediation efforts, since all steps towards Palestinian
reconciliation are essential to pave the way to the
resumption of the Middle East peace process.

It is now high time that the living conditions of
the inhabitants of the Gaza Strip receive long-overdue
attention. We call on the Palestinian Authority to
ease the economic measures that apply to Gaza as the
discussions between the Palestinian factions proceed.

Consistent with our established position on the
Middle East peace process, including with regard to
the 1967 lines and to East Jerusalem, as set out in the
relevant conclusions of the Council of the European
Union, Italy continues to support all efforts aimed
at restoring a political horizon, such as the round of
talks headed by the United States Administration with
both parties. In this regard, we reiterate our conviction
that any viable plan must be aligned with the two-State
solution, which is the only achievable one.

In the midst of all of the diplomatic efforts being
made by the main partners and regional allies, it is
important that all parties abstain from any provocation
or initiative that might hinder the peace process. Italy
therefore reiterates its concern over the intensified
expansion of settlements in the West Bank, reinforced
by recent announcements and decisions by the Israeli
Government that also affect the city of Hebron. As a
genuine and close friend of Israel, we believe that those
decisions run counter to the two-State prospect and
undermine the chance of ensuring a future of peace and
security for the parties, as also reaffirmed by resolution
2334 (2016).

On the Palestinian side, we expect a clear
condemnation of all acts ofviolence, such as the one that
took place in Har Adar in September. In recent days a
great deal has been said about UNESCO in connection
with the discussion that we are having today. However,
we have also received good news from UNESCO. We
appreciate, for instance, the adoption by consensus of
the Palestinian resolution in UNESCO a few days ago on
the events of last year, and we encourage further efforts
in this regard to work for consensus in good faith.

In August, the Council approved the renewal of
the mandate of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL) for one more year. Despite the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2373 (2017), during
the negotiations diverging views emerged on how
the peacekeeping mission should pursue its goal. As
a member of the Security Council and as UNIFIL's
largest troop contributor, together with Indonesia,
Italy not only affirms its support for UNIFIL but also
calls on all international partners to acknowledge and
respect the differences between the specific tasks and
prerogatives of the Lebanese authorities and those of
its peacekeepers.

The recent deployment in the south of the Lebanese
rapid-intervention regiment is evidence of the
commitment of the Lebanese institutions to their own
responsibilities. Italy will cooperate with the Secretariat
and all relevant countries in the implementation of
resolution 2373 (2017) while ensuring that improving
the effectiveness of UNIFIL does not translate into
any change in the mission's mandate. It also goes
without saying that an expanded UNIFIL operation
will require the mission's budget to be maintained at
the current level.

Furthermore, the Lebanese Armed Forces (LAF),
whose role in the national context is irreplaceable, will
also be able to cooperate more closely with UNIFIL
if they continue to receive the necessary support from
the international community. We therefore call on all
partners to renew their commitment to assisting and
strengthening the LAF in every possible way. My
country is willing to host an international meeting to
advocate for broader donor support.

In conclusion, I would like to turn to the joint fight
against terrorism. In Iraq, important accomplishments
have been recorded. But freeing an area from the
control of terrorists is only as meaningful as the degree
of effort that we put into stabilizing the Iraqi territory.
To that end, both the international community and the
United Nations system will need to focus primarily on
humanitarian assistance and restoration of essential
services, so as to create conditions that will allow for
the free, safe and voluntary return of refugees and
displaced persons. In the medium and long term, a
responsible approach to sustainable development will
be at the core of any strategy for reconciliation, along
with the inclusion of all sectors of society, so as to
prevent the resurgence of terrorism.

Finally, in Syria, the fall of Raqqa city, where until
recently the so-called Islamic State staged euphoric
parades, is also a welcome symbol of the collapsing
fortunes of Da'esh.

