Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): On behalf
of the United Arab Emirates, I congratulate Malaysia
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
this month.

We recognize the critical importance of this debate
and honour the twentieth anniversary of the children
and armed conflict report. We are participating in
today's debate because of our long-standing dedication
to children in need worldwide. Nowhere is securing
children in conflict more urgent than in our region,
where the abuses against children are especially heart-
wrenching, as we have heard throughout the day and in
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General's
briefing. In Syria, children have now been out of school
for six years, while thousands have been killed. In the
occupied Palestinian territories, generations of children
have been deprived of basic fundamental freedoms for
decades. Da'esh and other terrorist groups' widespread
recruitment and use of children as tools of war is
equally abhorrent and must be ended.

The subject of Yemen has also been raised in

today's debate, and I will focus my remarks on that topic
given the United Arab Emirates's involvement in the
Coalition to Restore Legitimacy in Yemen, formed at
the request of President Hadi. To date, 79 Emiratis have
paid the ultimate price in service of Yemen. In the light
of that sacrifice, the United Arab Emirates and all the
members of the Coalition take extraordinary measures to
protect children's rights anywhere we are engaged. The
United Arab Emirates regrets the initial listing of the
Coalition in the annex of the 2015 report (S/2016/360),
but appreciates the Secretary-General's decision to
remove the Coalition from the annex and to engage in
a forward-looking review to protect the integrity of the
report and strengthen its mechanisms. As committed,
accountable members of the international community,
the Coalition is currently investigating all allegations,
and findings will be submitted to the United Nations
in a responsible and transparent manner. Based on our
experience, we offer some procedural and substantive
suggestions to strengthen the impact of future reports
in the shared interest of protecting children in conflict
zones. Specifically, we advocate the adoption of the
following policies.

First, consulting regularly with national
Governments - as mandated in guidelines set forth in
resolution 1612 (2005) - is key to ensuring that the
information on which the report is based is accurate and
verified, with Member States and the United Nations
working together in good faith.

Secondly, with regard to reconsidering the utility of
the annex list, and specifically the listing of responsible
Member States alongside non-State actors and terrorist
groups, the annex must be connected to specific
outcomes to protect children. In that regard, the listing
of a coalition of countries is problematic legally and
practically, and should not become a practice.

Thirdly, we should establish clear and transparent
mechanisms for measuring criteria within the report in
a systematic, equitable manner that is apparent to all.

We do not bear the risk of engagement in any military
theatre lightly, and we continue to strive to minimize
the impact of operations on civilians. We have therefore
engaged directly with the Secretary-General and the
Special Representative, and have communicated details
of the Coalition's rules of engagement, which are in
full compliance with international law, as well as the
review mechanisms, preventive systems and corrective
measures in place. Furthermore, the United Arab
Emirates and its Coalition partners welcome further
communication through a joint review to exchange
information and lessons learned. Moreover, we reiterate
the Coalition's invitation to the United Nations team of
experts to visit its headquarters in Riyadh to further
engage in the review process.

Allow me to remind those here in the Chamber
that the Coalition itself was created to protect
civilians - including children - from Houthi rebels
and externally backed and other extremist groups.
At the request of the legitimate Yemeni Government,
the Coalition's aims were to protect the welfare of
the Yemeni people; provide regional stability and
security by reinstating the legitimate Governments;
and, in parallel, halting the expansion of extremist
groups, including Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula
and Da'esh. However, we all know that durable
solutions for stability are not gained through military
actions alone. That is why the United Arab Emirates
and its international partners are building long-term
institutional capacity in Yemen by developing the
country's Government, social support infrastructure,
rule of law and economy.

Furthermore, we continue to address the urgent
humanitarian need on the ground by providing and
facilitating the delivery of aid. United Arab Emirates
contributions have totalled $900 million since
operations started in March 2014.

Ultimately, the United Arab Emirates and all
members of the coalition are strongly committed to
intra-Yemeni negotiations as part of the ongoing peace
process. The United Arab Emirates fully supports
the efforts of the United Nations Special Envoy for
Yemen to bring the parties to a political resolution of
this conflict.

In closing, let me note the United Arab Emirates'
deep appreciation for the work of the Secretary-
General's Special Representative for Children and
Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, and of other
relevant United Nations agencies, particularly UNICEF,
with which we have a strong, global partnership, to
protect children around the world. For us and other
responsible members of the international community,
we are not engaging in any discussion to protect our
image. The mandate of the Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict is a just and universal
one for which the United Arab Emirates offers its
full support.

