Mr. Mansour (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I warmly congratulate you, Sir, on your new
post as Permanent Representative of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya to the United Nations and wish you every
success. I also congratulate you and your sisterly
country on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for the current month. We are fully confident
of your ability to wisely guide the Council's work. I
also thank the Permanent Representative of Japan for
his skilled and outstanding leadership of the Council
last month. In addition, I wish to express our
appreciation to Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs, for his comprehensive
briefing.

Since the Council's most recent open debate on
this item (see S/PV.6061), following the monthly
briefing in December 2008, we have witnessed a
dramatic deterioration on all fronts in the situation on
the ground in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem. In spite of the guarded
optimism that we expressed during that debate, which
following the adoption of resolution 1850 (2008) -
which, inter alia, reaffirmed the commitment to the
two-State solution, declared support for the peace
negotiations launched at Annapolis in November 2007
and reaffirmed their irreversibility - we are now at a
juncture in which peace seems more remote than ever
and the situation on the ground has become even more
volatile.

As we are all aware, resolution 1850 (2008) was
the first resolution adopted by the Council on the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict in more than four and a half
years, despite Israel's systematic violations of
international law and United Nations resolutions in the
occupied Palestinian territory, which only strengthened
Israel's impunity and lawlessness and hastened the
deterioration of the situation. Thus, shortly after the
adoption of resolution 1850 (2008), and instead of
implementing measures to build the confidence and
trust necessary for peacebuilding, we bore witness yet
again to Israel's blatant disrespect for the Council, the
peace process and all legal norms, demonstrated by its
savage war against the Gaza Strip, launched in
disregard for all standards of military conduct and
human decency and with disastrous humanitarian and
political consequences.

That brutal and merciless military aggression
against the defenceless Palestinian civilian population
ravaged a tiny area that was already gravely deprived
and suffering as a result of years of the unlawful Israeli
blockade. We are all aware by now of the human and
physical tolls of destruction deliberately inflicted by
the occupying Power during that three-week
aggression, the magnitude of which was unprecedented
since the occupation began in 1967.

A final tally of the casualties of the Israeli
aggression reveals that more than 1,400 Palestinians
were killed. The overwhelming majority of these were
civilians, including hundreds of children and women,
while more than 5,500 Palestinians, including more
than 1,800 children, were injured. I have with me a
photograph of one of those children. Many sustained
permanent injuries and maiming as a result of the
excessive, indiscriminate and lethal use of force, which
included prohibited weaponry and ammunition used by
the occupying forces against the civilian population.

The physical toll of destruction wantonly caused
by Israel in the Gaza Strip is equally immense. Billions
of dollars will be required to rebuild Gaza, where the
occupying Power damaged or completely destroyed
more than 21,000 homes and refugee shelters;
thousands of business properties, including agricultural
farmlands; vital civilian infrastructure, including water,
sanitation and electricity systems; and roads, hospitals,
ambulances, mosques, schools, national institutions
and several United Nations facilities.

The horrifying facts have become all too clear, so
I will not dwell on the details. However, I wish to take
a moment to urge a closer look at the human side of
this tragedy. We must stop perceiving the killing of
civilians in armed conflict as simply a silence that is
associated with death. Only when we begin to
understand the maddening and destructive force that
defines killing can we begin to understand the depth of
the trauma, anguish and suffering inflicted on a people
forced to endure such military assaults without a safe
place to hide or to flee to. The deafening cries and
paralysing screams of fear and pain of the children,
women and men killed and wounded and of their
shattered, terrorized families - those were the real
sights, sounds and core of a war in which no distinction
was made between combatants and civilians.

I had the honour of being in Cairo two weeks ago
as part of a delegation from the Palestine Committee of
the United Nations. We visited a hospital in Cairo and
saw with our own eyes dozens of injured Palestinians.
One of them was the child depicted in the photograph I
have here. We took that photograph with Ambassador
Paul Badj i, Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.
This child's name is Mahmoud Haani, and he caused
the international delegation to weep when he told us
his story. He asked us to take a message in the name of
the thousands of martyrs and wounded, and he asked us
to pose a question to Israel, the occupying Power:
"Why did you cause me to lose my eyesight and to ruin
my future? I am a child and only 12 years old. My
name is Mahmoud Haani," I have conveyed his
message to the Security Council and the Secretary-
General, and every person with a conscience is
responsible for holding accountable the criminals who
carried out these crimes and for ensuring that they face
the justice they so deserve.

The task of recovery has now begun, including
attempts to heal the wounds of families whose lives
have been shattered and forever altered by the brutal
attack and who must cope not only with grief and
loss- and, for many, renewed displacement - but
who must also struggle to survive under the deplorable
living conditions caused by the ongoing illegal Israeli
blockade, which constitutes collective punishment of
the entire population. The situation is as abnormal and
unstable as can be imagined.

We are fully cognizant of the short- and long-
term consequences of this crisis and know that the road
ahead as we rebuild and heal our society will be
extremely difficult. Not only funding, but monumental
efforts will be needed to help repair the physical,
psychological and societal damage and to achieve a
just resolution of the conflict that will fulfil the rights
and needs of the Palestinian people to freedom and
human dignity in their homeland after decades of loss,
oppression, statelessness and suffering.

Nevertheless, we reiterate our appreciation to all
countries and organizations throughout the world that
are supporting the recovery and reconstruction of Gaza,
including those that participated in the donor
conference at Sharm el-Sheikh, Egypt. In that
connection, we extend our thanks and appreciation to
the Arab Republic of Egypt for generously hosting that
important conference. We are deeply grateful for the
outpouring of solidarity and generous support for our
people. Moreover, we thank the United Nations and all
of its agencies in the occupied Palestinian territory,
which in all circumstances have continued to provide
invaluable assistance to the Palestinian people in all

fields, particularly emergency health care and food
sustenance, aimed at alleviating the humanitarian
crisis.

While addressing humanitarian needs, we must
also focus on other issues necessary for stabilizing and
restoring some normalcy to Gaza. The achievement of
a permanent, durable ceasefire is one such priority. At
the same time, the inhumane Israeli blockade of Gaza
must be lifted to end the imprisonment of our people.
The immediate long-term opening of all border
crossings is imperative and must allow for the import
of all essential supplies, including sufficient food,
medicine and fuel, as well as building supplies
necessary for reconstruction and other goods and
commercial flows necessary for economic recovery.

If Israel continues the punitive blockade on the
movement of persons and goods into and out of Gaza,
it will only ensure an increase in the poverty, despair,
indignation and frustration of the Palestinian people
and the peoples of the region.

In addition, serious steps must be taken to pursue
accountability for Israel's crimes against the
Palestinian civilian population. We reiterate our calls to
the international community, including the Security
Council, to investigate the grave breaches of
international law committed by the occupying forces in
Gaza, bearing in mind, inter alia, articles 146, 147 and
148 of the Fourth Geneva Convention. All crimes,
including the wilful killing of civilians, wilfully
causing great suffering or serious injury to body or
health and extensive destruction and appropriation of
property, must be investigated and the perpetrators
must be prosecuted.

Our consciences will not allow these barbaric war
crimes against our people to go unpunished. Evidence
continues to be collected, and all options are being
explored. The Palestinian leadership has taken initial
steps in this regard and will continue to act responsibly
and collectively by all appropriate means, including
through the Security Council, to ensure that the law is
upheld and justice is served. We will thus work
diligently to follow up the findings of the Secretary-
General's board of inquiry, of the fact-finding
commission to be dispatched by the Human Rights
Council and of any other relevant investigations being
carried out.

In this connection, I refer to the important letter
recently conveyed to the Secretary-General and

Security Council from prominent individuals in the
field of international justice and reconciliation of
conflict, calling for the establishment of a United
Nations commission of inquiry to investigate all
serious violations of international humanitarian law
committed during the Gaza conflict. As stated by the
distinguished signatories:

(spoke in English)

"We have seen at first hand the importance of
investigating the truth and delivering justice for
the victims of conflict and believe it is a
precondition to move forward and achieve peace
in the Middle East."

(spoke in Arabic)

Indeed, only in this way can we seek to end Israel's
impunity, prevent the recurrence of such crimes and
progress towards securing a just and lasting peace and
coexistence between the two peoples.

While the human misery and hardship quotient in
the Gaza Strip has risen to intolerable levels, the
situation in the rest of the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, also remains
volatile. Israel continues its military raids and arrest
operations in the West Bank, adding daily to the
thousands of imprisoned Palestinians, including
children, women and elected officials, whose release
we continue to demand. Also, and of particularly grave
concern, is Israel's ongoing settler colonization
campaign in the occupied Palestinian territory, which it
is pursuing in grave breach and defiance of
international law, United Nations resolutions and the
International Court of Justice advisory opinion, and in
total contradiction to the objectives and spirit of the
peace process.

In letter after letter, statement after statement -
including the statement by President Mahmoud Abbas
at the Council's special meeting on 26 September 2008
to specifically address this issue (see S/PV.5983) - we
have drawn attention to this unlawful campaign and
cautioned about its destructive impact on the situation
on the ground and on the peace process. We have
repeatedly appealed to the Council to uphold its
responsibilities and act to compel the occupying Power
to comply with its legal obligations and bring to an
immediate halt all settlement activities and all acts of
settler terrorism and violence against the Palestinian
people. Regrettably, the lack of action and Israel's
refusal to respect international law have created a tense
and dangerous situation on the ground and completely
undermined the peace process.

Even during the peace process, this massive
colonization campaign has never ceased. In fact, in the
period since the Annapolis conference, it has
multiplied l7-fold. I repeat, settlement activities have
multiplied l7-fold, at a minimum. The illegal campaign
to expropriate Palestinian land continues, as do efforts
to carry out a de facto annexation. For this purpose,
Israel continues the expansion of settlements and
settlement outposts; the construction of settlement
infrastructure; the transfer of thousands more Israeli
settlers to the occupied territory; the construction of
bypass roads and of the wall; the imposition of a racist
permit regime, residency restrictions and hundreds of
checkpoints; demolitions of Palestinian homes; and
excavations, all of which are particularly intense in and
around occupied East Jerusalem.

Indeed, the situation in and around East
Jerusalem is most critical, as Israel continues to
de-populate the city of its Palestinian inhabitants while
simultaneously promoting its Judaization by all of the
aforementioned unlawful actions, including in the area
of Al-Haram Al-Sharif in the Old City. The character
and physical landscape of the city continues to be
changed by the occupying Power, including through
measures to isolate it from the rest of the West Bank. In
addition to non-stop settler colonization, Israel also
continues to impose a closure on Palestinian
institutions in East Jerusalem and to obstruct
Palestinian cultural events and development in the city,
including the prevention of recent events in connection
with the celebration of "Jerusalem: Capital of Arab
Culture 2009".

While the Security Council and General
Assembly have repeatedly declared such measures
unlawful and null and void, more is needed at this
critical juncture than declarations and statements.
Action must be taken to halt all Israeli colonization
measures aimed at illegally and unilaterally
determining the fate of the city, for there can be no
peace without East Jerusalem - the capital and heart
of the future Palestinian State.

The intent of all such illegal measures and
practices by Israel is clear: it is to dramatically alter
the demographic composition, character, geographic
nature and status of the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, so as to entrench its presence
on the land in order to prejudge the outcome of final
status negotiations in the peace process in Israel's
favour.

On the ground, such flagrant breaches continue to
affect all aspects of Palestinian life, undermine the
territory's contiguity, integrity and unity, and inflame
tensions. The separation, isolation and cantonization of
Palestinian communities by the settlements, the
separation wall and the checkpoints, which can only be
likened to apartheid and segregation, are gravely
affecting these communities and destroying their
societal fabric. In the peace process, these provocative,
illegal Israeli actions have undermined the drive for
peace, poisoning the atmosphere between the two sides
and tainting the process as a whole, calling into
question Israel's commitment to the process and
credibility as a "partner for peace".

Colonization and the peace process cannot
coexist. Israel's settlement activities are totally
contradictory to the peace process and the core
principle of land for peace sustaining it. This
illegitimate policy has repeatedly damaged the peace
process and is physically destroying the prospects for
achieving the two-State solution for peace on the basis
of the 1967 borders in accordance with United Nations
resolutions, the terms of reference of the peace
process - on which there is international consensus -
and the Arab Peace Initiative.

We thus reaffirm that continuing negotiations
under such conditions would be futile and
unacceptable. A process under such conditions will
never achieve its goal of two States living side by side
in peace and security. The Palestinian leadership has
always negotiated in good faith, but we cannot
continue blindly in this process while Israel destroys
all chances for the realization of our legitimate national
aspirations.

The international community, including the
Quartet, the main sponsor of the peace process, must
realize that continued declarations or mild appeals to
Israel will no longer suffice. More of the same will not
change this grave situation and, worse still, further
appeasement will only deepen the problem. In the face
of continued defiance, real and serious action,
including practical measures, by the Quartet and the
international community as a whole is required to bring
an end to such destructive and unlawful Israeli

practices, which jeopardize the viability of the future
independent State of Palestine and the prospects for
peace and stability in our region.

Israel, the occupying Power, must be compelled
to cease immediately all settlement and related
colonization activities in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, and abide by its
obligations under international law in that regard,
including the Fourth Geneva Convention. Moreover,
demands must be made upon Israel to clearly affirm its
respect for its Road Map obligations and other peace
process commitments in both word and deed, to freeze,
all settlement activities, including so-called natural
growth, and to dismantle the outposts.

In this regard, we express serious concern about
the shift to the far right of the new Israeli Government
and over rhetoric and positions that totally contradict
the two-State solution for peace, the Quartet principles
and the peace process itself. The new Israeli position,
inter alia, calls for the expansion of settlements, rejects
the establishment of a Palestinian Arab State and
insists on full control over Jerusalem, indicating an
intention to vigorously pursue Jewish habitation there
in order to assert Israeli control over the eastern parts
of the city. We therefore emphasize that demands must
be made upon Israel to not only talk of peace, but to
actually act for peace, just as the Palestinian leadership
has done over the past 15 years since the start of the
peace process, including by upholding its Road Map
obligations.

In this connection and in closing, I wish to make
a brief reference to the status of Palestinian
reconciliation efforts. Despite the stall in the talks
mediated by Egypt, we remain hopeful of achieving
unification of the Palestinian political factions in order
to strengthen our efforts in pursuit of our just national
cause, which continues to confront so many challenges.
Arrangements are being made for a transitional
Government and elections and to address other priority
issues. We reaffirm our intention to work hard and
seriously to heal the divisions and to achieve the
national unity so vital to the achievement of our
legitimate national rights.

In this regard, we urge the international
community, particularly after having witnessed the
disastrous ramifications of recent years, to engage
diplomatically with a unified, representative
Palestinian leadership. That is imperative in order to

allow us together to address, with coordinated and
serious action, the many urgent issues we currently
face and to advance the overall goal of a just,
comprehensive, lasting and peaceful settlement of the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict and of the Arab-Israeli
conflict as a whole on the basis of Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002), 1515
(2003) and 1850 (2008), the principle of land for peace
and the Arab Peace Initiative.

