Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Security Council just adopted resolution 2216
(2015), which reiterates the Council's support for
the sovereignty, unity, independence and territorial
integrity of Yemen. The resolution also calls upon the
parties concerned to reach agreement on a ceasefire
as soon as possible. And it clearly requires the parties
concerned in Yemen to solve their differences in a
peaceful manner through dialogue and consultation.
The resolution is extremely important for restoring
stability in Yemen and promoting a political settlement
of the issue. China is profoundly concerned by recent
developments in Yemen. If allowed to continue, the
fighting and chaos in Yemen will not only plunge
the people of Yemen into profound calamity, but will
also spill over, affecting the entire region. There is no
military solution; political negotiation is the only way
out.

China calls upon the parties concerned to work in
the interests of the nation and the people of Yemen,
to take to heart the overall interests of regional peace
and stability and to truly comply with and implement
the relevant resolutions of the Security Council, in
particular resolution 2216 (2015), in order to achieve
a prompt ceasefire. Furthermore, we urge the parties
to resolve the crisis through political dialogue on the
basis of Security Council resolutions and the Gulf
Cooperation Council initiative, to restore stability
and order, as soon as possible, and to to promote an
inclusive political transition led by the Yemeni people.

China hopes that all parties will, on the basis of
satisfy the requirements of the resolution, focus on the
humanitarian issues on the ground in order to provide
security and facilitate humanitarian assistance and
the evacuation of expatriates in Yemen. The parties
should also commit to protect the safety and security of
diplomatic establishments and personnel in accordance
with relevant international law. China supports the
ongoing role of the United Nations in mediating a
political solution and calls upon the parties to ease the
tension, facilitate the humanitarian situation and play
a constructive role in the political solution. China is
ready to join the rest of the international community in
unremitting efforts for a political settlement.

