Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): First of all, we would like to thank the
Permanent Representative of Japan, Ambassador
Takasu, for his efforts in the institutional consolidation
of the role of the Peacebuilding Commission in the
United Nations system and beyond.

The experience of the Commission's second year
proves that assistance by the United Nations and other
partners to countries emerging from conflict has met
significant complexities in the areas of national
capacity-building in recipient countries and the
coordination and synergy of peacebuilding efforts by
the United Nations and other participants in the
peacebuilding process.

Our assessment of the second year of the
Commission's work is positive. Significant progress
has been achieved in Burundi, Sierra Leone and
Guinea-Bissau. Work has started on identifying the
priorities for peacebuilding in the Central African
Republic. We believe that one of the great benefits of
the Peacebuilding Commission is the establishment of
direct dialogue with national Governments, thus
ensuring their leading roles in and responsibility for
the peacebuilding process. We believe that the main
goal of the Peacebuilding Commission at the present
stage is to achieve feasible progress at the country
level through coordinated implementation of
peacebuilding strategies and monitoring and tracking
mechanisms under the leadership of the Governments
concerned.

We especially note the progress in arranging
regular dialogue between the Commission and the
Security Council on issues that are on the agenda of the
two bodies. We believe that the practice of inviting the
Chairs of the country-specific configurations to
Council meetings has proved its practical value. In the
future, we would like to consider the possibility of
holding those meetings in an open format, in order to
ensure an interactive dialogue on peacebuilding issues
in those countries.

We also believe it is important to ensure an
intensive exchange of information in the form of
regular meetings between the Chairperson of the
Commission and the President of the Security Council
and cooperative complementarity between the two
organs in drafting the documents of both bodies.

We should also continue the dialogue on the issue
of adding new candidates to the Commission's agenda,
taking into account the real needs of a specific country
for international post-conflict assistance, the progress of
the Commission in countries under its consideration -
with the understanding that the Commission is not an

additional source of funding - and, above all, a
coordination and consultation mechanism. Moreover,
we believe that it would be appropriate, over the course
of the next year, to begin to discuss criteria, including
timelines, for removing countries from the
Commission's agenda.

Of course, strengthening the organic relations
between the Peacebuilding Commission and the
Security Council should continue in parallel with the
development of a dialogue among the Commission, the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council, in addition to other United Nations bodies,
programmes and funds, the donor community and
regional organizations. The Commission should pay
greater attention to those issues.

We are of the opinion that during the
Commission's third year it will have to strengthen its
coordinating role in those areas that require greater
attention from the international community by
harmonizing its activities with existing assistance
mechanisms, primarily within the United Nations
system.

In many respects, that will depend on the
strengthening of the position of the Peacebuilding
Support Office within the Secretariat. In that respect,
we place our hopes in the new head of the Office,
Ms. Jane Holl Lute. We welcome her presence here in
the Security Council today.

We expect that the Peacebuilding Commission
and the Peacebuilding Support Office will take an
active part in the preparation of the Secretary-
General's report on early recovery and post-conflict
peacebuilding, as follows from the Security Council
meeting in May under the presidency of the United
Kingdom. The Commission's expertise in matters of
increasing coordination of peacebuilding activities,
building the civilian capacities of recipient States and
partners, including the United Nations, and early
recovery financing mechanisms should all be taken
into account in the report.

During the coming year, the Commission will
also have to focus on the analysis of lessons learned in
the process of peacebuilding. In that connection, we
believe it important to improve the efficiency of the
Working Group on Lessons Learned. Policy and
strategic discussions within the Organizational
Committee can also be of practical value. However,
they should not undermine the mandate of the Working

Group or lead to the development of any doctrinal
norms in the area of post-conflict peacebuilding and
rehabilitation.

The Commission should also concentrate on the
mobilization of additional donor resources, in
particular by integrating international financial
institutions, regional organizations, private sector
funds and trust funds into its work. We attach great
importance to the Peacebuilding Fund as a catalyst for
emergency financing that can facilitate the
mobilization of more sustainable aid mechanisms. We
believe the time is ripe to review its terms of reference,
and in that connection we expect concrete proposals
from the Secretariat in order to begin consideration of
the issue in the General Assembly.

