I thank Ms. Deborah Lyons, Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan, and Ms. Shkula Zadran for their important and inspiring briefings, which speak volumes. We extend our condolences to all the victims of terrorist attacks. I would also like to welcome Ambassador Adela Raz and Ambassador Majid Takht Ravanchi to this important meeting. Echoing our German colleague, I convey Indonesia's appreciation to all Security Council members for their cooperation and support for us as co-penholders of the Afghanistan dossier at the Security Council. The international community is behind Afghanistan. Our support for a peaceful, prosperous and self-reliant Afghanistan will be there as it moves forward. That consensus of international support is reflected, inter alia, through the Afghanistan Partnership Framework, adopted at the 2020 Afghanistan Conference, held in Geneva. This is the time for Afghanistan. Indonesia is honoured to be part of this historic moment as Afghans make efforts to realize the promise of peace held by peace negotiations. In that context, allow me to underline three points. First, violence must stop, and civilians must be protected. The current level of violence and the high civilian casualties are unacceptable. Threats, including by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), persist. We are concerned that those threats could escalate if they are not tackled effectively. The recent attacks, claimed by ISIL, on education facilities and journalists, are a direct attack on the future generation and on the freedom of expression. We condemn those terrorist attacks. All parties must protect civilians and civilian infrastructure. Abiding by international humanitarian law is not an option, but an obligation. Ensuring the safety civilians will also build the trust of the Afghan people. The progress of peace negotiations needs to translate into progress on the ground. The Taliban must also cease its attacks against innocent people. Secondly, an inclusive peace process and the quest for peace must continue. All parties should pursue a permanent and comprehensive ceasefire as part of efforts to ensure an inclusive political process. We underline the need for diversity and the participation of all segments of Afghan society in the peace process and nation- building. That is what is meant by the mantra of an Afghan-led and -owned process. The role played by youth as the future generation of Afghanistan and by women is indispensable. The participation of these groups is the recipe for sustainable peace. Indonesia welcomes the progress made by the negotiating parties in reaching an agreement on the rules of procedure. It is an important milestone, as these rules will guide the negotiation. This agreement is also a testament to the fact that, where there is a will, compromise is possible. We commend both parties for their efforts. All parties should continue to engage in constructive dialogue with a view to safeguarding the interests of the Afghan citizenry as a whole, namely, reconciliation, peace and development. We commend the contribution of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011) in helping to foster peace and support the peace process through travel exemptions. To that end, we support the extension of the mandate of its Monitoring Team. Thirdly, regional and international support should be maintained. Sustainable development, stability and peace in Afghanistan are in the best interests of every country in the region and beyond. Sustainable peace and an Afghanistan that is well connected to its region will yield greater regional trade and security, which will be beneficial for everyone. Increased cooperation in combating terrorism, drugs and other organized crime is a key to bringing stability to the country. We commend regional and international partners for spurring efforts in favour of Afghanistan. Such efforts should continue, as the country will need support for reconstruction. The role of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) is also very important. We commend UNAMA's many useful programmes in the areas of the peace process, reconciliation, the protection of civilians, human rights, anti-corruption, electoral reform and the boosting of trade and economic activities. As a co-penholder with Germany on the resolution on renewing UNAMA's mandate (resolution 2543 (2020)), there is nothing more joyous than to see UNAMA's tangible contributions on the ground making a difference for common Afghans. This is where we feel that the Security Council is most successful and where people's confidence in multilateralism is reinforced. Indonesia's support for Afghanistan will be unremitting. Whether in Afghan peace negotiations as a host-country support group, in bilateral assistance, in training or in supporting women's participation, our support will continue to be steadfast. I can attest to the fact that our Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mrs. Retno Marsudi, has a special place in her heart for the well-being and progress of Afghan women and girls. This is also Indonesia's priority. As this is Indonesia's last meeting on UNAMA in the Council, let me put on record that our co-penholdership on the Afghanistan file has been an enriching experience for us in our term as a member of the Council. We also thank Mr. Christoph Heusgen and our German colleagues, particularly Mr. Friedrich Schreder, for their close collaboration. I would personally like to thank my Deputy Political Coordinator, Kartika Handaruningrum, for taking care of this important file and for the impressive job she has done. Finally, we have done our utmost to help the people of Afghanistan. They may rest assured that, even though we will not be in the Council next year, Indonesia will continue to be a friend of the Afghan people. Indonesia will remain fully committed to the country. The hearts of the Indonesian people are with them. To quote an old Afghan proverb: "after every cloudburst, there is sunshine; from one heart to another, there is always a way for peace, if one wishes for it". May God be with us all as we seek to find peace in Afghanistan.
