Mr. Abbas (spoke in Arabic): Allow me at the
outset to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month, as we meet to debate an issue of great
importance. Its implications make it incumbent on the
Council to deal with it objectively in order to realize
not only the aspirations of the Governments and people
of the region, but also those of the entire international
community.

The suffering of the Palestinian people has been
exacerbated as a result of the continuous bloody
campaigns of oppression perpetrated by the Israeli
occupation forces and groups of armed settlers. These
campaigns have escalated recently through the use of
fighter-bombers and tanks in an unprecedented
bombardment of children, civilians and the institutions
of the Palestinian National Authority and through
broadcasting the names of those who should be
eliminated. These acts are clear indications of State
terrorism.

All this makes it incumbent on the Council and
the international community as a whole to exert
pressure on Israel to put an end to these bloody
campaigns, to abide by the agreements concluded with
the Palestinian side, to withdraw its forces immediately
from the occupied Palestinian territories, including
Holy Jerusalem, and to resume immediately the
negotiation process between the two parties.
Otherwise, the cycle of Israeli violence will never end
and will indeed threaten the entire region.

Therefore, it is incumbent on the Council to
reinstate the credibility of the international community
and the Council in dealing with these issues that
threaten international peace and security by taking the
following steps.

First, the Council should call on Israel, the
occupying Power, to abide by the relevant resolutions
of international legitimacy, in general, and, more
specifically, to abide by the articles of the Fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949 relative to the Protection
of Civilian Persons in Time of War. It should also make
every possible effort to end Israeli practices and
quickly provide international protection to the
Palestinian people.

Secondly, the Council should hasten the
convening of a conference of the High Contracting
Parties to the Fourth Geneva Convention, so as to
consider enforcing the Convention in the occupied
Palestinian territories, including Jerusalem. The
Council should also emphasize the need to put an end
to all settlement activities and to remove all existing
ones, in implementation of Security Council resolution
465 (1980). Doing so would serve to de-escalate the
situation and help revive the peace process towards a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace.

The Council should adopt a resolution that would
provide the necessary protection to the Palestinian
people by sending international observers.

Thirdly, the Council should reiterate the right of
return of all Palestinians, or compensate them in
conformity with international resolutions adopted in
that regard.

Fourthly, the Council should call on Secretary-
General Kofi Annan to take the initiative, as an
international impartial mediator, to establish a just,
comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East
and to return the situation to the state it was in prior to
28 September 2000. That would make it possible to
resume the peace process on the basis of resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973), as well as other relevant
resolutions.

The Council is requested to issue a clear and
unequivocal condemnation of every attempt made by
Israel to weaken the authority of the Palestinian
National Authority and that of President Yasser Arafat.
We would like to point out the dangerous implications
of such a policy, as it is bound to create anarchy. It is
incumbent upon the Council to adopt a resolution
condemning Israel's recent activities and escalations,
namely, its occupation of Orient House, and to call on
Israel to return Orient House and all other institutions
it has seized to the Palestinian Authority, in conformity
with international agreements concluded between the
two parties and on the basis of resolutions of
international legitimacy. The Council should also take
immediate measures to end the state of siege and the
policy of starvation that has been imposed on
Palestinians by Israel, so that international
organizations may deliver aid to the Palestinian people
without obstruction from Israel.

From this forum we urge the international
community to promptly provide all the necessary
economic and humanitarian assistance to the
Palestinian people so as to help them cope with the
impact of Israeli actions on the infrastructure of the
Palestinian economy.

We also call on the Council to take the necessary
actions to force Israel to take the courageous political
decision of returning to the negotiating table and to
take advantage of any proposal aiming to restore
balance to the serious and deteriorating situation,
specifically the Egyptian and Jordanian proposal and
the recommendations of the Mitchell Committee.

Allow me to address the United States of
America, as it is a major co-sponsor of the peace
process, which the Arabs have adopted as a strategic
choice. We call on the United States to work towards
peace and to strive to keep the situation from
deteriorating further.

It is necessary for Israel to know for certain that
violence can in no way provide it with the security to
which it aspires. That will never be realized as long as
Israel continues to pursue its oppressive and
expansionist policies of Judaizing Jerusalem. Israel
must realize that the only way to bring peace to the
Middle East is by putting an end to its occupation and
by fully abiding by the principle of land for peace and
relevant resolutions of international legitimacy.

To emphasize the so-called unity of the Council is
a sort of twisting of reality, as that unity simply means
giving Israel the right to veto under American
supervision. That serves to render the Council helpless
and unable to take measures that would restore the
confidence of the Arab world in this body. The
Security Council, which is the main authority
responsible for bringing a just peace to the Palestinian
people, must act to recognize the legitimate needs of
the Palestinian people. In conclusion, the League of
Arab States wishes to call on the Council not to allow
Council unity to come at the expense of the rights of
the Palestinian people but act to end this last
occupation in the world.

