Mr. Abarry (Niger) (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Martin Griffiths for his briefing on the recent developments relative to the security situation in Yemen. The Niger welcomes and reaffirms its full support for his unrelenting efforts to return peace in Yemen. My thanks also go to Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, and Ambassador Inga Rhonda King. The escalation seen over the past days, characterized by missile strikes and aerial bombing, constitutes a serious obstacle to the resumption of dialogue. My delegation urges the parties to demonstrate further restraint to give a chance to the political process and the implementation of the various agreements previously reached by the parties, including those of the National Dialogue Conference, the November 2019 Riyadh agreement and the various provisions of the December 2018 Stockholm Agreement. It was not so long ago that de-escalation was proving to be a success, which demonstrates that, if the parties want, they can create the conditions necessary for seeking a political solution. We condemn violations of international humanitarian law and blocking the delivery of humanitarian assistance in a region in which approximately two-thirds of the population are in need of such assistance. We also condemn violence directed against human rights workers and other civil society actors. The evacuation of sick children to hospitals, in particular in Jordan - it should be repeated - is to be lauded, as it can significantly contribute to de-escalation, which is so desperately desired. Similarly, we note and welcome that, despite upsurges in violence, the provision of humanitarian assistance and medical care is being pursued thanks to the courage and determination of the humanitarian workers. Such humanitarian assistance, which is vital to the Yemeni population in need of it, must continue and be stepped up. In that regard, I call on all the relevant entities of the United Nations system to strengthen their support for the Yemeni economy and enable the Government to ensure the regular functioning of essential State services. With regard to the political situation, my delegation encourages the parties to keep the channels of dialogue open and to resume without delay the political process, which, - we cannot repeat enough - is the only way of finding a lasting peace.
