Mr. Han Thu (Myanmar): At the outset, my
delegation wishes to express our gratitude to you, Sir,
for presiding over this important meeting. We also join
previous speakers in thanking Ms. Coomaraswamy,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, and Mr. Anthony Lake,
Executive Director of UNICEF, for their updated
information on the situation of the protection of
children in armed conflicts. It is most timely that the
Council is considering this important issue following
the release of the Secretary-General's report on
children and armed conflict (S/2011/250).

Children are the most innocent and vulnerable
victims of armed conflicts. Most often in conflicts,
they are abused and deprived of their basic human
rights. Children are still being recruited as combatants,
maimed, killed and raped in various armed conflicts.
Crime against children is unforgivable. Despite the
measures prescribed in international humanitarian law
and Security Council mandates, children continue to
suffer in conflict situations around the world.

Ensuring national reconciliation, the rule of law,
the protection of human rights and the promotion of
sustainable development and poverty eradication are
the best approaches to preventing conflict and to
enhancing the protection of children on a long-term
basis. The international community and the United
Nations have a vital role to play in assisting States to
establish an environment in which children can best
enjoy their basic rights and be better protected.

We believe that the primary responsibility for
protecting children and promoting their welfare lies
with States. The Government of Myanmar has made a
commitment that no children under the age of 18 will
be recruited into military service. Our armed forces are
purely voluntary, and those entering military service do
so of their own free will. There is neither a draft
system nor forced conscription in our country.
Moreover, under the Myanmar Defence Services Act of
April 1974 and War Office regulation 13/73, a person
cannot be enlisted in the armed forces until he or she
has reached the age of 18. This regulation is strictly
enforced. The Government has also initiated an active
advocacy programme to prevent the recruitment of
under-age children into military service. We have strict
scrutiny and inspection procedures in place at the
recruitment stage. New recruits who do not meet the
minimum age requirement or other qualifications are
rejected or discharged from the armed forces.

The Judge Advocate-General's Office of the
Ministry of Defence oversees strict adherence to
military recruitment orders, directives and regulations.
In that context, from January to April of this year a
total of 36 persons who failed to meet the recruitment
requirements were discharged from the military. Along
with discharging and reuniting under-age children with
their families, punitive actions were also taken against
one officer and 11 soldiers of other ranks for their
failure to abide by existing recruitment rules and
regulations.

We have made it crystal clear that the Myanmar
Government is eager for the name of our army,
Tatmadaw Kyi, to be de-listed from the annex of the
Secretary-General's report. To reach that goal, we are
preparing a draft national plan of action that includes
the elements provided by UNICEF and samples of the
plans of action of three different countries, which we
received from the Special Representative's Office. The
technical working group comprised of officials from
the Ministry of Defence, the Ministry for Foreign
Affairs, the Ministry of Labour, the Ministry of Social
Welfare, the Attorney-General's office and the Chief
Justice's office met with representatives from UNICEF
and the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) four times from September 2010 to March
2011.

With flexibility from both sides, we hope to
finalize our national plan of action. On our part,
Myanmar will continue to cooperate fully with the
Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict, UNICEF and
UNDP to conclude a national plan of action in the near
future. Our aspiration is for the name of our national
army to be de-listed from the annex to the Secretary-
General's report.

