Mr. Oshima (Japan): Allow me to express my
deepest sympathy and condolences to the Government
and the people of Indonesia as well as to the families
of those who were killed or injured in the devastating
earthquake which hit the southern coast of Java on 27
May.

I thank the respective Chairs of the three counter-
terrorism-related Committees for their briefings this
morning, in which they detailed progress being made
and challenges ahead. We found the briefings to be
very informative and useful. In expressing our thanks
to the three ambassadors, Ellen Loj, Cesar Mayoral and
Peter Burian, let me also state that we welcome the
resumed practice of ad hoc briefings by the
Committees to inform Member States of their activities
on a more frequent basis. We also highly appreciate the
excellent and dedicated work of the members of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED), the experts on the Monitoring Team of the
Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions Committee, the experts
on the 1540 Committee and the Secretariat.

Sll'V.5446

 

Today's meeting offers an opportunity for
Council members not only to be briefed on the
progress made in the work of the three Committees, but
also to hear the views of Member States on that work.
This is important because, in the ongoing debate in the
General Assembly on a comprehensive counter-
terrorism strategy, comments and opinions have been
expressed by Member States about the manner in
which the three Security Council Committees do their
work. It is also relevant in the context of the currently
debated mandates review and of the follow-up to the
2005 World Summit Outcome (resolution 60/1).

One of the areas in which rationalization will be
required in the work of the Committees - and about
which many States have voiced concerns - relates to
the easing of the reporting burdens on some Member
States. While emphasizing that reporting by Member
States is of central importance for the effective work of
the Committees, the three Chairs expressed their
understanding of the need to take action on the
problem of the burdens arising from reporting
obligations.

Japan supports consideration by the Council of
the possibility of consolidating reports to the greatest
extent possible to ease that burden where necessary.
For those non-reporting States that have the will but
lack the capacity to prepare reports, it is necessary to
consider the possible provision of assistance. We
appreciate, in that regard, the efforts by Ambassador
Loj and Ambassador Mayoral to hold dialogue with
several regional groups, including the Pacific Islands
Forum and members of the Caribbean Community. We
also encourage the expert groups of the three
Committees in their efforts to consolidate the questions
addressed in a single questionnaire. We hope that such
a questionnaire will be agreed and put into practice as
swiftly as possible.

Another rationalization measure worth
undertaking would be to consolidate Committee visits
to Member States, although the manner in which such
visits should be consolidated would obviously require
careful consideration, and in some cases adjustment,
given the fact that all of the Committees have related
but distinct purposes derived from their respective
mandates.

It seems to us that there is ample room for the
coordination and consolidation of visits. We believe
that, among the three Committees, the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC) and the Al-Qaida and
Taliban Sanctions Committee in particular should be
encouraged to coordinate the timing of their visits so
that they can be conducted jointly, while respecting the
requests of States to be visited. Such a step would also
enhance the effectiveness of the dialogue with State
authorities and improve the gathering and sharing of
information. At the same time, we understand that
there may be cases in which separate visits will be
necessary. When individual visits are required, it is
indispensable to share with the other Committees the
outcome of those visits so that the findings are fully
utilized. Such considerations aimed at rationalizing
visits would not only help relieve the burden of the
visited States, but also create the kind of enhanced
cooperative relationship between the Committees and
the visited States that we hope to see.

The CTED's responsibility to identify the specific
assistance needs of States on the basis of information
obtained through State reports and State visits
continues to be one of its important duties. To that end,
we expect that the development of closer cooperation
between the Directorate and the Group of Eight's
Counter-Terrorism Action Group (CTAG) will be
achieved through such efforts as participation in local
CTAG meetings, where relevant, during CTC and
CTED visits abroad. Japan expects the CTED to play a
clearinghouse role in matching identified needs for
assistance with actual donor support.

In that regard, we note and appreciate the fact
that the CTED has recently begun to engage in active
dialogue with potential donors. We hope that such
proactive efforts on the part of the CTED and the work
of the CTC will begin to produce concrete results and
that the needed assistance will begin to reach those
States requiring it. The Japanese Government wishes to
share its experience and information in that regard as
both a donor and a CTC member. In that connection,
my Government has established a new funding
facility - grant aid for cooperation on counter-
terrorism and security enhancement - providing
approximately $70 million for the current fiscal year,
beginning in April.

Other matters that have been raised are the listing
and delisting of individuals and entities on the
Consolidated List of the Al-Qaida/Taliban Sanctions
Committee and the issue of due process, which is also
of great interest and concern to many Member States.
Unfortunately, a final conclusion has yet to be reached

S/l'V.5446

 

in the Committee. It is essential that sanctions
measures be fully implemented and that terrorist
activities be effectively prevented. To that end, it is
necessary to expeditiously find a solution to the issue
of listing and delisting and to enhance confidence in
the Consolidated List. It is therefore encouraging that
serious discussion on this matter has resumed in the
Committee. We expect that that will soon result in a
fairer and more transparent procedure that takes into
consideration the various proposals put forward by the
Monitoring Team, Member States, think tanks and
others.

Finally, we welcome the two-year extension of
the 1540 Committee's mandate in a decision taken in
April through resolution 1673 (2006). Under that
resolution, the submission of additional information by
Member States will continue to be required as one of
the pillars of the implementation of the resolution,
while enabling the Committee to assist Member States
more proactively in fulfilling that goal. It is important
to enhance the implementation of the resolution
through multiple means, including through the
provision of technical assistance, outreach activities
and the holding of seminars. The Committee has just
embarked upon a discussion regarding the work
programme for the coming 12 months. We regard that
work programme as highly important as a guideline for
the activities of the Committee. We intend to contribute
constructively to the discussion.

In conclusion, the three Committees must not
only continue to pursue their respective practical
activities; they must also achieve substantive results in
the improvement of procedural matters, as has
repeatedly been pointed out by Member States. Our
intention is to continue to play an integral role in
advancing the work and reform of the three
Committees while giving full support to their
respective Chairpersons and members.

