The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council for the month of March, I should like
to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the
Council, to His Excellency Mr. J 061 Adechi, Permanent
Representative of Benin to the United Nations, for his
service as President of the Security Council for the
month of February 2005. I am sure I speak for all
members of the Council in expressing deep
appreciation to Ambassador Adechi for the great
diplomatic skill with which he conducted the Council's
business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of
the Congo

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, in which he requests to be invited to participate
in the consideration of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the consideration
without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ileka
(Democratic Republic of the Congo) took a seat
at the Council table.


The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council condemns with the
utmost firmness the attack against a patrol of the
United Nations Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC) by the Front

des Nationalistes et Integrationnistes in Ituri,
which occurred on 25 February 2005 near the
town of Kafe, resulting in the murder of nine
Bangladeshi peacekeepers. It offers its
condolences to the victims' families and to the
authorities of Bangladesh. It commends the
dedication of MONUC's personnel, who operate
in particularly hazardous conditions. It welcomes
the action of MONUC against the militia groups
responsible for these killings and MONUC's
continued robust action in pursuit of its mandate.

"The Security Council considers this
aggression, by its intentional and well-planned
nature, to be an unacceptable outrage. It calls
upon the Government of National Unity and
Transition immediately to take all necessary
measures to bring to justice the perpetrators,
sponsors and authors of this attack and welcomes
the first arrests undertaken by the Government. It
endorses in this regard the serious concern
expressed in Kinshasa on 28 February 2005 by
the International Committee in Support of the
Transition over the illegal and criminal activities
of militia in Ituri and their military and political
leaders, in particular Floribert Ndjabu, Goda
Sukpa, Etienne Lona, Thomas Lubanga, Bosco
Tanganda and Germain Katanga. It expresses its
concern that the integration of Ituri militia
officers into the Congolese Armed Forces has
failed to lead to the disarmament of their troops,
which should proceed without delay.

"The Security Council calls upon the
Government of National Unity and Transition to
strengthen its support for the implementation of
the disarmament and community reintegration
programme for Ituri militiamen. It considers
those who try to impede this programme as a
threat to the political process in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. It also calls upon the
Government of National Unity and Transition
urgently to deploy additional integrated troops
and police units to Ituri, and invites donors to
provide support for this vital undertaking.

"The Security Council reminds all States in
the region of their responsibility to ensure
compliance for the arms embargo imposed by
resolution 1493 (2003) and is considering
additional measures it might take to reinforce
implementation and monitoring of the embargo. It

further urges those States to ensure that their This statement will be issued as a document of
territories cannot be used by any Congolese the Security Council under the symbol
armed group, notably the Ituri militia, whose S/PRST/ZUOS/IU.

activities perpetuate a climate of insecurity that

affects the whole region. The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
"The Security Council reaffirms its full agenda.
support for MONUC' and urges MONUC to ,
. . . , . . The meeting rose at 11.40 (1.711. continue to fulfil its mandate With determination.
It notes the importance for MONUC to continue
to strengthen its action in Ituri and in North and
South Kivu."

