Mr. Staehelin (Switzerland)(spoke in French): First
of all, I would like to thank you, Mr. Minister, as well as
the Bangladesh delegation, for having organized this open
debate on the humanitarian aspects of issues before the
Security Council in the context of the maintenance of
peace and security. The number of statements made today
in this Chamber, beginning with that of the Secretary-
General, underscores the timeliness and the relevance of
this topic.

At the present time, an armed intervention of the
United Nations is sometimes the only possible solution to
quell massive, repeated and deliberate violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law. Switzerland
considers that the Security Council must be able to fully
assume the functions and responsibilities assigned to it by
the United Nations Charter. While it is generally
recognized that this type of international operation
involves a humanitarian component, that component
cannot and must not be confused with the military and
political aspects of a mandate.

Humanitarian action cannot replace political action.
Furthermore, without a political solution as a foundation
for a stable and peaceful future, there is a risk that
humanitarian action may provide only immediate and
provisional answers and that it may be unable to realize
its full stabilizing and integrating potential for the
reconstruction of societies affected by conflict. For this
reason, too, all of the actors present during and after a
conflict should be prepared to manage the transition from
an emergency phase to the period of reconstruction and
rehabilitation that, as we all know, is always delicate and
fragile.

My delegation is of the view that, to ensure a
comprehensive approach that takes account of the various
aspects of a crisis, the humanitarian dimension should be
integrated from the very start of planning and mounting
a peacekeeping operation. Switzerland will follow
discussions on this subject with interest.

With respect to humanitarian actors, better
coordination is necessary. But coordination is also
essential between humanitarian and political actors. The
development of strategic frameworks, such as the one

 

adopted for Afghanistan, responds to this need and seems
to us a good instrument. These efforts should be continued.

Moreover, the attention and the resources of the
international community should be mobilized in comparable
terms in crisis situations and in the period of transition
towards the solid and sustainable reconstruction of societies
affected by a conflict. The consolidated appeals mechanism
is an important planning tool. For its part, Switzerland
endeavours to ensure an equitable allocation of the
resources and means it provides for the various phases of
a crisis. Likewise, Switzerland endeavours to ensure
balanced regional distribution of these resources and means.

Humanitarian action is necessary, first and foremost
because of the serious violations of international
humanitarian law of which we are regular witnesses
through the media. Switzerland, as depositary of the
Geneva Conventions and their Additional Protocols,
attaches special importance to respect for this law.

The people affected by conflict are more and more the
civilian population, particularly women and children. The
proportion of civilians among those affected is constantly
increasing, and has reached, in certain recent conflicts, an
alarming figure of more than 90 per cent. Given the large
number of non-international conflicts, Switzerland would
like to recall here that the Geneva Conventions also contain
certain rules that are applicable to these types of conflict.

Furthermore, it is indispensable to seek out new ways
and means to exert greater pressure on the parties to a
conflict to prevent violations of humanitarian law and to
combat the impunity of the perpetrators. In that context,
Switzerland calls upon the States parties to the Geneva
Conventions and their Additional Protocols to fully assume
their obligations for the suppression of such crimes at the
national level. It urges them to cooperate fully with the
International Criminal Tribunals for the former Yugoslavia
and Rwanda. Switzerland looks forward to the early entry
into operation of the International Criminal Court.

Full respect for the principles of humanity,
impartiality, neutrality and independence is a necessary
condition in order for emergency assistance to reach the
people in need - whether they be injured persons, civilian
populations or prisoners. It is imperative that all parties to
a conflict guarantee unhindered access to victims, whether
that conflict is domestic or international, and that they
guarantee the security of the personnel of humanitarian
organizations. Denial of humanitarian access in violation of
international law is inadmissible. Without secure, immediate
and full access to victims, humanitarian assistance may be
manipulated or may simply not be provided.

Switzerland is convinced that an extensive
dissemination of humanitarian law and principles can
make a tangible and positive contribution to the
promotion of a culture of peace, reconciliation and
understanding among people and countries.

