Mr. Okamura (Japan): To save time, I will give
an abbreviated version of my statement, the full text of
which will be circulated by the Secretariat.
First, however, I would like to express my gratitude
to you, Mr. President, for convening today's meeting.
I would also like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Nicholas Haysom, whom
Japan warmly congratulates on his appointment as the
new Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA), together with his deputies,
Mr. Mark Bowen and Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto. We
look forward to seeing UNAMA continue to play an
important role in providing international assistance to
Afghanistan on its path towards self-reliance. I would
also like to thank Mr. Yuri Fedotov, Executive Director
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
for his briefing, and Ambassador Zahir Tanin for his
statement.

Afghanistan stands at a critical juncture. Under
the leadership of President Ashraf Ghani and Chief
Executive Officer Abdullah Abdullah, the new
Government must now begin to tackle numerous
challenges. In the area of security, the drawdown at the
end of this year of the International Security Assistance
Force will mark a watershed in Afghanistan's road to
self-reliance. The Afghan people have to realize that
they must demonstrate ownership and take the lead
in ensuring their own security, for which the Afghan
national defence and security forces should now assume
full responsibility.

Afghanistan's future is in the hands of the
Afghan people themselves. Japan therefore considers
their ownership and efforts to help themselves very
important. The transformation decade of 2015 through
2024 presents Afghanistan with a historical opportunity
for determining its own self-reliant future. Japan stands
ready to support the Afghan people as long as they
work in earnest for a better future. We also emphasize
the perspective of human security in focusing on each
individual's fulfilment and empowerment. We believe
that ordinary Afghan citizens aspire to a peaceful and
prosperous life close to their families and friends.
That aspiration is what provides the driving force for
peace and stability, and it is from those perspectives
that Japan has been actively engaged in the country's
reconstruction process. I would like to touch on two
points that are priorities for Japanese assistance.

The first concerns public order and security. From
my own experiences in post-conflict countries, I know
how crucial law and order are to reconstructing local
communities, where local people must assume the
primary responsibility for their own communities. It
is therefore essential that the Afghan people become
empowered and capable of ensuring public order and
security. That is why Japan has been supporting the
strengthening of Afghan law-enforcement capabilities.
Through our contribution to the Law and Order
Trust Fund for Afghanistan of the United Nations
Development Programme, amounting to a total of
$1 billion, we helped to double the number of Afghan
police officers between 2008 and 2012. We have also
implemented numerous capacity-building programmes,
providing, for instance, financial and technical
assistance to a four-month training programme for
about 200 female Afghan police officers that has been
under way in Turkey since last month.

My second point concerns sustainable development.
We believe that poverty reduction and sustainable
growth are essential to people's empowerment. A sound
and prosperous economy helps address the root causes of
terrorism and extremism. In that context, we would like
to underscore the strategic importance of agriculture
from the perspective of human security. Approximately
80 per cent ofAfghanistan's total population is engaged
in agricultural work, a sector that has the biggest
potential for job creation in the country. The presence
of empowered Afghan farmers will provide a solid
foundation for strong and resilient local communities,
which is what Japan is aiming for. Since rice production
has great potential for the Afghan economy, our
assistance projects include research and development
on rice cultivation and improving irrigation facilities.
Japan has recently also made contributions in the
area of veterinary medicine by providing $19 million
through the Food and Agriculture Organization to help
control foot-and-mouth disease.

Furthermore, I would like to point out that
developing basic infrastructure is also an essential
component in sustainable development. Infrastructure
connects people and enables trade and investment to
expand. We have been helping to construct or improve
roads, such as that between Kabul and Kandahar, as
well as airports, including Kabul International Airport
and the airport in Bamyan. The new Government's
emphasis on improving connectivity between
Afghanistan and its surroundings is further testimony
to the relevance of our approach. We hope Japan's
support will significantly contribute to reinvigorating
local communities and reintegrating Afghanistan into
the regional and global economies.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize
the importance of a strong partnership between
Afghanistan and the international community. The
London Conference on Afghanistan offered a valuable
opportunity to reaffirm the solid bond that unites us.
Japan welcomes the fact that most of the participants,
Afghan and international partners alike, reaffirmed
their commitments to the Tokyo Mutual Accountability
Framework. Since 2012, Japan, as the second-largest
contributor of aid to Afghanistan, has already disbursed
more than $2 billion of the $3 billion it committed to.
In the understanding that the new Afghan Government
will deliver on the commitments it made under the
Framework, we will make good on ours. As Afghanistan
makes the crucial transition to peace and prosperity,
Japan remains committed to offering its support, in
cooperation with the international community.

