Mr. Sumi (Japan): I thank Special Representative
Lamberto Zannier for his comprehensive briefing. I
should also like to extend a warm welcome to Foreign
Minister Vuk Jeremie of Serbia and Foreign Minister
Skender Hyseni of Kosovo.
Japan highly values the contributions of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo, the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo, the Kosovo Force and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe on the ground to
ensure the stability of Kosovo and the West Balkan
region as a whole.

We commend the International Court of Justice
for issuing the advisory opinion of 22 July after two
years of intensive work. Since our recognition of the
independence of Kosovo, Japan has supported the
newly formed country's efforts to develop as a vibrant,
democratic and multi-ethnic State. Our hope is that
Kosovo will now continue to advance its own nation-
building with the increasing support of the
international community. The advisory opinion is also
important to the reconciliation process between
Kosovo and Serbia.

Japan encourages both sides constructively to
address challenges that affect the lives of the
population of all communities in Kosovo. In this
context, Japan shares the belief of the Secretary-
General that the reconstruction of the Serbian
Orthodox sites can rebuild trust between communities.
We expect that UNMIK and the European Union (EU)
will play a mediating role between Pristina and
Belgrade, and we support the Secretary-General's
proposal to have joint United Nations/EU efforts to
facilitate dialogue.

We welcome the increase in the return and
settlement of internally displaced persons (IDPs) and
refugees. At the same time, we share the Secretary-
General's concern about occasional incidents targeting
minorities, which continue to present both physical and
psychological obstacles to sustainable returns.

Japan, as a proponent of human security,
continues to support the efforts of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to
facilitate IDP returns, promote peaceful multi-ethnic
coexistence and help the sustainable development of
Kosovo through bilateral and multilateral frameworks.
A human-centred approach is particularly relevant in
the northern provinces, with due attention to reducing
the level of vulnerability among the population. We
intend to cooperate with Kosovo, Serbia and other
regional and international actors towards the
achievement of a new stage of stability and prosperity
in the West Balkan region.
