Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We too would like to start by expressing
our deepest condolences to our Ethiopian friends in
connection with the tragic crash of an Ethiopian Airlines
plane and the resulting death toll of many people from a
number of countries, including personnel from various
entities in the United Nations system.

We thank Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), for his analysis of the processes ongoing
in Afghanistan. We listened carefully to the briefings
by Mr. Hamdullah Mohib, National Security Adviser
to the President of Afghanistan, and Ms. Tapesh. We
share many of the views in the quarterly report of the
Secretary-General (S/2019/193), and would like to add
the following points.

We believe that through its coordination of
international assistance, UNAMA has an important
role to play in the stabilization of Afghanistan. But we
are concerned about the situation there. It is deplorable
that the number of civilian victims is at a record high, as
the Secretary-General's report notes. We are also very
worried about the continuing presence of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) in Afghanistan.
In spite of isolated successes for the Afghan security
forces, the militants continue to strengthen their
position and influence in the country, filling their ranks
by recruiting foreign terrorist fighters, among others,
who have moved there after fighting for ISIL in Syria
and Iraq. Apart from anything else, that creates a real
threat to the security of our Central Asian friends and
the southern regions of Russia. We cannot help being
alarmed by the major terrorist attacks, some using
suicide bombers, that have been occurring regularly in
various cities in Afghanistan, including Kabul. Their
victims are primarily civilians, including women and
children. Members of the Afghan military and police
forces are dying at the hands of the terrorists, and the
reports of serious losses are more and more frequent.
Today we pay tribute to their memory and courage.

The situation with regard to the fight against drug
trafficking in Afghanistan continues to be a focus of our
attention. The drug threat remains a serious problem
for the region, the world and the country itself, while
narco dollars are a serious source of financial support
for terrorism, and we believe it is vital to continue
intensifying international efforts to combat this evil.
We remain committed to meeting our obligations to
provide assistance to the collective effort to counter the
drug threat, including with the active participation of
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. We have
taken our own practical steps in that regard, including
through the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO)
and the Collective Security Treaty Organization. We
will continue to contribute to the training of narcotics
police from Afghanistan, Pakistan and the countries of
Central Asia.
Russia has consistently supported the Afghan
people's aspirations for a stable peace. Our countries
are linked by historic bonds of friendship based on both
countries' interests. Advancing a peace process led by
the Afghans themselves is especially important. We are
sincerely interested in promoting national reconciliation
and the resulting stabilization of the country's situation
as quickly as possible. We emphasize our willingness
to provide comprehensive assistance to that end, and
that purpose is what guides us in implementing our
own efforts in that area. On 9 November 2018, with that
in mind, Russia held a second meeting of the Moscow
consultations format with major participation by
interested parties. We support the policy of making the
upcoming peace process in Afghanistan as inclusive as
possible, involving all the country's social and political
forces, including the opposition. The inter-Afghan
meeting organized in Moscow on 5 and 6 February by
the Afghan diaspora, in which leading Afghan political
parties and Taliban representatives participated,
embodied the broadly accepted international principle
of an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned dialogue for
settling the conflict.

We have noted the world's growing understanding
of the importance of the regional context of an Afghan
settlement as well, and the need to harness the potential
in that regard of bodies that have been shown to be
effective, particularly the SCO, and in that context, we
want to highlight the revived mechanism of the SCO-
Afghanistan Contact Group. We believe firmly that
all the current peace initiatives and negotiation efforts
should be aimed at uniting the whole country and all
Afghans, without exception. That is the key to achieving
our common goal in Afghanistan of a genuine peace
and to transforming Afghanistan into an independent,
self-sufficient, thriving State that will no longer breed
terrorist threats.

