Mr. Ging: I thank you, Madam President, for
this opportunity to brief the Council from Kiev on
the humanitarian situation on behalf of Mr. Stephen
O'Brien, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator. I myself
have just returned from a mission to eastern Ukraine,
where I witnessed the devastating impact ofthe conflict,
in particular on the most vulnerable: the elderly and the
sick.

Approximately 2.7 million people are living
in non-Government-controlled areas with limited
freedom of movement, and 800,000 people live under
difficult and dangerous conditions along the contact
line between Government and non-Government-
controlled areas. There are now up to 1 million people
internally displaced, and more than 1 million have fled
the country.

Over the past days I have seen the unacceptable
physical and mental hardships and indignities faced by
people, so many of them elderly, simply trying to move
about their own country to access basic services such as
health care and pensions. People have to queue on the
roadside for hours and hours, as Assistant Secretary-
General Simonovie has also said, and this is just to
cross contact lines, often overnighting in freezing
conditions, with no shelter or sanitation facilities.

Almost a year ago, we welcomed the commitments
of the Minsk agreements, where it was committed to
ensure safe access, delivery, storage and distribution
of humanitarian assistance to those in need. However,
these commitments have not been met. In July, the
United Nations and international non-governmental
organizations were instructed by the de facto authorities
in the non-Government-controlled areas of Luhansk and
Donetsk to register for formal accreditation. Following
our inability to do so, constrained by international
conventions, the de facto authorities imposed what has
amounted to a four-month suspension of the work of
most of the international aid agencies, along with the
expulsion of a majority of humanitarian actors from
these areas.

I protest, in the strongest possible terms, the
suspension of humanitarian programmes and the
expulsion of humanitarian actors, which stands in stark
contravention to international norms and principles.
Closing protection, food, health, water, shelter and
recovery programmes has had a devastating impact on
an already vulnerable and suffering people. Just one
alarming example of the impact involved in ending
programmes is the case of the termination ofa Doctors
Without Borders programme that was treating 146
multi-drug-resistant tuberculosis (TB) patients, which
now dramatically increases the risks of the spread of
drug-resistant TB in those areas.

I welcome the recent progress made with the
authorities in the non-Government-controlled areas of
Luhansk following the Emergency Relief Coordinator's
recent visit. There, United Nations agencies and one
international non-governmental organization and
the International Committee of the Red Cross have
been able to resume their work. Yesterday, I saw the
immediate positive impact of those programmes. But
there is so much to be done and, as winter sets in, I
urgently I appealed to the de facto authorities to allow
the immediate return of all international humanitarian
organizations.

In the non-Government-controlled areas
of Donetsk, on the other hand, United Nations
humanitarian programmes remain suspended, with
only two humanitarian organizations allowed to resume
their operations. Approximately 37 national and 12
international staff members of the United Nations are
present there and are ready to work, but are not allowed
to do so. That is not sustainable, nor is it acceptable. We
urgently need a breakthrough. I therefore appeal for the
support of Council members on that issue, so that we
can secure the return of all aid agencies to those areas.

I recognize and appreciate the open, constructive
and productive cooperation that we have with the
Government of Ukraine, but I must also add my voice
to that of Assistant Secretary-General Simonovie
and appeal for urgent solutions to overcome the
administrative blockages hampering the delivery of
essential humanitarian supplies and services. For
example, the recent reduction in the volume of water
being piped across the contact lines is having a serious
impact on the health ofpeople in those areas, especially
the most vulnerable.

It is unacceptable that existing laws prohibit the
transport of much-needed commercial supplies into
non-Government-controlled areas. I am also deeply
concerned by a proposed law that, if adopted, would
prohibit the transfer of water and electricity across
contact lines; that would have a disastrous impact on
the civilian population.

TheUnitedNationsandinternationalnon-governmental
organizations, in spite of the constraints they face,
continue to assist wherever they can. In 2015, 2.1 million
people were provided with access to safe water, nearly
320,000 with food assistance, over 230,000 people
with non-food items, and 75,000 people benefited from
mobile medical consultations. That is a testament to the
dedication and commitment of the aid agencies and the
generosity of those who are providing funding.

Finally, in the past few days, I have seen the
inhumanity, the indignity and the needless suffering
endured by people in eastern Ukraine as they try to
go about their daily lives. The conflict is having an
unacceptable impact on those least able to bear it. I
return to New York tomorrow distressed, having seen
at first hand the particular inhumanity suffered by the
elderly and the children in the conflict-affected areas.
Hopes are pinned on the fragile ceasefire, for which
there has been renewed respect since September. I
earnestly appeal to everyone with power and influence
to put the humanitarian plight of civilians affected
by the conflict at the centre of their attention so as to
ensure positive action to help those civilians. They
desperately need our urgent help.

