Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank you, Madam President, for calling today's
emergency open meeting. I wish also to thank Assistant
Secretary-General Keita for her briefing.

We very strongly condemn today's car bombing in
Benghazi, Libya. We mourn the loss of three security
officers of the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (UNSMIL) and we offer our condolences to their
families and to the Mission. We wish the wounded and
injured an early recovery.

China commends UNSMIL for its work in very
challenging conditions. Nearly two weeks ago, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Salame
made a three-part action proposal to end Libyan
conflict, which includes the appeal to the parties to
call a humanitarian truce during Eid Al-Adha (see S/PV.8588). The Government of National Accord's
Presidency Council already announced its conditional
acceptance of the humanitarian truce during the
holiday. The Libyan National Army also announced
a halt of military operations during the same period.
China welcomes these developments. We hope that all
relevant parties will effectively implement the relevant
commitments and continue to respond positively to the
Special Representative's three-part proposal and meet
each other halfway so as to create conditions for the
resumption of political talks.

The eight-year-long conflict in Libya has affected the
country itselfand its neighbours, causing great suffering
to the Libyan people and threatening international peace
and security. We call upon the Libyan parties to focus
on the overall interests of the country and the people
and to work for a peaceful settlement through political
dialogue. To this end, the international community
should provide constructive assistance, bolster the
United Nations-facilitated the political settlement
process, support Special Representative Salame in
his work, respect Libya's sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity, and promote peace talks, so
as to play a positive role in enabling the ceasefire and
restarting the political dialogue.

China stands ready to work with international
community to assist Libya in achieving peace and
stability and in helping its people living a happy and
peaceful life at an early date.

