Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): Let me begin by
congratulating Poland on having assumed the
presidency of the Security Council. We also extend
our appreciation to Foreign Minister Czaputowicz
for presiding over the debate earlier today, and thank
Poland for having convened this important debate as
the first order of business during its presidency. We
also wish to express our appreciation to Belgium for its
commitment as Chair of the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict. We thank Ms. Virginia Gamba,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, for her presentation, and
we thank all the briefers.

It is encouraging to hear that close to 14,000 children
have been released from different forms of captivity
and reintegrated into society worldwide. However, it is
disappointing to learn from in the Secretary-General's
report (S/2019/509) about the disturbing levels of
serious violations 4 24,000 violations against children
in armed conflict injust one year is distressing. That is,
I believe, more than the size of the population of many
towns around the world.

We are seriously concerned about the continued
impact of armed conflict on children, causing their
forced displacement and giving rise to serious protection
challenges. The activities of terrorist groups such as
Al-Shabaab and Boko Haram, including recruiting
and abducting children to use in asymmetric warfare
and, worse still, deploying them as suicide bombers,
continue unabated. Their violent acts mean that the
sisterly countries of Somalia and Nigeria remain
among the most affected in terms of the recruitment
and use of children for crime. That situation continues
to pose real protection challenges for United Nations
peacekeeping missions, as well as African-led peace
support operations. In that context, I would like to
underscore that Ethiopia attaches great importance
to the protection of civilians, including the protection
of children in armed conflict. The Government of
Ethiopia is committed to the full implementation of
obligations under international human rights law and
international humanitarian law. We are also committed
to the full implementation of resolution 1379 (2001) and
subsequent resolutions on children and armed conflict.

As a major troop-contributing country to United
Nations peace operations and African Union-led peace
support operations, Ethiopia places great emphasis on
deploying troops who have been adequately trained,
vetted, equipped and instructed. We ensure that our
peacekeepers in various operations, including the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), respect
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. Ethiopian peacekeepers fully
understand that disciplinary and judiciary powers will
be exercised over them in the case of any violation.
They operate within and abide by the broader principles
of international humanitarian law and the principles of
distinction and proportionality in all their operations.

Let me re-emphasize that our troops are guided
by the rules of engagement elaborated within the
framework of our obligations under international
humanitarian law, including the Geneva Conventions
and their Additional Protocols I and II. We have also
put in place a mechanism to ensure accountability in
order to address any violations by troops deployed to
any mission. Such a framework has, over the years,
enabled us to properly and effectively address any
protection challenges. I also wish to add that, as one
of the largest refugee-hosting countries, Ethiopia
continues to provide international protection to refugee
children, including unaccompanied minors who have
been forcibly displaced as a result of grave violations
by parties to armed conflicts.

Ethiopia is also ready to take corrective measures
and learn from shortfalls by conducting in-depth
investigations of any allegations against its forces
serving in peacekeeping missions and to take action
where appropriate. However, it is important that alleged
incidents involving any peacekeepers be substantiated
by complete investigations. Similar allegations have
been investigated by AMISOM. in the past, and the
investigators concluded that,

"There are reasonable grounds to doubt that the
alleged incidents took place unless any additional
and convincing evidence comes forward".

Conclusions like that strongly underline the need
to base investigations on concrete evidence and for
relevant United Nations agencies to work closely with
peacekeeping missions and the troop-contributing
countries concerned before publishing allegations.
We strongly believe that such investigations must be
consistent with the objectivity, accuracy and reliability
criteria established by resolution 1612 (2005).

It is our conviction that children must be protected
from indiscriminate attacks as well as the impact of
crossfire incidents during fighting in densely populated
rural areas and urban centres. In that regard, Ethiopia
subscribes without any exception to the principle of
primary consideration for the protection of children
and their interests. We take the importance of children's
right to protection very seriously. Criminalizing the
recruitment and use of children is part of our national
legal system as well as our African conventions, not to
mention our international obligations. We give utmost
priority to providing support and treatment to victims of
incidents, and we are entirely opposed to any impunity.

I note that we have made some positive gains in our
region. The signing in September 2018 ofthe Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan has had a considerable impact.
The subsequent decrease in hostilities is contributing to
improved humanitarian access, particularly to children
and women. It is in that context that we would like to
encourage the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General to explore mechanisms to further strengthen
the cooperation of her Office with the African Union
Peace and Security Council, including consultative
meetings aimed at ensuring the full implementation of

plans of action signed with parties to an armed conflict.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our support
for the Secretary-General's call on Member States
to ensure that mitigation measures are put in place
to prevent the six grave violations reported. We also
support all measures that strengthen the accountability
of perpetrators of crimes against children. I reaffirm
Ethiopia's fullest commitment to continuing its work
with relevant actors, both here in the United Nations and
in the African Union, in order to extend and streamline
the protection of children in armed conflict.
