Mr. Rishchynski: I would like to express the
appreciation of all the members of the Sierra Leone
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission for
the opportunity to come before the Security Council to
brief it on the situation in Sierra Leone.

(spoke in French)

It is my pleasure to brief the Security Council in
my capacity as Chair of the Sierra Leone configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission. I intend to focus
my remarks on three topics: the drawdown of the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL) and the transition to a United
Nations country team, the Government of Sierra
Leone's Agenda for Prosperity, and the future of the
Peacebuilding Commission's engagement.

(spoke in English)

As the Executive Representative of the Secretary-
General has outlined, UNIPSIL is on track to depart
Sierra Leone in March 2014. The United Nations
transition process is well under way, with a clear
plan in place for UNIPSIL to gradually transfer core
responsibilities to members of the United Nations
country team. While Sierra Leone has made significant
progress in recent years, some challenges will linger.
United Nations planning reflects those needs, with
continued investment required in the areas of conflict
prevention, security sector reform and human rights. If
managed successfully and inclusively, the forthcoming
constitutional review also has the potential to be
a transformative process, especially if it advances
equality between women and men and provides a new
basis for mitigating Sierra Leone's winner-takes-all
politics.

Those issues will require continued attention
and support. I am pleased to note that the response
to date from the United Nations and Sierra Leone's
international partners has been extremely positive.
Funds are either in place or anticipated to be available
to cover most of the costs associated with each of the
core transition areas. We also understand that the
Peacebuilding Fund is prepared to address some of the
residual gaps through its Immediate Response Facility.
As we noted in our previous briefing (see S/PV.6933),
the Peacebuilding Commission stands ready to help
marshal any additional resources that may be required.

(spoke in French)

The Government of Sierra Leone officially launched
its Agenda for Prosperity in July 2013. The strategy
outlines a Vision for socioeconomic development
based on effective management of natural resources
and private sector-led growth. The programme also
includes several elements relating to peacebuilding.
For example, pillar seven on governance and public
sector reform includes commitments to strengthening
anti-corruption efforts, protecting and promoting
human rights, enhancing access to justice, continuing
the reform of key security sector institutions, and
building public sector capacity. Pillar eight proposes
a series of important initiatives to combat Violence
against women, improve economic empowerment, and
increase participation in political decision-making. In
addition, the challenge of youth unemployment features
in several other pillars dedicated to socioeconomic
development. Given this focus, the Peacebuilding
Commission intends to hold a high-level meeting in the
coming months to discuss, promote and disseminate the
Agenda for Prosperity.

(spoke in English)

Resolution 2097 (2013) requested that the
Peacebuilding Commission review its engagement in
Sierra Leone "with a view to scaling down its role".
Discussions on the design of this process, the first
of its kind in the Peacebuilding Commission, have
begun within the configuration. An initial review
of peacebuilding in Sierra Leone will be conducted
later this year. This exercise will examine progress to
date, evaluate outstanding challenges and assess areas
potentially requiring additional support. These findings
will inform a technical mission to Sierra Leone later in
the fall, which will begin to establish the parameters
of the Commission's own transition process. We then
plan to conduct a Chair's visit in early 2014. That visit
will provide a valuable opportunity to discuss progress
on the United Nations transition and the Agenda for
Prosperity. It will also serve to finalize agreement
with the Government of Sierra Leone on the nature and
duration of the Commission's support. This analysis
and planning will be distilled into a transition strategy
for the Peacebuilding Commission, on which we intend
to consult with the Security Council in early 2014.

Finally, let me conclude with two comments. First,
transitions represent critical moments during post-
conflict peacebuilding processes. They have potential
to either lay the foundations for sustainable progress
or create new challenges. For this reason, Executive
Representative of the Secretary-General Jens Toyberg-
Frandzen, the United Nations country team, and the
United Nations system deserves great credit for their
careful stewardship of the process to date.

Secondly, at a time when the Security Council
faces significant challenges, Sierra Leone reminds
us of what it is possible to achieve. Yet consolidating
peace is a long-term endeavour. UNIPSIL's drawdown
should be seen as a transformation of international
support rather than its culmination. It is vitally
important that the international community continue to
devote the attention and resources necessary to build
on the impressive progress already achieved by Sierra
Leoneans.

