Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to you, Mr. President, and to
the Turkish delegation for organizing today's meeting
on the topical issue of peacekeeping operations. We
have listened with great interest to the statements by
Under-Secretaries-General Le Roy and Ms. Malcorra.

The increase in the number of peacekeeping
operations, the rise in the number of staff involved in
them, and the growing complexity of their peacekeeping
mandates - all against the backdrop of a shortage of
financial and technical resources - are conditions of
contemporary United Nations peacekeeping and the
development of comprehensive planning and
implementation strategies. We believe that any steps to
reform peacekeeping should be geared towards enhancing
the effectiveness of United Nations operations. It is
truly important that they be carried out in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations and the norms
of international law, including international humanitarian
law; in full respect for the primary responsibility of the
Security Council for the maintenance of international
peace and security; and in line with universally
recognized principles of peacekeeping.

We see opportunities for the improvement of
United Nations peacekeeping primarily in the areas of
operationalization, more effective use of the resources
of regional organizations and the growing potential of
the United Nations itself in all crucial areas of
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. Of course, mandates
must be very clear, implementable and appropriate to a
situation.

We call for continued improvement in consultations
between members of the Security Council, troop-
contributing countries and other contributors to
peacekeeping, as well as with the Secretariat, on all
matters related to peacekeeping activities, including at
the level of planning. We should make maximum use
of the procedures already in place and of previous
Security Council decisions. We believe that, in order to
organize such dialogue, we must make even fuller use
of the Council's Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations. In that connection, we acknowledge the
efforts of Japan as Chair of the Group.

We call on troop-contributing countries to more
actively utilize the dialogue format already in place so
as to keep members of the Security Council and the
Secretariat fully informed of their assessments of
operations under way. We have often said that dialogue
with troop contributors should be a path for genuine
two-way communication.

The Security Council has a very special
responsibility for drawing up realistic mandates for
peacekeeping operations. We believe that the decisions
of the Council to create peacekeeping operations
should be based on prior agreements with potential
troop contributors with the aim of ensuring full staffing
of the missions and their speedy deployment. Given the
increasing complexity and multifunctionality of
contemporary peacekeeping mandates, it is particularly
important to clearly define functions in connection
with peacekeeping and in post-conflict peacebuilding.
We believe that United Nations peacekeeping forces
should be involved only in the initial stages of
reconstruction, while we should involve more actively
in United Nations peacebuilding and socio-economic
reform those bodies that deal with such subjects, for
example the Peacebuilding Commission, regional
organizations, international financial institutions and
bilateral donors.

We should give special attention to the problem
of ensuring that the necessary level of military
expertise is available to the Security Council, which I
must say that it is still unsatisfactory. We support the
idea of involving military experts from Council
members' delegations in reaching agreement on and
reviewing the mandates of peacekeeping operations.
We also think that the Security Council should work
more systemically on the military aspects of
peacekeeping.

The Russian proposal that the Military Staff
Committee be made more active and have all 15
Council members represented in it is still on the table,
and we hope it will be welcomed. We are convinced
that an assessment by the Military Staff Committee of
the military situation in countries where peacekeeping
operations are deployed, recommendations from the
Committee on operational aspects of peacekeeping and
its participation in missions to determine the level of
readiness of peacekeeping contingents and
infrastructure would provide the Council with reliable
and timely information. Such an approach would
strengthen the military expertise of United Nations
peacekeeping as a whole.

We stress the responsibility of the Secretariat in
improving the comprehensive planning of operations
and coordination between Headquarters and the field.
In the context of the recent restructuring of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Field Support, the strengthening of the
Office of Military Affairs and the establishment of an
Office of Rule of Law and Security Institutions, we
believe that the Secretariat is fully capable of carrying
out this work effectively.

Additional attention could be given to improving
the day-to-day coordination of the activities of all of
these Secretariat structures. Achieving a systemic
approach will be possible only if there is a rational
distribution of powers and responsibilities among the
various departments and offices of the Secretariat,
while preserving the unity of command and control.
This is particularly relevant today in the light of the
deployment of the United Nations operations in Darfur,
Chad and the Central African Republic.

It is important to develop criteria for adjusting
mandates and drawing down peacekeeping operations.
To that end, it must be recalled that the main purpose
of peacekeeping is establishing conditions for a
successful political process. This is the key principle in
the Council's adoption of decisions in this area. In that
context, I fully agree with the statement made today by
Ambassador Rice of the United States of America to
the effect that it is unadvisable and counterproductive
to wind operations down too early. We believe that this
approach is of key importance and that it should be
applied to all United Nations peacekeeping operations,
without exception.

Experience has shown that more active resort to
regional organizations is effective, provided that their
activities are carried out in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the Charter and that their
relations with the United Nations, and the Council in
particular, are governed by the provisions of Chapter
VIII of the Charter. Along with such traditional
partners as the African Union and the European Union,
the United Nations could strengthen its relations with
other regional structures, many of which have quite a
bit of experience, for example in mediation and the
peaceful settlement of disputes. We feel that there are
good prospects for cooperation between the United
Nations and such well-tested organizations as the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization and the Collective
Security Treaty Organization.

Given the complex tasks and challenges facing
United Nations peacekeeping, we look forward to the
forthcoming New Horizon report to be issued by the
Secretariat, which was presented today by Mr. Le Roy
and Ms. Malcorra. The report will be a valuable
contribution to the work of reforming peacekeeping
mechanisms of the United Nations to make them more
effective. The report will clearly require very careful
study.

It is important to ensure optimal coordination
between the work of the Secretariat with the relevant
work of the Council and the General Assembly. The
Russian Federation attaches great importance to the
role of United Nations peacekeeping activities in the
maintenance of international peace and security, and
we intend to increase our participation in peacekeeping
operations. Russian peacekeepers are deployed in the
Middle East, various parts of Africa, Haiti and Kosovo.
There is a Russian helicopter unit in the United Nations
Mission in the Sudan and another Russian airborne unit
in the United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad. The training of African specialists
of the All-Russia Institute of Advanced Training for
Workers in the Russian Ministry of Internal Affairs is
important and useful work. We are willing to cooperate
in such relevant activities with all interested
delegations and the Secretariat.

