Mr. Sandoval Mendiolea (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I thank the delegation of Angola for
convening this debate and Ms. Sandra Honore both
for her presentation of the Secretary-General's report
(S/20l6/225) and for her leadership of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
at this crucial stage in Haiti's future.

The elections scheduled for 24 April in Haiti
are without a doubt the focus of this meeting for all
interested in the future of the country. Although
the two rounds held in 2015 were a reflection of the
significant progress Haiti has made since the 2010
earthquake, the electoral round scheduled for next
month may be the turning point for the consolidation
of a political process. Although it has not been without
its challenges, it promises to provide the Haitian people
with a renewed voice in its governance and to move
forward the restoration of constitutional order. Mexico
calls on all Haitian political actors to enable the speedy
revitalization and renewal of the Provisional Electoral
Council, to act in an appropriately responsible manner,
and to preserve security and stability during the delicate
transition period under way.

As the Secretary-General warns in his latest report,
the progress made so far is fragile and could suffer
setbacks. Violence and other instances of public unrest
linked to the electoral process constitute a latent concern
among members of the international community, and
the country's vulnerability to humanitarian crises is not
a negligible challenge.

My delegation is particularly concerned about the
short- and medium-term challenges of malnutrition
and the persistence of cholera in Haiti. In 2015 alone,
just over 36,000 suspected cases of cholera were
recorded - 9,000 more than in the previous year.
And according to the Ministry of Health, since its
emergence, the epidemic has cost the lives of more than
9,000 people and infected nearly a million Haitians.
Let us not allow solvable humanitarian challenges to
increase the number of threats to the present and the
future of Haiti. Improved vigilance, rapid alert and a
coordinated response from Haitian authorities and the
United Nations, as well as strategic investment in water
infrastructure, health and sanitation, are essential.
Mexico reaffirms its commitment to continuing to
promote action in priority areas for Haitian development
in the areas of agriculture, health, socioeconomic
development, the environment and education, and
we will continue to assist and strengthen the regional
efforts led by the Organization of American States.

The report presented today by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General could not be
clearer. It provides a detailed analysis of the challenges,
risks and opportunities in Haiti. First of all, it shows us
the vital role that MINUSTAH continues to play in the
daily life of the country and the pressing need for their
presence to be maintained for as long as circumstances
require. The role of MINUSTAH in institution building,
national security, promoting the rule of law and
human rights, its humanitarian support and promotion
of development, should be transferred to Haitians
progressively. We support the recommendations of the
Secretary-General for a gradual reconfiguration of
the Mission, based on the premise of overall stability,
security conditions and strengthened capacity of the
Haitian National Police, which is showing significant
progress, and we welcome the establishment ofa unit for
the investigation of sexual and gender-based violence
in the Central Directorate of the Judicial Police. We
also support the proposal that the strategic evaluation
mission for the transition of MINUSTAH be carried out
once the electoral process is completed, and we hope
that the result will reflect a fair balance between the
situation on the ground and assessment of the country's
real institutional capacities.

History has shown us on many occasions that the
time tables set for peacekeeping operations can be
counterproductive. The accelerated withdrawal of the
Mission could lead to the re-emergence of political
instability, with immeasurable consequences. We
believe that it is a priority to consolidate progress
without compromising security. The success of our
collective mission requires the commitment of all
stakeholders to ensure consensual Haitian solutions to
the country's problems. That is an essential component
for the unity and stability of Haiti in the long term.

In conclusion I wish to highlight Mexico's gratitude
for the countries that contribute troops and police to
Haiti, for the Group of Friends, and for all those who
are part of MINUSTAH and continue to work to lay the
foundation for a prosperous and peaceful Haiti.

