Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I welcome the presence of the Secretary-
General at this very important moment in the history
and the work of the Security Council. In his important
statement yesterday, the Secretary-General warned
that the Cold War had returned (see S/PV.8231). That
is exactly right. We all agree with the relevance of
this remark.

I take this opportunity to recall those who
relaunched the logic of the Cold War. Of course, we
all remember, following the collapse of the former
Soviet Union, that a number of philosophical books
were published here in this country, including The End
of History and the Last Man, by Francis Fukuyama.
Another author, American thinker Samuel Huntington,
wrote an essay entitled The Clash of Civilizations.
Those two works marked the return of the Cold War
logic. Indeed, the message of those two books was as
follows: To the people of the world, you must take the
American approach and surrender to the American will
or we will attack you. "My way or the highway", as the
American saying goes. That marked the return of the
Cold War philosophy.

Lies serve no purpose. They serve the person who
lies once and only once. Lies deceive only once. When
a lie is repeated it becomes exposed and exposes the
person who is lying.

My colleague the Ambassador of France announced
that the aggression of his country, along with the
United States and the United Kingdom, was carried
out on behalf of the international community. If that
is the case, I wonder which international community
my colleague the French Ambassador is speaking of.
Is he speaking of a real international community that
actually exists? Has the international community that
he represents authorized this tripartite aggression
against my country? Did their Governments obtain a
mandate from this international community to attack
my country?

My American, French and British colleagues
claimed that they have bombarded centres for the
production of chemical weapons in Syria. If the
Governments of these three countries knew the
actual location of these production centres that they
claim to have bombarded, why did they not share that
information with the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW)? Why did they not
share this information with the Fact-finding Mission
in Damascus before attacking my country? It is just a
question I am putting to the Security Council.

Furthermore, I would like to assure Council
members that the OPCW investigation team arrived
today at noon. Obviously, the team was delayed for a
full day getting from Beirut to Damascus before the
attack, for reasons that we do not know, as though the
team was asked not to go to Damascus until after the
bombing took place. But the team did reach Damascus
today at noon and will hold a meeting in two hours, at
7 p.m., Damascus time, with the local authorities. My
Government will, of course, provide every support to
the team so that it may carry out its mission successfully.

The facility of the Barzah Research and
Development Centre, the building that was targeted by
the tripartite aggression, was visited twice last year by
experts from the OPCW. They inspected it, after which
they gave us an official document stating that Syria had
complied with its obligations under the OPCW and that
no chemical activities had taken place in the inspected
building. If the OPCW experts gave us an official
document confirming that the Barzah Centre was not
used for any type of chemical activity in contravention
to our obligations with respect to the OPCW, how do
Council members reconcile that with what we have
heard this morning? How do they reconcile that with all
the accusations and claims that the aggression targeted
a chemical-weapons production centre?

My American colleague said that the time for
discussion is over - that it was over yesterday (see S/PV.8231). If that is so, then what are we doing today
as diplomats an ambassadors at the Security Council?
Our mission here is to speak, to explain what happened,
to shed light on all the issues. We are not here in the
Security Council simply to justify an aggression.
How can we state that the discussion is over? No, the
discussion is continuing in this Chamber, if the idea
is to put an end to aggressions or to implement the
provisions of the Charter and international law. That is
why we are here.

My British and French colleagues spoke of a
plan of action and have invited the Secretary-General
to implement it before the Council and the Syrian
Government have agreed to it. Their plan of action is
in fact a very strange one. But I would like to present
on behalf of my Government a counter plan of action,
which, I assume, should have been presented today.

First, we should read the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations and define and recall
the responsibilities of the three States in maintaining
international peace and security, rather than threatening
it. I happen to have three versions of the Charter, two
in English and one in French. Perhaps these three
States should read what the Charter actually states.
Secondly, these three States must immediately stop
supporting the armed terrorist groups that are active in
my country. Thirdly, they should put an end to the lies
and fabrications being used to justify their aggression
against my country. Fourthly, these three States should
realize that, after seven years of a terrorist war that
was imposed on my country, Syria, a war carried out
by these three countries and their agents in the region,
their missiles, airplanes and bombs will not weaken
our determination to defeat and destroy their terrorists.
This will not prevent the Syrian people from deciding
their own political future without foreign intervention.

I will repeat this for the thousandth time - the
Syrian people will not allow any foreign intervention
to define our future. I promised yesterday that we will
not remain inactive in the face of any aggression, and
we have kept our promise. I will explain how we have
kept our promise.

Allow me now to address those States that remain
committed to international law. I would tell them that
the Syrian Arab Republic and its many friends and
allies are perfectly capable of dealing with the brutal
aggression that my country has had to face. But what
we are asking the diplomats and ambassadors today
who are committed to international legitimacy and
the Charter to call on the United States, Britain and
France to read the provisions of the United Nations
Charter, in particular those pertaining to respect for
the sovereignty of States and to the non-use of force
in international relations. Perhaps the Governments of
these three countries will realize, if only once, that their
role in the Security Council is to maintain international
peace and security rather than to undermine it. As Ijust
said, I have three copies of the Charter, and I would ask
the Council's secretariat to distribute them to the three
delegations so that they might enlighten or awaken
themselves from their ignorance and their tyranny.

In flagrant violation of the principles of international
law and the United Nations Charter, the United States,
Britain and France, at 3:55 am. on Saturday, 14 April,
Damascus time, attacked the Syrian Arab Republic by
launching some 110 missiles against Damascus and
other Syrian cities and areas. In response to this terrible
aggression, the Syrian Arab Republic has exercised its
legitimate right in line with Article 51 of the Charter to
defend itself, and we have defended ourselves against
this evil attack. Syrian air defences were able to
intercept a number of rockets launched by the tripartite
aggression, while some of them reached the Barzah
Centre in - not outside 4 the capital Damascus. The
Centre in that location that includes laboratories and
classrooms. Fortunately, the damage was only material.
Some of those modern, charming and smart rockets
were intercepted, while others targeted a military site
near Homs, wounding three civilians.

The Governments of these three States prepared
for this evil attack by issuing aggressive statements
through their senior officials, saying that their only
excuse for preventing the advance of the Syrian Arab
Army against armed groups was these allegations of
the use of chemical weapons. Indeed, in a race against
time, the armed terrorist groups did receive instructions
from those aggressors to fabricate this Charade of the
use of chemical weapons in Douma. They found false
witnesses and manipulated the alleged crime scene as
they did before, which served as the pretext for this
scandalous aggression. This can only be explained by
the fact that the original aggressors - the United States
of America, Britain and France - decided to interfere
directly in order to avenge the defeat of their proxies in
Ghouta. In fact, those who fabricated the Charade of the
chemical attack in Ghouta were arrested and admitted
on television that it was a fabricated attack. We have a
video of that ifthe presidency wishes to see it.

I would like to draw the attention of those who
align themselves with the Charter of the United Nations
and international legitimacy to the fact that this evil
aggression sends another message from those three
aggressors to the terrorist groups that they can continue
using chemical weapons in the future and committing
their terrorist crimes, not against Syrian civilians only
but in other countries. There is no doubt about that.
In 146 letters we have drawn the Council's attention
to the plans of the terrorist groups to use chemical
weapons in Syria. There are 146 letters that have been
sent to the Council and the Secretariat. Today, some
Council members are suddenly reinventing the wheel.
The Council knows that this aggression took place just
as a fact-finding team from the OPCW was supposed to
arrive in Syria at the request of the Syrian Government to
examine the allegations of a chemical attack in Douma.
Obviously, the main message that these aggressors are
sending to the Council and to the world is that they are
not actually interested in the Council's mandate and
that they do not want a transparent and independent
investigation. They are trying to undermine the work
ofthe investigative mission and anticipating the results.
They are trying to put pressure on that mission to
conceal their lies and fabrications, just as happened six
years ago, in 2013, when Mr. Sellstrom went to Khan
Al-Assal from Damascus, as I have explained in a
previous statement to the Council.

This morning's attack was not just an attack on
Syria, as my dear friend, the representative of Bolivia
said; rather, it was an attack against the Charter, the
Council, international law and 193 members of this
Organization. The attempt by Washington, DC,
London and Paris to ensure the failure of the United
Nations working groups and fact-finding missions
is systematic. While those three States boast of their
support for these bodies, behind the closed doors of the
Organization they pressure and blackmail them not to
carry out the mandates for which they were established.
We recall what took place with the investigative
missions in Iraq, Libya, Yugoslavia and Africa. No
investigative mission can be successful if it is subjected
to political blackmailing. It cannot succeed.

Of the three aggressors, I say they are liars. They
are compulsive liars. They are hypocrites. They are
attempting to ensure the failure of any action of the
Organization that does not serve their interests. Ever
since the Organization was established, they have tried
to undermine the efforts of international investigative
bodies. They have tried to exploit them. I need only
mention Iraq, Yugoslavia, Libya, Syria, and Africa. The
aggressors exhausted the Council agendas for decades
with their attempts to divert its attention from its role
in the maintenance of international peace and security.
They used the Council to pursue their aggressive policy
of interference and colonialism.

Yesterday, in the press of the United States and
of the West, the main theme was lying in the context
of a campaign that was claiming success, but they
know it was a lie. While these three Governments
were launching their evil aggression against my
country, Syria, and while my country's air defence
system was countering the attacks with a great deal of
bravery - one hundred missiles were destroyed and
did not reach their target - the American Secretary
of Defense and the Army Chief of Staff were before
the American and international press in an outrageous
surrealist scenario. They were not actually able to
answer objective questions. Millions of television
viewers must have pitied those two men because
they were like dunces, repeating phrases without any
meaning, and were unable to respond to the legitimate
questions of a journalist about their attempts to target
chemical weapons facilities and the danger that posed
to civilians if the alleged chemical weapons were to
spread. They did not respond. They were also unable
to respond to a journalist who asked the Secretary of
Defense, "You said yesterday that you had no proof that
the Syrian Government was responsible for the attack
in Douma. What happened in the past few hours? What
made you change your mind?" His answer was that he
received confirmation from intelligence services.

The Syrian Arab Republic condemns in the
strongest terms this tripartite attack, which once
again shows undeniably that those three countries
pay no heed to international legitimacy, even though
they repeatedly say they do. Those countries have
revealed their belief in the law of the jungle and the
law of the most powerful even as they are permanent
members of the Security Council, an organ entrusted
with maintaining international peace and security and
with stopping any aggression, in accordance with the
principles and purposes of the Charter.

The Syrian Arab Republic is disgusted by the
scandalous position of the rulers in Sheikhdom of
Qatar, who supported this Western colonial tripartite
aggression by allowing planes to take off from the
American A1 Udeid air base in Qatar. It is not surprising
that the little boys of the Sheikhdom of Qatar took that
position. They have supported terrorist gangs, such as
the Muslim Brotherhood and others, in a variety of ways
in order to destabilize Arab countries, including Syria.

The Syrian Arab Republic is asking the
international community, if it exists - we have heard
a new definition of the international community
today - and the Security Council to firmly condemn
this aggression, which will exacerbate the tensions in
the region and which is a threat to international peace
and security throughout the world.

I call upon those who are committed to international
legitimacy to imagine with me the meeting in which
the United States National Security Council decided
to carry out this attack. I cannot help wondering what
was said.

"We have no legal basis for attacking Syria. We
have no proof that a toxic chemical weapons attack
took place in Douma, but let us set that aside. We
did not need international legitimacy or any legal
argument to conduct military interventions in
the past."

I am just imagining the discussion that might have
taken place among them yesterday.

"This military action is necessary for us and
for our allies in order to distract public attention in
our countries from the scandals involving our own
political elite and ensure that the corrupt system in
some Gulf States pays the price of such aggression.
Most important is how to protect the terrorism that
we have sponsored in Syria for years."

