Mr. Vamos-Goldman (Canada) (spoke in French): My delegation wishes to express its deep
appreciation to High Representative Petritsch for the
briefing he gave us today, as well as for the excellent
work he continues to do in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We would also like to take this opportunity to thank the
High Representative for his letter dated 9 October 2000
to the Steering Board countries regarding political
developments in Belgrade and the opportunity these
present for progress on issues of succession.

Canada believes that these issues should be
resolved, and we look forward to seeing the results of
the efforts of the High Representative's Office. Canada
welcomes the commencement of the process of re-
establishing diplomatic relations between Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
following the visit that President Kostunica recently
paid to Sarajevo. We note in this regard the special
effort made by the High Representative to ensure the
success of that visit.

(spoke in English)

Canada is concerned about statements made
recently by Croatian Government officials announcing
their intention to formally protest changes made to
Bosnia and Herzegovina's electoral regulations. As has
been clearly indicated by the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe, these changes are in
accordance with the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Constitution and the Dayton Peace Accords. Bosnia
and Herzegovina's electoral regulations represent an
internal issue. We urge the Croatian Government to
maintain its commitment to respect the integrity of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Canada believes strongly that the return of
refugees and displaced persons to their pre-war homes
remains a top priority. It is very important that the
Bosnian authorities fully implement measures likely to
foster returns, such as the property law, and cease
obstructing legal evictions. Progress on this front is
critical in measuring the commitment of Bosnian
authorities to a lasting peace within the Dayton
framework.

We need also to maintain pressure on Croatia and
the Republika Srpska to ensure that they take the
appropriate actions to fully implement the agreement
they signed last March on two-way refugee return.

(spoke in French)

Earlier this month, Canada assumed command of
Multinational Division-South West in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, on a rotational basis with the United
Kingdom and the Netherlands. We are determined to
play a dynamic role within our sector of command,
particularly with regard to refugee returns and the work
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia. We look forward to continuing close
cooperation with the High Representative's Office in
pursuing these and other objectives related to our
command.

