Mr. Nambiar (India): We thank you, Mr.
President, for providing us with this opportunity to
convey our views on recent developments in the
international community's collective fight against
terrorism. This debate assumes particular relevance in
the context of ongoing measures to introduce
significant and far-reaching changes in the structure
and functioning of the Security Council's Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC). We congratulate
Ambassador Arias of Spain on his exemplary
chairmanship of the Committee.

India's exposure to the ravages of terrorism for
over two decades, with the loss of thousands of lives,
has only strengthened our resolve to fight this global
menace. In the period following the attacks of 11
September 2001, the international community was
galvanized to act individually and collectively against
the threat of international terrorism.

The measures adopted have had considerable
impact in restricting, curtailing and limiting the space
within which terrorist groups can operate. The most
important impact has been the growing perception that
terrorism cannot be condoned or supported as a
legitimate activity. Any justification - on diplomatic,
political, religious or any other grounds - for support
to terrorism remains untenable.

The United Nations in general, and the Security
Council in particular, have taken firm strides in the
period following 11 September 2001 to create and
carry forward international momentum on counter-
terrorism activities through multilateral means. The
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), under the
capable leadership earlier of the United Kingdom and
now of Spain, has been the focal point of such
international efforts. As a result, a large number of
States have undertaken measures to create the
legislative and administrative frameworks required to
counter terrorism. Many are moving towards improving
their operational capabilities in tackling terrorists and
their networks, both in their respective countries and
through global cooperation.

In our own region, the seven States members of
the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation
(SAARC), at its twelfth Summit, held at Islamabad in
January 2004, signed the Additional Protocol to the
SAARC Regional Convention on Suppression of
Terrorism. The Additional Protocol would update the
Convention in order to meet the obligations devolving
in terms of resolution 1373 (2001). The SAARC
Islamabad Declaration, noting that the people of South
Asia continue to face a serious threat from terrorism,
condemned terrorist violence in all its forms and
manifestations. It recognized that terrorism violates the
fundamental values of the United Nations and the
SAARC Charter and constitutes one of the most serious
threats to international peace and security.

In our statement in the Security Council on 18
January 2002 (see S/PV.4453) - soon after the
adoption of resolution 1373 (2001) - India
recommended to the Counter-Terrorism Committee that
its focus should extend to groups that are known to
perpetrate terrorism; that it should be proactive in
seeking views, in particular from States affected by
terrorist acts; that it should not leave unchallenged or
un-addressed claims of moral, political and diplomatic
support for terrorism, which are clearly in
contravention of resolution 1373 (2001); and that it
should institute more effective measures to deny safe
haven to terrorists and to seek their extradition.

Undoubtedly, a lot has been achieved over the
past two years. However, continuing acts of terror in
different parts of the world by Al Qaeda, the Taliban
and their sympathizers, or by groups with a propensity
to achieve their questionable objectives in a similar
way, illustrate the continued vulnerability of the
international community in this regard. The
international community must persevere in its efforts to
interdict and neutralize terrorist organizations and their
networks through dynamic measures designed for
maximum global reach. The CTC could increase its
effectiveness by going beyond building legislative
capacity to improving the operational and
administrative capabilities of States and cooperation
among States in their counter-terrorism efforts.

We have seen the report of the CTC Chairman on
the proposal for the revitalization of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee, recently adopted by the
Committee (S/2004/ 124, annex). India is fully
committed, in principle, to any proposal that enables
the CTC to improve its effectiveness and strengthen the
fight against terrorism. The CTC's effective monitoring
of Member States' compliance with the provisions of
resolution 1373 (2001) is an objective that India has
supported since the adoption of that resolution.

At the same time, new systems require a certain
amount of introspection and clear articulation before
they are instituted. Those that may have long-term
implications on the functioning of the Council and the
United Nations, and that might possibly have a bearing
on Member States themselves, cannot be considered
the sole preserve of the Council. Although some of the
questions relating to the proposal on establishing a
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
may well have been addressed and possibly answered
in the course of the debate today, the following
questions come to mind. What kind of a precedent are
we creating by the establishment of an enhanced
mechanism such as the Executive Directorate within
the Security Council? Is there sufficient rationale for a
separate structure within the Secretariat? How effective
would a body of 20 experts be in terms of cost and
performance? How does the Council propose to ensure
the accountability of the Executive Directorate and its
institutionalized accessibility to and appropriate
consultation with Member States on their concerns and
priorities? Finally, have the financial implications of
the establishment of the Executive Directorate over a
period of three years and the need for its consistency
with regular budgetary, administrative and financial
practices been fully considered?

Other issues that need to be considered are the
recruitment of experts on the basis of geographical
representation, non-controversial credentials, objective
selection, diversity of background, expertise and
experience; and the avoidance of duplication and
overlap in the functioning of different agencies or
bodies elsewhere within the United Nations system
engaged in capacity-building on counter-terrorism with
that of the Executive Directorate.

The overall message that India, like most other
Member States, would like to convey is one of
unstinting support for counter-terrorism efforts arising
from the Security Council. Notwithstanding the
questions that I posed, the efforts of the CTC to
institute effective measures within a transparent and
calibrated system will receive our firm support and
cooperation.

