Mr. Owade (Kenya): I wish to take this opportunity
to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
important post of President of the Security Council for the
month of March. We extend similar congratulations to the
Government and the people of our sister country,
Botswana, not only on its able and dynamic chairmanship
of the Council, but also on the brilliant contributions you,
Sir, and your country have made since Botswana assumed
a non-permanent seat in the Council in January 1995. We
are very proud of your innovative thinking and ingenuity

 

and are confident that the Council will benefit profoundly
from your wise leadership. We pay a similar tribute to your
predecessor, the Permanent Representative of the United
States, and to her great country for a very successful
presidency in the month of February.

Kenya shares an BOO-kilometre border with Somalia.
The ethnic populations along the border region of the two
sister countries are the same people. Naturally, therefore,
we take great interest in the situation in Somalia, which is
the subject on the agenda of the Council today. As
neighbours having long-standing historical and cultural ties
to Somalia, the Kenyan people can never enjoy their sleep
when there is turmoil across the border.

My delegation made a statement before the Security
Council on 4 November 1994, when the Council was
debating the resolution on the withdrawal of the United
Nations Operation in Somalia (UNOSOM. II). In that
statement, we drew to the attention of the Council the stark
realities of the situation in Somalia and the dangers posed
by the premature withdrawal of UNOSOM. II. We appealed
for pragmatism and perseverance on the part of the United
Nations in the search for a peaceful solution to the conflict
in Somalia. We endeavoured to remind the Council that two
of the principal missions of the United Nations - namely,
the maintenance of international peace and security and
humanitarian relief - had not been accomplished. We
urged - indeed, pleaded with - the Council to wait a
little longer to allow for the establishment of a central
authority in Somalia by facilitating the national efforts at
reconciliation.

It is regrettable that our plea was in vain, for the
Council proceeded to withdraw UNOSOM. II from Somalia
almost with haste, thereby abandoning the unfortunate and
helpless people of that country to fend for themselves.
More than a year has passed since the withdrawal; the
situation in Somalia is still grim, and no solutions are in
sight. In contrast, we have noted that the Council has never
tired of seeking solutions to international conflicts in other
parts of the world - conflicts even more protracted than
the Somali one - and we wonder why.

While Kenya has continually appealed to the faction
leaders in Somalia to show more flexibility and dedication
in bringing the conflict to an end, the innocent, ordinary
Somali people cannot understand, to this day, why the
international community deserted them in their real time of
need.

It is our hope that the mistakes of Somalia, which
have haunted - and, we believe, will continue to
haunt - this Organization for a long time will never be
repeated.

We would be remiss if we did not express our
appreciation to the Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros
Boutros-Ghali, who has always maintained that Somalia
should not be abandoned by the United Nations. In his
latest report, the Secretary-General has reiterated that the
Security Council should continue to assist the Somali
people to achieve a political settlement and to provide
humanitarian and other support services. In this regard,
we welcome the Secretary-General's decision to establish
a small Political Office, which is operating from Nairobi
until circumstances allow it to be transferred to
Mogadishu. We support the proposals by the delegation
of Tunisia regarding the strengthening of that Office.

We also welcome the report that the United Nations
Political Office for Somalia has been doing a valuable
job, which is appreciated not only by the Somali people
but also by the faction leaders. These activities should be
enhanced so as to accelerate the political process. We
agree with those who have often reiterated that the
solution to the Somali problem lies squarely with its
people, and in particular with the faction leaders.

Kenya also acknowledges the serious efforts at
reconciliation between the faction leaders. President
Daniel arap Moi of Kenya has warmly and openly
welcomed the delegations of the Somali faction leaders in
Nairobi and urged them to compromise among themselves
in order to find a broad-based solution to their problems.
These efforts are well covered in paragraph 11 of the
Secretary-General's report (S/ 1996/42). We also take note
of the many other efforts made and initiatives taken to
advance the consultations.

The Secretary-General describes the situation in
Somalia in the following words:
"Since the withdrawal of UNOSOM. II, the
security situation in Somalia has been characterized
by political instability, inter-clan conflict, banditry
and general lawlessness". (S/1996/42, para. 25 )

This is indeed a worrisome situation. The
humanitarian needs of the country are even more stark.
The people of Somalia continue to suffer from a shortage
of essential commodities, such as food, and basic
amenities, such as schools and health services. Epidemic

 

diseases such as cholera continue to pose serious threats to
the lives of the people. There are also warnings of a crop
failure, which must be taken seriously to avoid another
catastrophe.

Kenya wishes to seize this opportunity to appeal to the
international community and, in particular, to the
humanitarian agencies not to tire, but to continue to assist
the Somali people in these times of dire need.

The Security Council must continue to treat the
situation in Somalia as a threat to international peace and
security and must augment the efforts that are being made
by regional organizations such as the Organization of
African Unity (OAU). It cannot run away from the
responsibility bestowed upon it by the Charter. Arms
continue to be imported into the country. Tension between
the faction leaders is still high. Basic infrastructure is still
non-existent. Mogadishu's international airport is still
closed, as is the seaport.

The United Nations could do much more to make a
difference in Somalia. We believe that it is the only hope.
We are confident, however, that under your wise and
dynamic leadership, Mr. President, the Security Council
will address the Somali issue more seriously than perhaps
it has done in the past. Kenya, as a neighbour of Somalia,
will continue to extend its cooperation and support.

