Mr. Braun (Germany) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Mr. President, for having convened this important
debate today.

(spoke in English)

Germany aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union in just
a moment.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
statement, and the briefers for sharing their valuable
expertise and insight with us.

Allow me to congratulate the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict and UNICEF on the first anniversary of the
"Children, Not Soldiers" campaign. We believe that
the impact of the campaign to end the recruitment
of children by State actors is remarkable, and we are
pleased to have been able to make a contribution to it.

Despite the progress achieved, much more
needs to be done to tackle the violations committed,
especially by non-State actors. To reduce the number
of violations, we believe that it is imperative for States
concerned to allow direct contacts between the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and non-State
armed groups.

Allow me to make three operative points on how
we may improve the implementation of our children
and armed conflict agenda.

First, success depends on an open, constructive
and continued dialogue among all Member States,
United Nations institutions, civil society organizations
and academic centres. That is why Germany recently
organized a workshop on the implementation of
resolution 1998 (2011), on the protection of schools
and hospitals, at the German Institute for International
and Security Affairs in Berlin. During that meeting,
we touched upon a question posed by today's concept
note (S/2015/ 168, annex): How can the documentation
of abuse be improved? One finding on this issue was
the potentially useful role of new technologies, such as,
for example, the Watchlist mobile phone application.
Germany therefore encourages all stakeholders to
explore ways and means to apply new technologies to
monitoring and reporting. Technological tools must
become standard best practice when documenting
grave violations against children in situations of armed
conflict.

Secondly, with regard to United Nations peace

operations, we believe that more can be done to protect
civilians, in particular children, and therefore these
aspects should be strengthened. That is why Germany
has funded the development of respective Department
of Peacekeeping Operations training materials, and we
hope to see them applied across the board. Germany also
considers it important that the ongoing peace operations
review duly consider this aspect. This must start with
attention given to sufficient child protection capacity in
peace operation mandates right from a mission's outset.
When needed and appropriate, a sufficient number of
dedicated child protection officers should be part of the
mission's staff.

Thirdly and lastly, in order to strengthen
accountability for perpetrators, we encourage the
Council to include grave violations against children
as a designation criterion in sanctions committees,
and encourage the Special Representative to continue
to share information with appropriate sanctions
committees. We also believe that the Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict should share country-
specific conclusions with the relevant committees.

Let me also underline the need for situations to be
considered by the International Criminal Court when
applicable. International justice mechanisms must play
their part in strengthening accountability. The recent
confirmation of the judgement against Thomas Lubanga
for recruiting and using child soldiers is a case in point.

More than 270 schoolgirls remain in captivity
in Nigeria; 153 Kurdish boys were abducted by the
so-called Islamic State from Ain al-Arab in Syria.
Hundreds of Yazidi children have been abducted
by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant/Daesh in
western Iraq. Many more brutal acts against children
are committed on a daily basis. Such acts not only
send families into deep distress, they also impact the
potential of future generations. Therefore, there needs
to be a call for States and the international community
to engage in further concerted action without delay. Let
me assure the Council of Germany's readiness to assist
it in that effort.

