Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): We thank Special Envoy
Martin Griffiths, Under-Secretary-General Mark
Lowcock, Executive Director David Beasley and
Ms. Rasha Jarhum for their respective briefings,
which highlighted how the humanitarian crisis and the
fighting in Yemen remain a source of grave concern.
We are indeed moved by their powerful speeches.
Those of us who have experienced hunger of biblical
proportions in the past heard them loud and clear. The
four ofthem told us the facts on the ground. They spoke
sincerely and allowed us to rediscover for ourselves
how weak and vulnerable we are of our own making
as humans. We believe it is high time to find a durable
political solution that could sustainably address the
daily suffering of millions of Yemenis.

While there was a marked increase in clashes
at the beginning of this month, particularly in
Al-Hudaydah city, causing civilian deaths and injuries
and displacement, as well as the destruction of civilian
facilities, we note that the intensity of the violence has
now been reduced. Reports indicate that the coalition
has halted its military operations in Al-Hudaydah. We
hope that will lead to a sustained ceasefire.

The increasing number of voices calling for ending
the war in Yemen lately is something that needs to be
welcomed. As the Secretary-General stressed in his
statement on 2 November,

"on the political side, there are signs of hope.
We must do all we can to maximize the chances
for success."

We concur with the Secretary-General that the
international community should act together
to Stop the violence and prevent an imminent
humanitarian catastrophe.

We believe that that can be done by fully supporting
the continued diplomatic endeavours of Special Envoy
Griffiths. We appreciate that the Special Envoy has
continued to make preparations for the upcoming
round of consultations to revive the political talks. We
also welcome the readiness of the parties to engage
with him. In that regard, we underscore that the
continued and sustained de-escalation of violence and
restraint would be absolutely vital in order to create an
enabling environment for the political process. We also
encourage the United Nations to re-engage the parties
on a negotiated outcome on the Al-Hudaydah port,
which should remain open and operational, as it is a
lifeline for millions of Yemenis.

We call on all parties to resolve their differences at
the United Nations-facilitated political process, which
we believe is the only solution to address the legitimate
aspirations of the people of Yemen and respond to the
legitimate security concerns of countries in the region.
The Council should also continue to provide its political
backing to the Special Envoy. In that regard, the unity
of the Council is imperative.

While it is time to seize this opportunity to relaunch
the political process, the United Nations and its
humanitarian partners should also be supported as they
continue to operate in extremely difficult circumstances.
The Office for the Coordination ofHumanitarian Affairs
has pointed out that the humanitarian movement and
access to warehouses and people in need have become
more difficult or impossible in some cases. Therefore,
safe, unhindered and sustained humanitarian access
remains absolutely vital to enable them to provide the
much-needed humanitarian assistance to all in need.
The protection of civilians and civilian facilities is also
critical. Protecting the supply of food and essential
goods, addressing the economic difficulties, including
the payment of civil servants, and increasing funding
for humanitarian operations would also be critical to
alleviate the humanitarian tragedy in Yemen.

In conclusion, for the sake of civilians, who have
suffered enormously, it is time to accelerate coordinated
efforts to revitalize the Yemeni-owned and Yemeni-
led political process under the auspices of the United
Nations, in accordance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions, including resolution 2216 (2015).
The upcoming peace talks in Sweden will provide an
opportunity to make progress. The parties must be
called upon to demonstrate the necessary political will
and commitment to participating in the talks.

The Council should be able to speak with one voice
in calling for an end to the war in Yemen and the need
to address the humanitarian situation as a matter of

urgency. We look forward to engaging constructively
in the upcoming discussions on the proposed draft
resolution by the United Kingdom.
