Ms. Coomaraswamy: I would like to begin by
congratulating the Security Council on its bold
initiative - resolution 1612 (2005) - which seeks to
protect children in armed conflict. I would like to
express my particular gratitude to the French
06-44052
Chairperson, Mr. Jean-Marc de La Sabliere, for his
active and groundbreaking leadership on that issue.

As we watch events unfold in the Middle East,
we are reminded that children often bear the brunt of
physical and psychological trauma caused by armed
conflict. It is the desire to protect children that united
the world one year ago when the Security Council
passed that landmark resolution. Resolution 1612
(2005) is novel in a number of ways that give it
prominence.

It is a testament to the fact that the Security
Council is committed to going beyond words to
specific action in endorsing a monitoring and reporting
mechanism. That mechanism, clearly designating a
system for reporting on grave Violations against
children from the field level through to the Secretary-
General's Office, has been set up in order to address
the situations of children in conflict-affected areas
more diligently. Through the resolution, the Security
Council also expresses its intention to combat impunity
through possible targeted measures against repeat
violators of children's rights. The Security Council has
also called for specific action plans to stop the
recruitment and use of children as soldiers, giving
parties a framework to ensure compliance. The
Security Council Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict and its bimonthly meeting schedule
ensure that the issue of children and peace and security
is actively seized by the Council throughout the year.

In the past year, much has been accomplished on
that ambitious agenda for children. The Security
Council Working Group has met on four occasions and
has set its programme of work for the year. The United
Nations system - including UNICEF, the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights- and its partners have worked diligently, on a
tight deadline, to bring that mechanism to fruition in
pilot countries, and the first report, on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. was submitted to the Security
Council Working Group in June of this year. The
community of non-governmental organizations is very
engaged in supporting the monitoring and reporting
agenda, and civil society representatives in affected
countries are gearing up to strengthen their interface on
monitoring and reporting. Finally, we are encouraged
that other destinations for action - the Human Rights
Commission and the International Criminal Court -
06-44052
are addressing the issue of violations of children's
rights in conflict in an effective manner.

However, although the groundswell of support for
that resolution and the monitoring and reporting
exercise in particular have been strong, and the
situation for children in Sierra Leone, Burundi, Liberia
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo has
improved markedly, children continue to suffer. Over
250,000 children continue to be exploited as child
soldiers by armed forces and groups around the world.
Tens of thousands of girls are being subjected to rape
and other forms of sexual violence. Abductions of
children are becoming more systematic and
widespread. Since 2003, over 14 million children have
been forcibly displaced within and outside their home
countries, and between 8,000 and 10,000 children are
killed or maimed each year by landmines.

I would like to share with the Council the story of
Abou, a boy from Sierra Leone, abducted by the
Revolutionary United Front (RUF) from his school in
Kenema. He was only 11 years old at the time. Four
years later, Abou had become a killer, a known and
feared commander of the RUF rebels and one of the
youngest. He was demobilized by the United Nations
when he was only 15, receiving amnesty for atrocities
committed during the conflict in Sierra Leone. And
although his community accepted Abou back, it was
clear that many in the community were still afraid of
the boy, and he was quite isolated. Six months after
being reunited with his family, Abou disappeared.
Three years later, Abou was among the children
disarmed and demobilized in C6te d'Ivoire. He told a
story of leaving his community in Sierra Leone
because he was "haunted by bad spirits" and of being
re-recruited to fight for Liberians United for
Reconciliation and Democracy (LURD) in Liberia. He
later went as a mercenary to C6te d'Ivoire, together
with other LURD fighters. In an interview with United
Nations staff, Abou explained, "I left because what I
really know how to do well is fight and be a soldier,
but there is peace in Sierra Leone".

The story illustrates a terrible tragedy of the
trauma of children and the communities that they have
been forced to brutalize; of the tremendous challenges
to the successful healing and reintegration of children
in the aftermath of conflict; and of the recycling of
children into conflicts that shift across borders.
Unfortunately, there are too many Abous out there, and
we are compelled to protect them.
3

In that vein, we await the Security Council
Working Group's deliberations and recommendations
to the Security Council on the report of the situation of
children affected by armed conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The initial phase of the setting-
up of a monitoring and reporting mechanism is now
over. It is now time for the Council to take effective
action against repeat offenders. As today is an
important milestone for resolution 1612 (2005), the
response of the Council to its first substantive report on
children and armed conflict presents a key opportunity
to set in place measures to spare more children the fate
of Abou. The world is watching and the children are
watching. We must not fail them.

The United Nations system and its partners have
risen to the challenge of responding fully and capably
in this first phase of the implementation of resolution
1612 (2005). We have been encouraged by the response
of actors at the local, national, regional and
international levels. Many partners and stakeholders
are cooperating with each other to make Security
Council resolution 1612 (2005) a success for children.
My Office takes this opportunity to thank all of them
for their diligence and their commitment.

Now that this first phase of implementation is
coming to an end, it is time for the United Nations
system and the Security Council to look beyond the
limited scope of the first phase and to broaden the
geographical scope of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism to all situations of concern in which grave
Violations are perpetrated against children in armed
conflict.

In addition, the international community must
begin to look at long-term solutions for children
affected by armed conflict. I stand by my United
Nations agency colleagues in the United Nations
Development Programme and the World Bank, as well
as our non-governmental organization partners, in
advocating that, to be truly adequate in responding to
the needs of children affected by conflict, band-aid
solutions are not sufficient and long-term development
responses that will result in the meaningful
reintegration of those children, including access to
education and alternative livelihoods, should be
developed. Those should be the foundations of
concerted international action and a sustained
commitment to the provision of resources and technical
assistance for those children.
In conclusion, this month also marks the 10-year
anniversary of the Graca Machel report on children and
armed conflict, which gave birth to a new
consciousness in the United Nations about the plight of
children affected by armed conflict. In that sense, I
find it useful to go back to the words of Graca Machel
herself to remind us of the reason we are meeting
today. She said:

"We cannot waste our precious children.
Not another one, not another day. It is long past
time for us to act on their behalf - the impact of
conflict on children is everyone's responsibility
and it must be everyone's concern."

