Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would very much like to welcome and thank
Ambassador Zahir Tanin, Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan, and Mr. Staffan de Mistura, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), for their statements and analyses of the
situation in that country.

My delegation would like to highlight the
contribution of UNAMA in improving the stabilization
and democratization process in Afghanistan. At the
same time, the Government's request for a renewal of
UNAMA's mandate shows that the people of
Afghanistan have trust in the Mission's ability to help
lay the foundations for sustainable peace and
development.

We believe it appropriate to focus UNAMA's
mandate on supporting the Government in key areas,
such as security, governance, economic development
and regional cooperation. We also support the emphasis
on a transition towards greater Afghan responsibility
and leadership in the essential areas of security, the
rule of law and development.
The transition process, and in particular the peace
and stabilization processes, will only be sustainable if
they are accompanied by an inclusive political process
that includes genuine reconciliation and dialogue. The
convening of the Consultative Peace Jirga, the
establishment of the High Peace Council and the
adoption of the Peace and Reintegration Programme
are all initiatives in the right direction whose value we
duly appreciate.

We support ongoing work within the agreed
timetable in order to ensure that Afghan forces resume
leadership in the area of security by 2014.
Nevertheless, we concur with the Secretary-General
that this effort should be led by the progress made on
the ground. In that respect, we recognize the efforts of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
and the International Security Assistance Force. We
encourage them to continue to work with the Afghan
authorities to create conditions that will enable them to
gradually assume full responsibility for governance,
security and economic development, in line with the
Kabul process.

As the Afghan Government gradually assumes its
responsibilities for security, it is crucial that judicial
institutions have the necessary human, political and
financial resources to implement judicial and
accountability mechanisms with a view to restoring the
public's trust in public institutions. That includes the
fight against corruption and organized crime.

It is also essential to resolve outstanding issues,
such as those involving the case of the Bank of Kabul
and electoral reforms, with a view to addressing claims
of fraud in the recent elections and to ensure that all
Afghan communities are suitably represented in
parliament.

We regret the increase in the number of security
incidents in recent months and that violence persists as
one of the main factors affecting progress in
Afghanistan. The deteriorating security situation had
led to an increase in humanitarian needs and in the
number of civilian deaths and internally displaced
persons. We urge all parties to the conflict to fulfil
their obligations under international humanitarian and
human rights law and to take all necessary steps to
protect civilians.

Afghanistan faces numerous problems that could
threaten the sustainability of the gains made thus far.
That is why, in the context of the principle of shared

1 1-26621
responsibility as the basis for a comprehensive
approach to combating the global drug problem
comprehensively in all its aspects, my country
reiterates its willingness to strengthen bilateral
cooperation with Afghanistan to address that and other
types of organized crime.

We believe that creating sustainable economic
development opportunities for those who cease
cultivating illicit crops is a key component of any
anti-drug policy and should be the focus of
international cooperation. Similarly, we wish to
emphasize the importance of joint regional initiatives
undertaken to combat the global drug problem in all its
aspects in the region. The constructive and sustained
engagement of various regional and extraregional
actors with an interest in implementing common
strategies to combat this phenomenon contributes to
stabilization and builds mutual trust among
neighbouring countries and those outside the region.

Security is a key condition for strengthening the
rule of law and guaranteeing the full exercise of
fundamental freedoms. Following a military victory, a
political solution and true reconciliation are needed.
We agree with the Secretary-General that, vis-a-vis the
international community, the full exercise of Afghan
sovereignty is a right and a responsibility towards the
Afghan people. With those goals in mind, we support
the three key principles mentioned by the Secretary-
General, namely, leadership and ownership, sustainable
planning and implementation and the protection and
promotion of the rights of all Afghans.

