Mr. Oyarzun (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): First, I
wish to thank the Under-Secretary-General,
Mr. Oshima, for his briefing on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. My delegation is very
pleased that the Council is dealing on a regular basis
with this issue, which is of such vital importance to
people's lives. We are also very satisfied by the
excellent work done by Mr. Oshima.

I would like to focus on those elements of
Mr. Oshima's briefing that I consider to be most
relevant. First, with respect to the culture of protection,
thanks to the reports of the Secretary-General and the
workshops held in recent months, we have managed to
make the culture of the protection of civilians steadily
take root in our societies. However, that progress is not
enough. There are still those many cases of brutal
violations to which Mr. Oshima has referred. We must
therefore redouble our efforts in order to achieve
patterns of protection of civilians in armed conflict. In
that context, the road map and the group for the
protection of civilians, presided over by Mr. Oshima,
are very valuable tools that Spain supports.

Limited access - or measures to restrict
access - in areas of conflict is perhaps one of the most
crucial issues that we will deal with in today's open
meeting. Lack of access means that vulnerable groups
are left at the mercy of the abuses that, unfortunately,
occur in conflicts. Lack of access results in thousands
of persons being deprived of the international
community's assistance, and in those people having to
experience the worst horrors of war without anyone
being able to witness their suffering.

My third comment deals with the cases of rape
and atrocities against women and children. My
delegation has listened with particular interest and
concern to Mr. Oshima's statements on the tragic
abuses committed against women and on the sexual
exploitation and abuses with respect to humanitarian
personnel. It is our responsibility to create the
necessary mechanism so that those most brutal crimes
in no way go unpunished.

The issues of disarmament and the separation of
civilians and combatants are amply dealt with in the
reports of the Secretary-General. In this regard, I
should like to make two additional comments. First,
disarmament is absolutely vital to preventing fresh
outbreaks of violence. It must be appropriately
monitored to ensure that reintegration can take place.
Secondly, the separation of civilians and combatants is
in all probability among the most important challenges
we face, because when it fails to occur we see the most
numerous cases of child abuse and recruitment in
armed conflict.

In conclusion, I wish to express my delegation's
concern about the tragedy of displaced persons who are
obliged to abandon their homes. To date, despite
unflagging efforts, the international community has
been able to do little to prevent this. Given the specific
circumstances of such cases, this group is among the
most vulnerable and hardest to provide with
humanitarian assistance. I believe that we are working
in the right direction, but we cannot fail to do our
utmost urgently to attenuate the suffering that,
regrettably, afflicts many people. As the Ambassador
of Chile quite rightly noted, the very credibility of this
Organization will be gauged by our success in
protecting the innocent.

