Ms. Bogyay (Hungary): Let me first commend the
Senegalese presidency for including this very important
topic on the agenda of the Security Council.

Hungary aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by observer of the European Union.

When speaking about water security and
cooperation, I always refer to the striking conclusion of
a Hungarian-born Nobel laureate physicist, the inventor
of the hologram, Denes Gabor, who said,

"Until today man has fought nature; from now on
man has to fight his own nature."

What makes that statement so relevant in the context
of this debate is that the challenges related to the
sustainable management of our freshwater resources, as
well as the looming water crisis, are, to a large extent,
man-made. Interdependence will only increase over
time, as regions and sectors exposed to water shortages
rely more and more on water controlled by others and
face dramatically changing climatic conditions and
challenges that contribute to the growing water scarcity.

Many consider water as a driver of conflict, but,
even more important, I think that it should be a source
of cooperation. While more than 140 water-related
treaties have been signed in this century, datasets show
that only about seven minor skirmishes over water
occurred during the same period. War over water is not
strategically rational, hydrogeographically effective or
economically viable. Until today, water cooperation has
prevailed over water conflicts.

Hungary has developed a strong tradition of
prudent water management over the centuries. It also
provides technical assistance to developing nations.
Given the hydrogeological conditions of the country,
transboundary water cooperation is an unquestionable
imperative for Hungary.

We encourage all Member States to join the
relevant United Nations conventions on water. To avoid
mismanagement, distrust and eventually conflict, the
establishment of coordination mechanisms among
countries at the level of transboundary river basins
or aquifers is an absolute necessity. Transboundary
cooperation hinges on political will and on
understanding what the issues are. The cooperation
required for data-sharing over transboundary river
basins and aquifers is very important.

Since 2003, the Budapest World Science Forum,
organized by the Hungarian Academy of Sciences
and UNESCO, has put water cooperation on the front
line of its deliberations. Water diplomacy is a major
issue for us. In just a couple of days, we will hold the
second Budapest Water Summit, under the patronage
of His Excellency the President of Hungary, who is a
member of the joint United Nations-World Bank High-
Level Panel on Water. We believe that the Budapest
Summit meeting next week will give momentum to
the implementation of the water-related agenda arising
from the Sustainable Development Goals and the Paris
Agreement on Climate Change. The aim of the Summit
is to promote the message to all countries that facilitating
the development of sustainable water resources should
be a source of cooperation and of peace.

