Ms. Malcorra: I would like to join in
Mr. Ladsous' recognition of the importance of United
Nations engagement in peacebuilding in our mission
areas and note the fundamental role of effective
transitions in ensuring that we leave behind a
sustainable peace.

Delivering an effective response to the
peacebuilding needs of post-conflict countries requires
from field support systems the same agility and
flexibility that is required for other peacekeeping tasks.
Indeed, the magnitude and extent of field missions and
the funding involved throughout the duration of a
mission's life cycle can have a significant impact,
through job creation and local procurement, for
example, each of which contributes to the building of
peace. At the same time, it is recognized that their
impact on the socio-economic situation can also be
negative, for example, as a result of environmental
degradation or distortions made to the job market.

In the global field support strategy (GFSS), due
consideration has been given to the potential social and
economic impact of United Nations missions and the
need to support mission goals in peacebuilding. I
would like to take this opportunity today to brief the
Council on some examples where support given to
field operations has had a positive impact.

The economic impact of our large
multidimensional field missions is significant,
especially when considering that deployment often
occurs in post-conflict nations without a stable
macroeconomic climate, which makes local acquisition
of goods and services very difficult. As part of our
strategy, we are introducing mechanisms that can
promote local and regional procurement, which is an
activity that can plant the seeds for private sector
development.

To that end, the GFSS will enable our teams on
the ground to target local vendors and clearly
communicate procurement requirements in the official
language of the country where possible. That can be
challenging in the start-up phase of a mission, and it
may not be feasible to rely on the local market.
However, over time, local vendors can get a sense of
the requirements of the mission, and hopefully their
business sense and ingenuity will encourage them to
start offering the goods and services required.

There are certain products and services for which
the local market can have a distinct advantage.
Although that may represent a low percentage of our
overall procurement, it can have an important impact
on the local market. The flow-on effect in the private
sector can be considerable and, if properly planned,
can generate a growing and sustainable process for
propelling individuals into long-term development,
thereby contributing to efforts to break the cycle of
poverty. It goes without saying that all such efforts
must be undertaken in the context of United Nations
rules and regulations.

Efforts have also been made to focus on a
mission's ability to address critical social issues such
as unemployment. The United Nations Mission in
Liberia (UNMIL) provided clear and positive examples
in that regard. High levels of unemployment and slow
economic recovery make it difficult for youth and war-
affected populations to find legal income-generating
opportunities locally. As was explained in the 2011
World Development Report, such a situation presents a
serious impediment to war-affected populations' ability
to establish alternative livelihoods and encourage
sustainable reintegration in local communities. In
response to that need, UNMIL and its partners - the
World Bank, the World Food Programme, the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the
Ministry of Public Works - designed a series of
labour-intensive road repair projects designed to
increase accessibility and create short-term
employment opportunities. The projects were
concentrated around vulnerable communities, such as
communities along borders and those in close
proximity to desirable natural resources.

Such projects created more than 75,000 jobs and
channelled almost $6 million into local communities,
with the workforce comprising representation from all
communities, ex-combatants, returnees and women.
Six hundred kilometres of primary roads and 300
kilometres of secondary roads were rehabilitated,
which improved year-round access to many parts of the
country.

The impact of the projects was reviewed through
an independent assessment that concluded that the

security situation in communities established along the
roads improved, as there were real job opportunities.
Furthermore, income was reinvested in small
businesses, used to repay debt and put towards longer-
term expenses such as education and housing. In other
words, the project was building peace.

From a Department of Field Support perspective,
the issue of transitions from one United Nations
presence to another is equally critical, often requiring
drawdown or sometimes a surge in operations. In
Burundi and Sierra Leone, for instance, the liquidation
of one mission coincided with the start-up of another.
One of the key lessons we have learned from such
transitions is the need to prepare contingency plans in
order to lay the foundation for adequate support for the
possible follow-on presence, in addition to building a
sustainable peace. Transitions may be inherently
political processes, but they can succeed only if they
are well prepared and executed. For that to happen, it is
crucial that the substantive side and the support side
plan in an integrated manner. That is particularly
important as we need to recognize that many support
issues, such as the question of asset liquidation, are
highly political, while also dealing with the issue of
expectations management and a fear of mission exit in
terms of socio-economic impact.

In many countries, peacekeeping missions
provide major support to national authorities with
regard to infrastructure maintenance, transport and
logistics, among others. As with our efforts in
peacebuilding, we also have to work with our national
counterparts to prepare for the impact that mission
drawdown is likely to have on national resources,
capacities and budgets.

The experiences of the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste and UNMIL demonstrate how
joint planning with national counterparts can address
those challenges and, to the extent possible, mitigate
the impact of reduced logistical and infrastructural
support to our national partners through coordinated
planning and capacity-building. That being said, such a
reduction in peacekeeping resources has wider
implications for all partners, not only the national
Government, as it is likely to impact on those partner's
programmes and require increased commitment by
them, both within the United Nations and beyond.

Against that background and recognizing the
importance of integrating support services, we are
working with our partners in the Integration Steering
Group and its sub-working groups to harmonize
support costs across the United Nations. That will
extend our services to agencies, funds and programmes
and create greater transparency on how a smaller role
of one United Nations entity will impact the resource
requirements of others on the ground. That will also be
facilitated through greater cooperation on the issue of
trust funds and support costs applied to them. In this
regard, the Peacebuilding Fund and the Secretariat
have signed a memorandum of understanding that has
overcome past funding constraints on the
Peacebuilding Fund. The broader cost-recovery policy
directed by the Controller is well under way.

A different yet important contribution the United
Nations brings to post-conflict societies is in the form
of national capacity development. Several of our
missions have introduced specific strategies and
programmes, such as certification programmes, that are
aimed at strengthening national staff capacity. That was
done in the Sudan, Liberia, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Timor-Leste. That should be our priority
from the outset, given that national staff will play a
critical role in the development of their country beyond
our presence.

Our ongoing work on civilian capacities will be
another vital part of that effort. Accessing more
effectively the needed civilian experts and deploying
them into missions to support the development of
national capacities and to help us plan and execute
peacebuilding tasks and effective transitions will
depend on stronger partnerships between the United
Nations and external providers, principally Member
States. As such, we have to work together if we are to
succeed.

Critically, national ownership underpins the
entire civilian capacity initiative. That was identified
clearly in the recent regional consultations in Bali,
where the Finance Minister of Timor-Leste stressed her
country's wish to lead its own peacebuilding process
and direct international support in accordance with the
country's own priorities.

Better support to national capacity-building is
therefore a priority for civilian capacity, which in turn
must be a priority for peacebuilding and effective
transitions. UNDP is leading a system-wide group in
looking at how we can do better in post-conflict
contexts, and is carrying out a survey of United
Nations field presences to understand what tools are
needed to do this more effectively. We expect that
UNDP will be able to make recommendations this
summer.

The situation does remain challenging, however.
We still fail to deploy timely, certain civilian capacities
in a timely manner to countries emerging from conflict
and face persistent capacity gaps in five core areas:
safety and security, the rule of law, inclusive political
processes, core Government functionality and
economic revitalization. Much like with our sourcing
of key enabling assets for peacekeeping, we are also
having difficulty in accessing niche capacities to
respond to specialized needs.

We are, however, working out how to tackle those
challenges. We are focused on building partnerships
with Member States, regional organizations,
non-governmental organizations and others, and on
South-South cooperation in this regard. We are also
recognizing the added value that comes from the real
world experience of post-conflict recovery, democratic
transition or building national institutions from scratch
or very low capacity. That is the sort of capacity that
those nations emerging from conflict find most
useful- the experience of those who have actually
confronted and worked through the same challenges
they are now facing.

We must ensure that we are working to our
strengths or, as we put it, delivering based on the
principle of comparative advantage. Missions do not
have to implement everything themselves and, of
course, other partners may be better placed to deliver
on the wide range of tasks that are expected. We will
continue to work towards realizing mechanisms and
modalities to best support that process.

Each of those activities - be they focused on the
building of peace during a mission, on effectively
transitioning to a sustainable and nationally owned
peace as we withdraw, or on the deployment of the
right civilian personnel to the right place and playing
the right roles alongside our partners - are all aimed
at delivering on our mandates, building national
institutions, and ensuring that we do not have to return
again once our missions have left.

The Security Council plays an enormous role in
that, setting the direction for our efforts not only
through mandates, but also through building and
maintaining the political support required for delivery.
In addition, we count on the Council and its members
to work with us as partners in ensuring a coherent,
coordinated and sustained response to the complex
challenges we face in building peace before, during
and after the departure of our missions.
