Mr. Garcia Moritan (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina thanks Kuwait for convening today's open
debate on a topic that has always been of particular
interest to us. We also thank Ms. Karin Landgren and
Mr. James Cockayne for their valuable briefings.

Argentina believes that the note by the President
(S/2017/507, annex), known as note 507, is a valuable tool
for increasing the Council's transparency, inclusiveness
and efficiency, as well as a balanced text that can serve
as a useful guide on agreed measures or best practices
in relation to its working methods.

My country has historically advocated the need for
constant efforts to improve transparency, inclusiveness,
openness, democratization and efficiency in the
work of the Security Council. We are guided in that
regard by the conviction that, without prejudice to the
effectiveness of its decision-making, the Council can
and should be more transparent and democratic in its
relationship with a broader membership.

There is no doubt that improvements have been made
to the Council's working methods in recent years - the
product of efforts made by the non-permanent members,
who are the patient and determined architects of
those achievements.
It was indeed Argentina, during its presidency
of the Security Council in February 2000, that urged
the adoption of a note by the President of the Council
(S/2000/155), in which newly elected non-permanent
members were invited to observe informal consultations
for the period of one month immediately preceding
their term as elected members of the Council. During
our tenure in 2005-2006, we were also a driving
force in support of various initiatives for achieving
greater transparency and access to the membership of
the Council.

When Argentina last chaired the Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions,
during the 2013-2014 biennium, several presidential
notes were adopted on subjects such as consultations
with troop- and police-contributing countries, dialogue
with the non-permanent members of the Council and
other bodies, the participation of Council members
in the drafting of Council products and their broader
responsibility for drafting, and the continuity of the
work of its subsidiary bodies, among others.

With regard to dialogue with troop- and
police-contributing countries, we recall the joint
proposal we made with New Zealand in 1995 to
establish a mechanism for monthly Security Council
consultations with those countries. We also call on
the Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations to
continue holding regular and predictable meetings with
troop-contributing countries on relevant issues.

Argentina values the periodic assessment of the
implementation of note 507 and other relevant notes and
the identification of successful practices and possible
shortcomings, as well as the consideration of necessary
adjustments. Argentina calls on the Informal Working
Group on Documentation and Other Procedural
Questions to continue working in that regard towards
producing a single comprehensive document in order
to consolidate and rationalize all decisions taken on
working methods.

Dialogue between the Security Council and other
bodies, whether from within the United Nations system
or elsewhere, is essential in order for the Council to
fulfil its functions. It is important in that regard to
ensure that there is fluid dialogue between the Council
and the General Assembly, including the timely
submission to the Assembly of the annual reports of the
Council, in accordance with Article 24, paragraph 3, of
the Charter of the United Nations.

Similarly, the Peacebuilding Commission, the
International Criminal Court and the humanitarian
assistance agencies are among the bodies that we
consider crucial in the fulfilment of the mandate of
the Council. The Security Council has a multiplicity
of responsibilities and coordination with other actors
is vital in order to meet them. However, Argentina is
not in favour of the Security Council absorbing the
functions of other organs given that is function is to
maintain international peace and security.

One of the areas in which the Council has not
made substantive progress is the follow-up of referrals
made to the International Criminal Court. The Council
periodically receives the required reports from
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
relating to its own resolution but does not take action
accordingly, even in cases in which the Court has
reported that the cooperation required to comply with
Council resolutions has not been provided.

We also wish to highlight the lack of significant
progress in due process in the framework ofthe Council's
Sanctions Committees. Argentina therefore continues
to support the need for the independent and impartial
Ombudsman procedure applied in the framework of the
ISIL (Da'esh) and Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee to be
extended to all other sanctions committees.

We are starkly aware of the fact that, in improving
the working methods of the Security Council, the
culture of this organ in terms of its decision-making
and the effectiveness of its performance are at stake.
That is why Argentina welcomes the constructive
discussions on the subject that have been held as part
of the intergovernmental negotiations on Security
Council reform.

I would like to conclude by reiterating that the task
of reviewing and updating the working methods of the
Security Council, in response to the demands of the
international community for its greater democratization,
inclusivity, accountability and transparency, is an
important goal that my country fully endorses.

