Mr. Corman (Turkey): Mr. President, before
coming to Turkey's explanation of vote, I would like to
join you and others in paying tribute to Ambassador
Khalilzad. We knew him as the United States
Ambassador to Baghdad. We worked closely with him
to overcome some of the great challenges faced by Iraq
at that time. We have had the honour to work with him
here. We can only regret that it was a very short period
of time that we could share membership in this Council
with him. We will cherish him as a man who combines
the wisdom of the East and the West.

Turkey attaches great importance to the
comprehensive and lasting settlement of the situation
in Somalia; hence our sponsorship of today's
resolution. We welcome the Djibouti peace agreement.
It presents the basis for the resolution of the conflict.
Yet more needs to be done by the Somalis themselves.

We commend the contribution of the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) to lasting peace
and stability in Somalia. We appreciate the
commitments of the Governments of Uganda and
Burundi. We are concerned about the worsening
humanitarian situation in Somalia. It is crucial that
AMISOM. remain in Somalia, but for AMISOM. to
carry out its mandate in a more efficient manner, it has
to be reinforced.

Today's resolution reflects the determination of
the Council to establish a United Nations peacekeeping
operation in Somalia as a follow-on force to AMISOM.
Progress in the political process and security
conditions on the ground will no doubt have an impact
on the decision that the Security Council is expected to
adopt by 1 June 2009. We welcome the call made in
this resolution to the Secretary-General to establish a
trust fund to provide financial support to AMISOM
until a United Nations peacekeeping operation is
deployed. Turkey will participate in the donor
conference to be convened by the Secretary-General,
and it will make an announcement on its financial
contribution.

In line with the provisions of this resolution, the
Turkish armed forces are prepared to give training to
prospective peacekeepers within AMISOM. in Turkey,
as outlined in the letter of His Excellency Abdullah
Gill, President of the Republic of Turkey, to His
Excellency Ban Ki-moon, dated 29 December 2008.

By adopting today's resolution, the Council did
what is necessary on its part. Now is the time for the
parties to the Djibouti process to seize this opportunity
to create conditions that will be conducive to the
deployment of the United Nations peacekeeping
operation as early as possible. In that regard, I would
like to express our appreciation for the tireless efforts
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
to continue to make progress on the political process.

