Mr. Sreenivasan (India): We are pleased to see you,
Sir, presiding over this meeting of the Security Council. It
is fitting and proper that it is under Botswana's presidency
that the Security Council will be approving the
establishment of the enlarged United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III). This decision will
reflect the international community's continued concern for
and commitment to peace and reconciliation in Angola.
Despite discouraging set-backs in the past, the United
Nations has kept up its patient and persistent engagement
in Angola.

In Angola peace appears to be on the horizon. The
people of Angola seek peace. The cease-fire is generally
holding. There are prospects of a face-to-face meeting
between the President of Angola and Mr. Savimbi.

At this critical time, when we are on the threshold
of peace, it is important that the United Nations should
give a decisive and early push towards a final settlement.
This is the time to give a clear and unequivocal message
to those elements that might still have some doubts or
reservations about the future.

In his report, the Secretary-General has proposed the
phased deployment of troops and other personnel. There
should be adequate flexibility provided in this regard to
ensure that the progressive achievement of the tasks of
UNAVEM. III is not delayed. We would also urge the
Security Council to keep the termination date of the
mission sufficiently flexible to ensure the fulfilment of the
objectives of the mission.
We wish to use this opportunity to appeal to His
Excellency Mr. Eduardo dos Santos and Mr. Savimbi for
an early meeting between them. It is our fervent hope that
they will fulfil the expectations of the international
community and the Angolan people and display the
necessary political will to bring about political
reconciliation and trust at all levels to ensure the
establishment of a lasting peace and an end to all
bloodshed in Angola.

India has participated in the United Nations
peace-keeping operations in Angola ever since their
beginning in 1989. In the present phase we have already
deployed 16 military observers. Twenty civilian observers
will be joining them shortly. We have committed an
infantry battalion and an engineering support company for
UNAVEM. III. All these units will come fully equipped,
and are ready for deployment. This is a reflection of our
earnest desire to help the international community to
restore peace and normality in a country with which India
has the friendliest of relations.

Besides this contribution of troops, India has an
ongoing bilateral programme of economic and technical
cooperation with Angola.

 

India's contribution to UNAVEM. III in Angola is part
of the long-term, consistent and principled support that my
country has extended to the cause of peace and security on
the African continent. India has been at the forefront of
United Nations peace-keeping operations, starting with
Congo and including Namibia, Mozambique, Somalia,
Liberia and Rwanda. India has always been in the forefront
of championing African causes of freedom, justice and
economic and social development.

The underlying cause of the recent conflict in Angola
and in other parts of Africa has to be attributed primarily
to the cold war. Fortunately, the cold war is over now.
Durable peace must now be established so that the
underlying problem of inadequate development can be
tackled as a top priority. This is also the surest way of
ensuring the establishment of sustained peace and prosperity
in Angola and elsewhere.

