Ms. Wallstrom (Sweden): Listening to the
representatives of all countries around this table, I
have heard support for the idea that multilateral and
diplomatic efforts are urgently needed to address the
challenges of today. International peace and security,
and preventing conflict and terrorism, are rightly
high on our agenda. I therefore thank you, Madam
President, for convening this important meeting on
non-proliferation.

We have been asked to comment on four themes
in this briefing: sanctions efficiency, capacity to
implement, non-State actors, and weapons of mass
destruction. I think that the answer to all of issues
is close multilateral cooperation. The world would
certainly be a much more dangerous place without
the existing treaties and agreements of the global
disarmament and non-proliferation regime. Yet, that
multilateral framework depends on our continuous
commitment to collective solutions.

In many parts of the world, we are seeing the
modernization of nuclear weapons arsenals, increased
missile capacities, the threat of chemical weapons
use and a normalization of the rhetoric surrounding
all weapons of mass destruction. History has shown
us too many times that such steps form a pathway
to catastrophe. The nuclear-weapon States bear a
particular responsibility in upholding and making
good on the commitment inherent in the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) of a
nuclear weapons-free world. To that end, the Review
Conference of the Parties to the NPT in 2020 must pave
the way for enhanced disarmament and non-proliferation
commitments. Equally, Sweden reiterates the call on all
States to sign and ratify the Comprehensive Nuclear-
Test-Ban Treaty.
The non-proliferation Treaty is the common tool
towards disarmament and non-proliferation, but let me
today also focus on three specific issues on which many
speakers have already touched. These are the challenges
to the Iran nuclear agreement, the development of
nuclear weapons by the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea, and the recurring use of chemical weapons.

First, the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA) - the Iran deal - is a historic achievement.
It is a concrete example of effective diplomatic
non-proliferation efforts. The agreement prevents
nuclear proliferation in Iran, but also aims to avoid
ripple effects in the region. As the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) confirms, Iran continues to
fulfil its nuclear obligations under the agreement. As
long as that is the case, the JCPOA effectively curtails
Iran's ability to develop nuclear weapons.

This is why Sweden, together with the rest of the
European Union (EU), deeply regrets the United States
unilateral withdrawal from the agreement - a decision
with far-reaching consequences that makes our world
more unsafe. And frankly, what are the alternatives to
the agreement? Undercutting a concrete multilateral
non-proliferation tool it dangerously undermines our
joint non-proliferation efforts elsewhere.

Together with our EU partners, we will try to
mitigate the adverse effects of the United States
policies. Sweden and the rest of the EU will continue to
foster broad relations and dialogue with Iran, including
on issues such as human rights. Iran's role in the region
and missile activities are clearly a matter of concern.
These concerns can and should, however, be addressed
separately and not at the expense ofthe JCPOA. Security
in the Middle East region can be achieved only through
diplomatic solutions and enhanced cooperation, not
through further polarization and isolation. It should be
remembered that we tried that before for decades, with
isolation and sanctions, and all it did was to support the
most conservative forces in Iran. That is a problem

Secondly, the nuclear weapons programme of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea is a major
threat to the global non-proliferation regime. Recent
diplomatic efforts deserve our full and active support.
The continued progress in the inter-Korean dialogue
is very encouraging, and the summit between the
United States and the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea in Singapore in June was indeed significant.
All parties must now work to maintain momentum
and take positive steps. For the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea, that means that commitments must
be translated into legally binding undertakings. The
IAEA should be given a role early in the verification
of the denuclearization and disarmament process. The
Security Council and the international community
must continue to stand united.

Thirdly, the use of chemical weapons is a serious
violation of international law. Every violation
undermines established norms and risks eroding
the international taboo on these weapons. This is a
very serious and worrisome development. The use of
chemical weapons is morally abhorrent and can never
be accepted.

In Syria, the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism has confirmed that chemical weapons
were used repeatedly by the Syrian Arab Republic
and by Da'esh. We supported the decision to task the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
to identify the perpetrators of the use of chemical
weapons in Syria. While a mechanism established by
the Council would have been preferable, the issue was
too important to be allowed to be blocked. This does
not, however, free the Council from its responsibility to
ensure that those responsible are held to account.

In Salisbury, in the United Kingdom, a targeted
murder was attempted using a nerve agent. Such
assaults are absolutely unacceptable, and we call on
Russia to fully cooperate with the investigations.

We must never lose sight of why we are making the
efforts to eliminate these horrific weapons. Until now,
we have not talked about the victims. I myself have met
with survivors of nuclear weapons attacks, and I will
never forget their stories. Victims of chemical weapons
have shared similarly accounts. It is important to listen
to such personal experiences in order to understand what
it is we are fighting for. It has definitely strengthened
my resolve to step up efforts for non-proliferation
and disarmament.

Weapons of mass destruction are clearly a global
threat that we must address together. Only through
multilateral solutions, including on the part of the
Council, can we effectively prevent the use of these
repugnant weapons. The multilateral non-proliferation
and disarmament framework is also a key pillar of the
international rules-based order. We owe this to the
survivors and victims of past attacks, and we owe it to
future generations.

The meeting rose at12.30p.m.
