Allow me to start by expressing France's deepest condolences to Cete d' Ivoire on the passing away of its Prime Minister, Amadou Gon Coulibaly. As Cete d'Ivoire is currently entering an electoral period that is paramount for the country's future, France pays tribute to this great servant of the Ivorian people. France commends the Special Representative and the team of the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) for their ongoing efforts in recent months, despite the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. The pandemic is already having serious consequences in West Africa and the Sahel. We must therefore redouble our efforts to support the countries of the region as they face multiple challenges - whether related to security, respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms, humanitarian consequences, economic development or climate change and its impact on the peace and stability of States. The security situation in the area remains fragile, mainly in the Sahel. The Nouakchott summit of 30 June allowed us to take stock of the situation and the shared commitments made in Pau. All the countries of the region and their partners reaffirmed their determination to combat terrorism and intensify efforts to achieve lasting stabilization in the region. In the three-border area between Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger, terrorist groups are continuing their activities, forcing thousands of people to flee the violence. Nevertheless, military operations launched in March by France and the countries of the Group of Five for the Sahel have produced results, weakening and disrupting terrorist groups - whether the Islamic State in Greater Sahara or armed groups affiliates of Al-Qaida. In that connection, I note the neutralization, on 3 June, of the leader of Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb, Abdelmalek Droukdel. We also note progress in regional State development and redeployment, and have supported such efforts alongside our partners, particularly those in the European Union. France welcomes announcements made by the Sahelian authorities with regard to the opening of investigations into allegations of human rights violations, in particular those concerning certain members of their armies, and calls for those responsible to be identified and brought to justice. On the political front, the current year is decisive for the consolidation of democratic processes. In that regard, I refer in particular to Guinea and Burkina Faso. In Guinea, the 22 March legislative elections and referendum were fraught with tension. Distrust among political actors remains strong. Comprehensive dialogue is critical. The presidential election in October will be crucial for the continuation of the political process in the country, and it is important that it be conducted in a transparent, credible and inclusive manner. In Burkina Faso, we are concerned about the prevailing insecurity in the north and the east, which could hinder the successful holding of the 22 November elections. We encourage the authorities to strengthen the State's presence in these outlying areas, with a view to restoring basic services and easing tensions. It is important to consolidate the gains made in this country, which successfully completed its democratic transition five years ago. France supports the role of the Economic Community of West African States and the International Organization of La Francophonie in supporting political processes in the region. Lastly, the situation in the Lake Chad basin must be closely monitored. France welcomes the successes achieved by Chadian troops against terrorist groups. We encourage Nigeria, whose role is essential, to capitalize on these successes in order to build up its military effort against Boko Haram. Only the restoration of security will make it possible to redeploy basic services, restart the economy and carry out long-term development actions. It is also essential that the actions of humanitarian actors and international humanitarian law be respected.
