Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I thank

you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting. I wish

to welcome Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, Special

Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia. I

thank him for his briefing and urge him to continue the

efforts he has undertaken since he took office to

promote a comprehensive political process in Somalia

in accordance with Security Council resolution 1772
(2007).

It is unfortunate that, as the Secretary-General
stated in his most recent report to the Security Council
under this item (S/2007/658), the security situation in
Somalia is making it difficult to deploy United Nations
peacekeepers. However, we welcome the Secretary-
General's recent statement that, despite that situation,
work is under way to develop a strategic assessment
for a United Nations intervention in Somalia in order to
provide an integrated approach and a framework for
United Nations peacebuilding efforts in that country. In
addition, the Organization can play a greater role in
mobilizing and providing support for the efforts of the
African Union (AU) to strengthen the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), including completion
of the deployment of Burundian troops this month.

We agree that ensuring stability in Somalia
requires parallel efforts on the political and security
tracks. We have always called for a national dialogue
in Somalia based on the principles of reconciliation
and inclusion, rather than on those of force and
exclusion. Therefore, we commend Mr. Ould
Abdallah's efforts to move national reconciliation
forward, thus creating the basic conditions needed for
the country's continued progress towards stability and
democracy. That can be achieved only through an end
to the violence, the withdrawal of foreign troops and
the building of constitutional democratic institutions.

At this juncture, it is essential that Somalia
continue to broaden the political reconciliation process,
which must include all tribes and factions. In addition
to continuing that approach, the Government must draft
a constitution for the country, develop a road map for
the remainder of the transitional period and pave the
way for conducting a census and elections by the end
of the period.
It goes without saying that the disputes in
Somalia, whether within the institutions of the
Transitional Federal Government or between the
Government and the opposition, must be settled

through dialogue. Moreover, all parties in the country
must refrain from using violence as a way to express
political positions. They must also stop jeopardizing
the safety of civilians, impeding humanitarian access to
them and, in particular, targeting humanitarian relief
workers, journalists and AMISOM. personnel.

Despite the fact that the Government formed by
newly appointed Prime Minister Nur Hassan Hussein
was dissolved shortly after its formation, we hope that
it will soon be succeeded by a new, broad-based
Cabinet that includes various Somali parties and that
can communicate well with the opposition. We also
hope that it will play an effective role in alleviating the
worsening humanitarian situation in the country,
particularly since Mr. Hussein has a solid background
and experience in that area.

The dire humanitarian situation facing the people
of Somalia has been described as the worst in Africa. It
is regrettable that that the humanitarian situation
continues to deteriorate. Indeed, since the beginning of
this year, the number of civilians fleeing the capital
because of the continuing violence has risen to
approximately 600,000, making the problem of
internally displaced persons a serious crisis.
Furthermore, the social and health statistics for women
and children in Somalia are among the worst in the
world. Briefing the Council after his recent visit to
Somalia (see S/PV.5792), the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs explained that international
humanitarian agencies face great difficulties in
carrying out their tasks because of the continuing
violence, and that the international response has been
inadequate. Therefore, the flow of international aid to
Somalia must continue, together with cooperation and
coordination between international and regional parties
and the Transitional Federal Government in order to
guarantee humanitarian access to those most in need.

The question that arises here is why the
international response to the humanitarian situation in
Somalia has been different from the response to that in
Darfur. Are the two situations not the same? Are
innocent civilians not suffering as a result of both
conflicts? In addition to the extremely grave
humanitarian situation being experienced by the
Somali people, their human rights are being violated,
as the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights indicated on 11 December in her statement to
the Human Rights Council. We deplore the serious
violations that are taking place, including the targeting
of civilians, as well as the indifference shown by rebels,
troops of the Transitional Government and Ethiopian
troops towards civilian population centres. Just in recent
days, scores of people have been killed or injured by
artillery shells that targeted their homes and shelters in
Mogadishu. This situation should not be tolerated.

Moreover, the issue of the ever-worsening piracy
that has been taking place for almost a year now and
that has not spared even ships carrying humanitarian
aid must be addressed. Therefore, initiatives taken
recently by the French navy to escort humanitarian
assistance vessels are praiseworthy.

Finally, I would like to point out that the mandate
of the United Nations Political Office for Somalia
expires at the end of this month. Everyone agrees on
the need for its continued existence. Therefore we
would like to stress that the role of the Office in
supporting the participatory political process and
achieving national reconciliation is important and must
be strengthened.

