Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Secretary-General Guterres for his briefing and
deeply appreciate his tireless efforts on the issue of the
Middle East and that of Syria.

The current situation in Syria is perilous. The
country is at the crossroads of war and peace, and
China is following the developments there with great
concern. The possibility of an escalation of tensions
worries us deeply. The pressing priority of the moment
is to launch a comprehensive, objective and impartial
investigation into the relevant incidents in order to
arrive at authoritative conclusions.

China has consistently stood in favour of the
peaceful settlement of disputes and opposed the routine
use or threat of force in international relations. To
take unilateral military action by circumventing the
Security Council is inconsistent with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and runs
counter to the basic norms enshrined in international
law and those governing international relations.

Syria's sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity must be fully respected. We call
on the parties concerned to remain calm, exercise
restraint, refrain from any move that could lead to
further escalation of the situation and resolve the issue
peacefully through consultation and dialogue. China is
convinced that there can be no military solution to the
Syrian issue; the only way out is a political settlement.
China supports the United Nations in playing an active
role in safeguarding the authority and standing of the
Organization and its Security Council.

China calls on the international community to
steadfastly continue its diplomatic efforts, tirelessly
stay the course so as to settle the Syrian issue politically,
give full play to the role of the United Nations as the
main mediator, and resolve without delay the Syrian
issue comprehensively, justly and adequately, in
keeping with the provisions of the relevant Security
Council resolutions.

The people ofthe world yearn for peace and oppose
war. The situation in Syria has ramifications for peace
and stability in the Middle East and the world at large, as
well as for the credibility and authority of the Council.
At this critical juncture, the Council must rightfully
discharge its sacred responsibility emanating from
the Charter of the United Nations; act in line with the
dictates of our times; build unity and consensus and do
its utmost to maintain peace; leave no stone unturned
in its efforts to prevent war; and live up to the trust and
expectations of the international community.

China is and has always been a builder of world
peace, a contributor to global development and a
defender of the international order. China stands ready
to continue its unflagging efforts to safeguard peace
and stability in the Middle East and the world at large,
in a spirit of responsibility to history and to the peoples
of the world.

