Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
would like to thank Spain for its initiative to hold this
open debate on the situation in the Middle East, and we
welcome the presence of Foreign Minister Jose Manuel
Garcia Margallo here in New York to preside over this
meeting. I listened carefully to the briefing given by
Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson.

On 24 October, the United Nations will celebrate
the seventieth anniversary of its founding. Regrettably,
however, no hope has been seen for a solution to the
Palestinian issue, which is at the core of the issues of
the Middle East and has persisted since the founding
of the Organization. The Palestinian-Israeli security
situation continues to deteriorate, with frequent bloody
incidents resulting in increasing civilian casualties and
threatening to further escalate and spread the conflict.
This situation is not acceptable. The international
community should take prompt action to alleviate the
situation. In that respect, China would like to emphasize
the following five points.

First, the international community should urge
Palestine and Israel to exercise restraint, keep calm
and put an end to all rhetoric and actions not conducive
to easing the tense situation so as to avoid further
escalation of the conflict. China highly appreciates the
current good offices of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
in the Middle East and welcomes the promise made by
the Palestinian side to investigate crimes committed
during the clashes. It hopes that this will help reduce
violence and conflict. We urge Israel to avoid excessive
use of force and honour its commitment to maintain
the status quo of the holy sites and put an end to its
violations of the rights of the Palestinian people to
create the basic conditions for the two sides to sit down
to seek a solution to the issue.

Secondly, the establishment of an independent
Palestine and a situation in which the two countries
of Palestine and Israel can live side by side in peace
is the correct way out of the impasse, and peace talks
are the only feasible and practical means towards that
end. The leaders of Palestine and Israel should put the
fundamental interests of their peoples and the overall
goal of maintaining regional peace and stability above
all else and make political decisions to push for the
gradual settlement of the issue. Israel should take the
lead to show good will in taking actions favourable for
the resumption of negotiations. The reasonable security
concerns of the countries in the region should also be
addressed.

Thirdly, the Security Council bears the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. It should therefore actively respond
to the reasonable requests of Palestine and the Arab
countries by taking the actions necessary to put an end
to the clashes between the parties and resuming the
peace talks.
China welcomes the case studies initiated by
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, at the request of
Palestine, and his report (S/2015/677) to the Security
Council with regard to international protection by the
United Nations for the Palestinian people, and hopes
that the Security Council will carefully consider it.

Fourthly, the settlement of the Palestinian issue
requires the collective efforts of both Palestine and
Israel, as well as the international community. China
hopes the potential of the existing mechanisms of
the Middle East peace process can be further tapped
with strengthened communication and synergy among
the Quartet, the countries of the region and major
international partners so as to strengthen the momentum
for the resumption of peace talks between Palestine and
Israel and to find together an effective remedy for the
current Palestinian-Israeli situation.

Fifthly, efforts should be made to improve the
humanitarian situation in Palestine. Currently the
rebuilding of Gaza faces many difficulties. The
humanitarian situation continues to deteriorate in the
face of multiple challenges, such as the blockade by
Israel, the unstable Palestinian-Israeli situation and
the serious shortage of resources. China urges Israel
to cooperate with international relief efforts and
completely lift the blockade ofthe Gaza Strip. We hope
the international community and donors will honour
their assistance commitments as soon as possible to
increase the support to Gaza in order to improve the
humanitarian situation there.

China has always supported the just cause of the
Palestinian people for the restoration of their legitimate
national rights and has always promoted peace and
facilitated negotiations. In 2013, President Xi Jinping put
forward a four-point proposal for settling the question
of Palestine. It emphasized that peaceful coexistence
between Palestine and Israel is the right direction to
take to settle the issue between the countries with the
establishment of an independent Palestine.

Peace talks represent the only realistic path
towards reconciliation between Israel and Palestine.
Principles such as land for peace provide an important
basis for promoting the Middle East peace process,
and international support constitutes a necessary
guarantee of progress in the peace talks. China will
maintain communications and coordination with all
parties concerned in an unremitting effort to push for
the easing of the Palestinian-Israeli situation and the
resumption of peace talks.

In the 70 years of the history of the United Nations,
we have witnessed many wars in the Middle East and the
displacement of innocent civilians. The combination of
national disputes and religious and ethnic conflicts have
resulted in conflicts and wars, humanitarian disasters,
migrant crises and the threat of terrorism. The history
of the Middle East has repeatedly demonstrated that no
use of force can settle such issues definitively. Hatred
will only dash the hopes for peace. In today's world, no
country can enjoy absolute security for itself on its own
or find stability in the instability of others.

President Xi Jinping of China, during his
participation in the general debate (see A/70/PV.13) in
September, fully elaborated on the idea of building a
new type of international relations based on win-win
cooperation, with an emphasis on building partnerships
in which countries treat each other as equals and engage
in consultations with a mutual understanding to create
a security architecture featuring fairness, justice and
joint contributions.

China is ready to join the international community
in a common effort to find the way out of the crisis
in the Middle East and to achieve peace, stability and
development at an early date.

