Mr. King (United Kingdom): We are grateful to
the Secretary-General for his report and to David
Stephen and Ambassador Kumalo for their very helpful
introductory remarks today.

The situation in Guinea-Bissau is very worrying.
The political process appears to be stuck. We are
disappointed at the lack of progress on the
promulgation of the constitution, at the lack of
continuity in the Administration caused by frequent
ministerial changes, and at the increasing likelihood
that legislative elections will again be postponed.

We are also concerned about the continuing
tensions in the military. We hope that Guinea-Bissau's
African partners are making it clear that
unconstitutional methods of proceeding will not be
tolerated. We are particularly alarmed by the
deterioration in the human rights situation, including
lack of press freedom and the undermining of the
independence of the judiciary.

The primary responsibility for improving the
situation lies with the President and the Government of
Guinea-Bissau. We are making this clear in the
proposed presidential statement and we agree with the
points which previous speakers have made in this
respect. The European Union's declaration on Guinea-
Bissau complements these messages.

The Security Council mission to West Africa later
this month will start in Guinea-Bissau. It is indeed
timely, as David Stephen and a number of other
speakers have noted, and we are pleased to be working
with the Economic and Social Council again on this
subject. We are also very grateful to Ambassador
Aguilar Zinser for sharing the leadership of the West
African mission.

The mission must send a tough message. The
international community stands ready to help Guinea-
Bissau in many areas, but needs the Government of
Guinea-Bissau to show genuine commitment to free
and fair elections and to sound financial management.
This is what was agreed in the compact proposed by
the Economic and Social Council mission last
November. The Government of Guinea-Bissau must
start seriously to deliver.

In conclusion, we commend all those who are
working to improve the situation in Guinea-Bissau and,
in particular, David Stephen and the staff of the United
Nations Peace-building Support Office in Guinea-
Bissau.

