Mr. Seger (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland thanks the Secretary-General for his
report on peacebuilding in the aftermath of conflict
(S/20l2/746). We remain convinced that, in order to
respond to the challenges of our times, peacebuilding
in general must be strengthened, and in particular, the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture. The United
Nations has a lot of experience behind it. We commend
the Secretary-General and the Organization for the
progress made to date. However, further progress is in
order.

Allow me to begin with three general comments
on the report. First, the Secretary-General notes
three peacebuilding priorities, namely, inclusivity,
institution-building and sustained international
support and mutual accountability. We welcome
both the choice and the order of the three priorities.
Our own experiences - particularly through the
Swiss chairmanship of the Burundi country-specific
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) - confirm that those priorities are critical
in successful peacebuilding. The recent donors
conference for Burundi, held in Geneva at the end of
October, is a good illustration in that regard. It allowed
an alignment of donors around a common agenda that
had been prepared by Burundi through an inclusive
process. The conference represented an important
milestone in Burundi's peacebuilding process, and we
are optimistic regarding its long-term positive impact.
The three principles also form important elements
of the New Deal for Engagement in Fragile States,
which was agreed in Busan last year and of which
Switzerland is a signatory. The New Deal represents
a useful framework for implementing measures aimed
at mutual accountability, and, as noted in the report,
transition compacts can help in formalizing long-term
commitments among States and their partners.

Secondly, we believe that a clear long-term vision
for peacebuilding would help to better streamline
our efforts. The present report sets clear priorities
for effectively continuing earlier efforts. However,
a strategic outlook for the overall peacebuilding
architecture would be equally important. Discussions
should not only address ways to respond to current
challenges, but also elaborate a vision of United
Nations peacebuilding in the next five to ten years.
Even if it appears difficult, we should try to set targets
for successful peacebuilding and develop a vision ofthe
United Nation's role in relation to other peacebuilding
actors. Such a strategic discussion would also help
us to better understand the existing links among the
peacebuilding architecture and other core processes,
such as the post-Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs) process. The increasing gap between conflict-
affected countries and other developing countries
in achieving the MDGs is, indeed, worrying and
constitutes a challenge to our effective efforts. We
therefore strongly support the inclusion of peacebuilding
considerations in the post-2015 development agenda.

Thirdly, further progress is necessary on gender
mainstreaming. The Secretary-General's seven-point
action plan for gender-responsive peacebuilding (see S/2010/466) represents a useful starting point. Progress
has been encouraging, but further progress is needed,
especially in governance and economic recovery. With
the creation of UN-Women, the Secretary-General can
count on the support of a strong partner. We expect to
see a more systematic consideration and inclusion of
gender-specific issues in peacebuilding in the future.

Clearly, we were particularly interested in the
section on the Peacebuilding Commission. We agree
that further progress should be achieved, particularly
on the points covered in the 2010 review (S/2010/393).
Let me make five specific remarks in that regard.

First and generally, we believe that there is further
potential for peacebuilding actors to play a more
central and strategic role within the overall United
Nations architecture. That is particularly true for the
PBC, as a consultative intergovernmental body, as well
as the Peacebuilding Support Office (PBSO). It appears
that their roles and added value have been neither
understood nor exploited to the fullest extent possible.

Secondly, increased efforts must aim to broaden
dialogue and link the actors concerned. The PBC is
uniquely placed to fulfil that role. It has - in large part
thanks to the PBSO - invested considerable effort to
reach out to the United Nations system, particularly the
Security Council and other international organizations,
such as the World Bank and the African Development
Bank. Considerable progress has been achieved, and
my view is that development banks are taking a more
active role in peacebuilding. Those factors must be
exploited to the fullest possible extent.

Thirdly, with direct reference to my previous point,
the relationship between the Security Council and the
PBC is crucial. Regular exchanges between the two
bodies, whether through open debates such as today's,
or more informal exchanges such as the dialogue
organized by Colombia in July, are very useful.

We are convinced that the Peacebuilding
Commission can bring added value to the Council's
discussions. In particular, it can serve as a safety net
for fragile countries that are not the immediate focus
of the Council's attention but that nonetheless require a
degree of support. The fact that the PBC closely follows
the countries on its agenda allows Council members
to concentrate their efforts on other, more pressing
situations. In return, on the other hand, the PBC needs
the Council's full support along with swift and flexible
access to it in the event of a sudden deterioration on the
ground.
To conclude, I reiterate our belief that the challenges
of peacebuilding should be urgently addressed and that
the United Nations has an important role to play in that
regard. We will continue to fully support efforts to that
end and stand ready to contribute our share.

