Mr. Fowler (Canada) (spoke in French): Let me
begin by commending you, Mr. President, for having
organized today's debate on the Security Council's role in
conflict prevention. Canada is a firm supporter of such
initiatives, which enable the Council to consider
multidisciplinary quotations concerning security and the
Council's mandate in an open, transparent and
comprehensive manner. The subject on which you have
focused our attention today is of pressing relevance to the
Security Council. A quick glance at the Council's day-to-
day agenda unfortunately reveals the reality of the
Council's reactive approach to conflict. The results of the
Council's deliberations and of the action it mandates on
the ground tell of the challenges of reversing, controlling
or resolving conflict once it has broken out. The risks and
costs, both human and financial, of this approach must
lead us to a re-evaluation of how the Council works, how
its mandate is interpreted and how it uses the tools at its
disposal.

 

Canada has consistently called for greater Council
activism on conflict prevention. We fully support the
Secretary-General's appeal to the Council to embrace a
culture of prevention. As he so eloquently noted, even the
most costly policy of conflict prevention is far cheaper in
lives and resources than measures taken under the
prevailing culture of reaction. How, in practical terms, can
the Council adopt a culture of prevention and take action
accordingly? Canada would argue that the Council has all
the basic tools it needs. What it lacks is the vision and,
above all, the will and commitment necessary to use them
flexibly and creatively.

Nothing in the Council's Charter mandate precludes it
from taking preventive action in the pursuit of international
peace and security. Taking such action would, of course,
require the Council to embrace a broader definition of
security; taking into account the multiple factors that
contribute to a conflict and thus suppressing it in its earliest
stages and manifestations. That would mean focusing not
only on aggression between States, but also on such
intrastate security issues as gross and systematic human
rights abuse or catastrophic humanitarian emergencies, utter
failures of governance and the rule of law, and gross
instances of economic deprivation. In short, it would mean
paying greater attention to threats to human security which,
as recent experience has shown, have been key sources of
conflict in the post-cold-war era. Responding to such threats
early and effectively requires a political decision by the
Council which, after all, has the discretionary power to
determine what constitutes a threat to peace and security.
Early preventive action by the Council, whether persuasive
or coercive, would help to pre-empt both the emergence
and the escalation of conflict, thus providing an important
deterrent effect.

There are important precedents of Council action to
build on. The United Nations first preventive military
deployment - the United Nations Preventive Deployment
Force - helped to prevent the spread of conflict in a
region racked by strife. The Council should consider
deploying more preventive missions, both military and
civilian, drawing on this experience and that of recent
post-conflict operations which play important preventive
roles.
Another innovative and progressive step was the
creation of international criminal tribunals. They are an
important signal from the Council that gross and systematic
human rights abuses within States merit a robust response
by the international community and that such abuses will
not be allowed to stand. The tribunals, and eventually the
International Criminal Court, can thus provide a deterrent
to would-be violators by demonstrating that they will be
held accountable for genocide, war crimes and crimes
against humanity. The tribunals also play an important
norm-reinforcing role. Until the International Criminal
Court is established, we hope that the precedent set by the
tribunals will be followed in other situations that call for
them.

(spoke in English)

The Council is served by the Office of the
Secretary-General with the ability to mediate, investigate
disputes, promote dialogue, send peace envoys and, above
all, bring matters which he deems threats to security to
the Council's attention. The Council should take full
advantage of this preventive capacity by backing the
Secretary-General in these efforts and ensuring that he has
the necessary resources and political support to conduct
them effectively. More importantly, the Council needs to
take appropriate action in response to his advice. The
Council should also make greater use of the provisions
for the peaceful settlement of disputes under Chapter VI
of the Charter, in particular by launching its own
investigations into potential conflicts and encouraging
Member States to bring such matters to the Council's
attention. The practice of dispatching delegations of
Council members to conflict situations to bring the will
and commitment of the Council home to actual or
potential belligerents should also be used - but
sparingly - as a preventive measure. Clearly, the use of
a Council mission when circumstances suggest success to
be unlikely would quickly devalue its currency.

The Council's procedures and working methods can
have a decisive impact on the effectiveness of its efforts
at preventing conflict, for they speak loudly to the matter
of the Council's continuing credibility. For an institution
dedicated to the pursuit of peace, the Council's procedural
and constitutional complexities often seem to conspire
against that goal. Under current working methods, the
Council often fails to allow the effective participation of
Member States whose vital interests are indeed at stake.
Further, given the way it operates, it is too easy to
exclude from the Council's agenda items inimical to the
interests of one or more of its members.

Conflict prevention calls for broad and inclusive
dialogue. If the Council is to be an effective tool of
conflict prevention, it must adapt its conclave and
privileged working methods to the new security
environment by broadening its range of interlocutors and

 

its sources of information. There should be more scope for
the participation of non-members in the Council's
deliberations, whether formal or informal, when their
presence could make a useful contribution to the Council's
efforts to prevent conflict. The Council should also explore
more innovative formats to permit interaction with
non-State actors who could contribute to the Council's
efforts at conflict prevention.

In his report on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, the Secretary-General made a number of practical
recommendations to the Council for preventing conflict. For
example, he advocated greater responsiveness to the early-
warning indicators of conflict by making use of human
rights information and analysis from independent treaty
body experts and the Commission on Human Rights, as
well as reliable non-governmental sources. The challenge is
not the availability of information, but bringing it to the
Council's attention and taking appropriate action in
response.

One approach might be to follow the practice used to
keep the Council apprised of humanitarian issues and have
regular briefings by special rapporteurs or, indeed, by the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. We
also support the Secretary-General's recommendation to set
up expert working groups of the Council to monitor volatile
situations and consider options to prevent the outbreak of
violence. The Secretary-General also set out factors which
should trigger action by the Security Council to protect
civilians in the face of massive human rights abuse or
humanitarian emergency. Acceptance of these factors by the
Council in its consideration of specific security situations,
backed by action when needed, would have a significant
impact on conflict prevention.

Canada fully supports cooperation between the Council
and regional and subregional security organizations in
efforts to prevent conflict. The latter can play key roles in
averting conflict because of their proximity to the issues
and their intimate knowledge of the protagonists. There is,
however, a continuing tendency for the Council to seek to
devolve, or at least discuss the devolution of, its own
security responsibilities to regional and subregional groups,
often in the full knowledge that such groups or
organizations are neither competent to assume nor capable
of assuming such responsibilities. Even when such
organizations can play a useful role, conflict prevention
efforts conducted at the local or regional level frequently
need the impetus that only the active engagement of this
Council can provide. What is to be avoided at all costs is
a situation where Council inaction creates a void which
others, perhaps with inadequate resources and capacities,
are abandoned to fill.

We will continue to be faced with situations in
which our best efforts at conflict prevention fail. Over the
years, we have developed instruments such as
peacekeeping, peace enforcement and sanctions to respond
in those circumstances. We believe that determined action
to resolve and end conflicts, including those marked by
humanitarian suffering or human rights abuse, can be an
important deterrent against future conflicts. Renewed
effort and, above all, adequate resources - financial and
human - are a sine qua non to effective Council
engagement. Unless the Council can count on the
willingness of the general membership to provide the
wherewithal to make the Council's effective engagement
possible and practicable, all the fine theory is for naught.
At the very least, we must immediately take steps to
enhance the effectiveness of the instruments available in
such cases, particularly the United Nations capacity to
plan effectively and deploy rapidly. Peace support
operations must also be given the necessary mandates and
resources to prevent the resurgence of conflict. Finally,
the Council should further explore the deterrent qualities
of the instruments which have been traditionally
employed during or in the aftermath of conflict. Canada
strongly believes that if these interventions are used as
preventive measures, their impact and efficacy will
increase as their costs diminish. Surely, however, our
political institutions have matured to the point where
intelligent cost-benefit analysis requires us to invest in
those ounces of prevention which, if successful, would
avoid the full horror of not taking early action.

