The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of the Russian Federation.

I thank Mr. Zannier, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Kosovo, for introducing the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2010/401) on the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), and for his efforts to implement
UNMIK's very important mandate in accordance with
resolution 1244 (1999).

We welcome the participation in today's meeting
of the Security Council by Mr. Vuk Jeremie, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Serbia. We share his
assessments.

We have listened to Mr. Hyseni's statement.

At the outset, I should like to reaffirm the
Russian Federation's unchanged position with regard to
our non-recognition of the unilateral declaration of
independence of Kosovo. The Russian Federation
continues to champion the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of the Republic of Serbia.

We are also convinced of the need for strict
compliance with resolution 1244 (1999), which
remains fully applicable and binding upon all as the
international legal basis for a Kosovo settlement and
maintaining the security of the province. In that
context, we fully support UNMIK's activities. As in the
past, UNMIK continues to be the leading international
civilian presence in the province. No one has the power
to impede the powers entrusted to it, including with
respect to upholding the rights and security of national
minorities and fulfilling the international community's
mandate of democratic standards in the province. The
same applies to UNMIK's external representation
functions in Pristina and regional international
mechanisms. We note UNMIK's irreplaceable role in
promoting inter-communal dialogue, first and foremost
in the North of the province.

As far as the security situation in Kosovo is
concerned, we continue to have serious concerns. The
tragic events in northern Mitrovica in early July serve
as direct confirmation of that. All of this speaks to the
need to preserve the lead role of the Security Council
in a Kosovo settlement; the Council should remain the
guarantor of respect for international law, the Charter
of the United Nations and its own decisions.

The situation of internally displaced persons and
returnees in Kosovo remains unsatisfactory. We share
the conclusions of the report of the Secretary-General
with regard to the fact that the total number of
returnees remains disappointingly low. There are many
reasons for that, including the heightened level of
inter-communal intolerance.
Also alarming is the situation with regard to
preserving Serbian and Orthodox cultural heritage.
Frequent instances of desecration and defilement of
Serbian holy sites continue, while restoration efforts
face a shortage of financial resources. Given this
situation, the Government of the Russian Federation
has decided to make a $2-million contribution during
the 2010 to 2011 period to the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization's
voluntary trust fund in order to finance restoration
efforts.

On 22 July, pursuant to a request by the General
Assembly, the International Court of Justice issued an
advisory opinion on the legality of Kosovo's unilateral
declaration of independence. In that regard, it is crucial
to note the following points.

The Court issued an opinion only with regard to
the declaration of Kosovo's independence, specifically
noting that it did not consider the broader issue of
Kosovo's right to unilaterally secede from Serbia. In its
conclusions, the Court also did not address the
consequences of the adoption of that document,
including the issues of whether or not Kosovo is a
State and whether its recognition by a number of
countries is lawful. With that in mind, we believe it
important for interested parties to begin a dialogue to
develop a lawful, fair and effective settlement for
Kosovo.

In conclusion, I must note that we fail to
understand a number of statements made today by
colleagues in the Security Council. In response to
Serbia's request for dialogue, we heard something that
came close to being a threat of confrontation by
countries that recognize Kosovo. We do not know
whether one delegation was entrusted with speaking on
behalf of all those countries. We hope that the majority
of them will limit themselves to restrained approaches
and not impede Pristina from adopting the sole correct
solution - dialogue with Belgrade. Otherwise,
Kosovars will not be able to untangle a very complex
web of problems.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

Mr. Jeremic' has asked to make a further
statement, and I give him the floor.

