The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Burkina Faso, C6te d'Ivoire, Guinea,
Luxembourg, Mali, Niger, Nigeria and Sierra Leone, in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the discussion without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber

The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for West
Africa and the Head of the United Nations Office for
West Africa, Mr. Ahmedou Ould-Abdallah.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Ould-Abdallah to take a seat at the
Council table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation to
Mr. Ibrahima Diouf, Special Adviser on Child
Protection to the Executive-Secretary of the Economic
Community of States of West Africa (ECOWAS),
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Diouf to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2005/86, containing the progress report of
the Secretary-General on ways to combat subregional
and cross-border problems in West Africa.

I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Kofi Annan, at this meeting, and I
invite him to take the floor.


