Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the convening of this informative meeting ,and
we thank Mr. De Mistura for his complete briefing. We
acknowledge his intense and always prudent work, and
we express our commitment to positively contribute to
the success of his efforts.

We would like to begin by expressing our deep
concern about the new and recent actions by regional
actors and about the escalation of the conflict in Syria.
It constitutes an additional threat to peace and security
in the Middle East and should lead us to reiterate the
need to end the conflict. It is especially necessary to
end the suffering experienced by the Syrian people, as
well as the grave and ongoing violations of international
law and international humanitarian law, including the
use of chemical weapons.

First, against that backdrop, it is now more urgent
than ever to move the political process forward. The
2012 Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex) and
resolution 2254 (2015) should continue to guide our
efforts; there is no military solution to the conflict.
In that regard, we welcome the fact that the parties
focused on substantive aspects during their recent
conversations, including the holding of United Nations-
supervised elections and the constitutional issue.

However, we must express our concern about the
lack of tangible results following the eighth and ninth
rounds of negotiations held in Geneva and Vienna in
December and January, respectively. We believe it is
necessary for the parties involved to work constructively
in determining the mandate of a constitutional
committee, including its terms of reference, selection
criteria and other related matters. In that regard, we
would like to especially highlight the efforts of Mr. De
Mistura to launch, as soon as possible, the constitutional
committee agreed to in Sochi. We would also like to
underscore the importance that initiatives, such as the
one in Sochi, are always complementary to the Geneva
talks process, as Mr. De Mistura also indicated today.

Secondly, there is also a need to address the root
causes of the conflict. To that end, the solution to
the conflict must be comprehensive and allow for
the presence of the State in all areas of the country
to ensure security, safeguard human rights and
promote sustainable development for the entire Syrian
population. It is also necessary to promote increased
participation by women and young people and to
strengthen civil society organizations, especially in the
drafting of a new constitution.

Indubitably, the Syrians themselves bear the
primary responsibility for arriving at a solution to the
problem. However, the international community and
the Security Council have a moral responsibility to
end that tragedy, and for that reason we must be united
in lending our full support and active engagement to
Mr. De Mistura in the successful discharge ofhis duties.

