Mr. Ahmed (Pakistan): At the outset, I should
like to congratulate you, Sir, on the substantive nature
and frequency of the Council's meetings under your
presidency this month.

Once again, we return to this Chamber to discuss
the subject of terrorism and the response of the world
community to counter it. The steps taken by the
Security Council to combat this serious threat to
international peace and security, which include the
adoption of various resolutions, including resolutions
1368 (2001), 1373 (2001), 1377 (2001) and 1390
(2002), as well as the establishment of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC), are unprecedented in
their approach and global in their scope. While these
measures are indeed necessary and must be
implemented, there is also a need to look beyond such
immediate steps. I think we all agree on these
imperatives, and I should like to commend the diligent
stewardship of Sir Jeremy Greenstock as he steers the
work of the Committee.

Terrorism is the curse of our time. It haunts all
societies and all regions. It stalks us all. As we seek to
grapple with this challenge, our approach should not be
cosmetic or guided by emotion or anger. Surely the
perpetrators of terrorism must be brought to justice.
But our battle must not be confined to retaliation and
retribution. We must unearth the source of the problem
and diagnose the disease beneath the skin. Mere
bandages will not heal wounds caused by the injustices
of systems and societies. We must try to understand
and grapple with the causes that force human beings to
kill human beings. Why is humanity under assault,
after all? Why is humanity becoming devoid of
humanity?

No matter what actions we might take against
terrorism, this faceless enemy, which lurks in the
shadows of fear and frustration, breeds on hatred and
disillusionment and is fed by ignorance, poverty and
injustice, will not disappear unless we seriously
address what lies behind it. Terrorism will continue to
haunt us until we treat its roots, which lie in the
inequality of societies, the exploitation of the
downtrodden, the denial of fundamental rights and the
sense of injustice. It would be simplistic merely to
focus on the symptoms or their ugly manifestations.

Terrorism, the anathema of this new century, has
to be eliminated, root and branch, in all its forms and
manifestations. And indeed, terrorism has many forms
and manifestations, which should also be included
within the ambit of Security Council resolutions and
within the purview of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee. Those who employ the State apparatus to
trample upon the fundamental and inalienable rights of
people are also perpetrators of terrorism. If, as
according to some, terrorism is defined by the act and
not by the description of the perpetrators, then alien
occupiers and usurpers - especially those who employ
ruthless measures against people under occupation -
also fit that definition.

Pakistan rejects and condemns terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations. We have never condoned
acts of terrorism, and we have been cooperating with
the international community in combating this
universal evil. We in Pakistan will continue to abide by
our obligations under the Charter of the United Nations
and under the resolutions of the Security Council.
President Musharraf has clearly stated our policy on
this matter. In spite of the challenges that Pakistan
faces, we are determined to do what is right and what is
just.

These are unusual times demanding exceptional
responses. In effectively confronting the universal evil
of terrorism, we cannot be oblivious to the need to
address the source and the roots of the problem. It is
time for courageous decisions, for correcting historical
wrongs and for redressing endemic injustices. Our
universal obligation to fight terrorism must not deflect
us from the need for a just, lasting and honourable
settlement of the Kashmir and Palestine issues. It is
time for the Security Council to restore its credibility
and legitimacy and to work as a true instrument of
peace and security, as mandated by the Charter.

