The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of France.

As we near the end of the French presidency of the
Security Council, it is useful to pause for a moment to
take a step back and assess what we have achieved. As
members know, this month has been particularly busy
and intense. In March, we held 28 meetings, adopted
9 resolutions and issued 3 presidential statements and
8 press statements. To better understand these statistics,
we can simply say that they are comparable, given the
Council's absence from New York for one week, to the
month of March of last year, which, as members will
recall, established a new record in terms of workload.
Today, no one can deny that the Council, as the saying
goes, is actively seized of the matters on its agenda.

We established three main focuses for our
presidency: the Middle East, children and armed
conflict, and Africa. Allow me to broadly state what
we have accomplished together. On the Middle East,
the high-level debate (see S/PV.7419) presided by the
Minister Laurent Fabius and devoted to the victims of
attacks and abuses on ethnic or religious grounds in
the Middle East was a key moment in mobilizing the
international community. The powerful statements
delivered by the participants and the statement of the
Secretary-General allowed that first meeting on this
topic to alert and mobilize the United Nations as a whole
and above all to start planning a response. Minister
Laurent Fabius and the Secretary-General also outlined
the prospect ofplan of action to be developed by a panel
of experts. As Mr. Fabius stated, France is ready to host
an international conference that would be devoted to
the presentation of the findings of the panel of experts.
We will ensure the follow-up to this initiative so that
this important political dynamic is translated into
tangible action on this critical topic to enable the return
of threatened populations.

On Libya, the Council adopted three
resolutions - resolutions 2208 (2015), 2213 (2015)
and 2214 (2015) - this month focusing on the political
and security aspects of the crisis and underscored the
importance of United Nations mediation. Faced with
the crisis in Yemen, the Council held an emergency
meeting (see S/PV.7411) on Sunday, 22 March,
and adopted presidential statement S/PRST/2015/8
renewing its support for the legitimate President and
the efforts undertaken by the Special Adviser of the
Secretary-General on Yemen. Naturally, given the
acceleration of events, the Council should remain
mobilized to encourage and support any Viable solution
to the crisis. We also adopted resolution 2209 (2015) on
the use of chemical weapons in Syria, which warns that
any future non-compliance will be subject to measures
under Chapter VII. We hope that the investigations
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons will be concluded as soon as possible.

Finally, let me turn to the peace process. The
Council held a very enriching meeting (see S/PV.7417)
with Special Coordinator Robert Serry, dwelling on
his legacy on that dossier, which he had handled for
seven years. Consensus remains within the Council that
the two-State solution should more than ever remain
the point of reference of our action. France sees that
consensus as momentum for resuming discussions
in the Council on a draft resolution to set the broad
parametres of a solution, which are well known, while
also relaunching negotiations in which the international
community will spare no effort. As Minister Laurent
Fabius announced, we intend to move make progress
soon.

Finally, the Council adopted an important
presidential statement on Lebanon, which covers
all dimensions of the situation of the country and
underscore the unified support within the Council for
Lebanon.

Now I turn to the second focus of the our presidency:
the protection of children in armed conflict, which
has long been a high priority for France. In close
collaboration with Malaysia, we prepared for the tenth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1612 (2005),
by holding an open debate on child Victims of non-State
armed groups (see S/PV.7414). The debate heard speeches
by the Secretary-General, the Special Representative of
UNICEF, and the harrowing testimonies of Julie Bodin
and, in particular, of Junior Nzita, former child soldier
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. He truly

taught us a life lesson by contributing an incomparably
poignant human story to our discussion.

I also want to highlight that the French presidency
sought to innovate in terms of Council working
methods for this debate. Instead of voting on a
previously negotiated text, then listening to speeches
by participating States, we decided to reverse the
order - first we listened, then we acted. We thank the
more than 80 participants for their numerous and rich
contributions. France will synthesize these soon, which
I will duly issue to all Members of our Organization.
It will be a useful contribution to the discussions and
negotiations that Malaysia will host between now and
the summer, following on from our efforts, for which I
thank them.

I was impressed by the teamwork between our
two delegations, which will continue, as well as with
UNICEF, with which we have worked to promote,
since their adoption in 2007, the Paris Commitments to
protect children against their unlawful recruitment or
use by armed forces or armed groups.

Finally, the third and final focus of our presidency
was on the crises in Africa. First, I will refer to the
important mission of the Council to Africa, starting in
the Central African Republic, then to the African Union
and Burundi, which I had the honour and pleasure to
lead with my Angolan colleague, and for the Bujumbura
stage, with my American colleague. I will not dwell on
this because we have had the opportunity to report on
it, but the negotiations of major significance this month
focused on the Democratic Republic of Congo. The
mandate that we adopted last Thursday in resolution
2211 (2015) establishes of a regular and structured
dialogue with the Congolese Government on the future
of the Mission. With appropriate staffing, the Mission
will have to concentrate on a reduced number of tasks,
primarily the protection of civilians.

The same day, the Council increased the force
strength of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic at the request of the Secretary-General. I
would also like to mention, and highlight, the vote on
the first Council resolution (resolution 2206 (2015)
setting up a sanctions regime in South Sudan, which
was followed by the adoption of presidential statement
S/PRST/2015/9 following the failure of the Addis Ababa
talks.

Last but not least, it was under the French
presidency that the Council held its first public meeting
on Boko Haram (see S/PV.7421), and that negotiations
began towards a vote on a draft resolution to support the
efforts under way in the form of a joint multinational
force comprising soldiers of countries of the region
against this barbaric group.

Finally, I must add that our presidency allowed
us to foster dialogue between the Council and
regional organizations, in the spirit of Chapter VIII
of our Charter. Indeed, we have received for the
first time the High Representative of the European
Union, Ms. Mogherini. We met in Addis Ababa with
Peace and Security Council of the African Union.
And I have received, in my capacity President of the
Council, Mrs. Michaelle Jean, Secretary General of the
International Organization of the Francophonie.

I could also mention the important meetings we
held on Ukraine, Haiti, relations between Sudan and
South Sudan, Darfur, Afghanistan, the humanitarian
dimensions of the situation in Syria and yet many other
subjects.

I conclude by thanking all Council members for
their cooperation thought this particularly dense and
productive month. I would like to make special and
extremely grateful mention for the Council Secretariat
teams, the conference and security services, the sound
engineers and our invaluable interpreters.

I wish Jordan every success in the month of April
and I, for one, am confident that the Council will be in
good hands with Dina and her team.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council. I give the floor to the other members of the
Council.

