Mr. Berruga (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation wishes to underscore the importance and the
relevance of this public debate, as the participation of
the entire international community is fundamentally
important to the maintenance and strengthening of
international peace and security.

Mexico notes that the draft resolution seeks to
remedy lacunae existing in the existing apparatus of
multilateral legal instruments on disarmament and non-
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (WMD).
At the same time, it stresses the need to find a way to
address the threat inherent in the possibility of non-
State actors, particularly terrorist groups, acquiring
such weapons.

Given the eagerness to generate a broad
consensus, we hope that the sponsors will receive
positively the comments made in this open debate, as
well as the various proposals for amendment and
strengthening that have been presented in connection
with the draft resolution.

There must be no doubt about the urgent need to
take effective measures to tackle actors not covered by
the instruments we have at present.

Mexico believes that it is a matter of grave
concern to humankind that extremist groups might gain
access to nuclear, chemical or biological weapons. We
have recently witnessed, with sadness, that terrorist
groups have attacked with increasing brutality, greater
frequency and greater indiscriminateness. In that
context, concerted, resolute and effective action by the
international community is needed. A terrorist attack
using weapons of mass destruction would seriously
alter coexistence in the world and seriously jeopardize
international security and stability. Until now
Governments alone have been able to produce weapons
of mass destruction. If a terrorist group gained access
to them, it would be because the weapons had been
stockpiled by a Government institution, either military
or scientific. Hence the strict control of arsenals and
any means of distribution to terrorist individuals or
groups must be a salient priority.

Extremist groups are, by definition, beyond the
control and the decision-making power of peace-loving
States. Given that reality, the only effective recourse
the international community has is to prevent and
ensure that terrorists cannot gain access to this type of
weapons. We do not have the slightest guarantee that
these groups would use weapons of mass destruction
for exclusively political purposes. If they have access
to them, there will always be the danger that they will
use them.

Undoubtedly, the best approach to dealing with the
danger posed by weapons of mass destruction would be to
embark on their complete elimination through
multilaterally-negotiated disarmament agreements.
That way, concern about proliferation among
individuals, particularly terrorists, as well as among
States, would be addressed.

Through the draft resolution before us, the
Security Council, invoking Chapter VII of the Charter,
wishes to impose on all States Members the obligation
to adopt and implement effective laws to prevent non-
State actors from manufacturing, acquiring, possessing,
developing, transporting, transferring or using nuclear,
chemical or biological weapons and their delivery
systems.

The proposed approach is based on an incomplete
course of action, which will not necessarily lead to the
conditions that are required to achieve the desired
objective. Mexico is clear about its doubts regarding
the possible establishment of a committee responsible
for monitoring the implementation of the draft
resolution. We feel that, in defining its mandate, we need
to avoid duplicating the functions of other existing bodies,
particularly the Counter-Terrorism Committee, whose
functions already include the elimination of the supply
of all kinds of weapons to terrorists.

However, my delegation is concerned about the
precedent that this draft resolution could set for the
handling of other new issues on the world agenda. We
are not only concerned about the proliferation of
parallel regimes to those already established, using
channels outside the norms of existing treaties, but also
about the growing trend that the Security Council seeks
to legislate, particularly with regard to issues that have
their own regime of rights and obligations, even if
incomplete when it comes to non-State actors. We
require resolute commitments from States and, in order
to achieve that, we need the wide participation and
discussion of all actors.

My delegation wishes to reaffirm Mexico's
commitment to the international strategy to combat
terrorism. We agree with the importance of addressing
all problems associated with the draft resolution before
us. In that regard, we consider very appropriate the
comments and amendments presented by Brazil, which
contain the elements necessary to make the course of
action outlined in the initiative more effective.

Finally, as we join efforts to combat terrorism,
Mexico believes that we must bear in mind the
challenges that my delegation has pointed out and,
above all, the collegiate way in which the international
community seeks to combat this scourge.

