It is China's consistent position that the international community should increase humanitarian assistance to the Syrian people on the basis of respecting Syria's sovereignty and territorial integrity. China encourages the relevant parties to step up communication and cooperation with the Syrian Government to facilitate its positive role and help remove obstacles to cross-line humanitarian relief to meet the needs of the Syrian people. China continues to have reservations about the cross-border mechanism. Considering the actual situation in Syria, China does not object to retaining the cross- border mechanism at this stage. At the same time, China believes that the cross-border mechanism should be adjusted accordingly in the light of the developments on the ground. We have noted that the latest resolution presented by Belgium and Germany (resolution 2533 (2020)) reaffirms the commitment to the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity of Syria and includes further adjustment to the cross- border mechanism. This is another step in the right direction. It must be pointed out that years of illegal sanctions have exacerbated the economic and humanitarian crises in Syria, devastating livelihoods and bringing untold suffering to innocent civilians. The sanctions have also seriously undermined Syria's ability to respond to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). The repeated calls made by Secretary-General Guterres and Special Envoy Pedersen for the lifting of unilateral coercive measures have received the overwhelming support of United Nations Member States. We thank the majority of Security Council members that support China's position. In the light of the COVID-19 pandemic, lifting unilateral coercive measures becomes more important and urgent to improve the humanitarian situation in Syria. China calls on the Security Council to address this critical issue and requests a comprehensive assessment by the Secretariat on the impact of unilateral coercive measures on the humanitarian situation in Syria. We urge the United States to lift its unilateral coercive measures on Syria immediately, stop causing more harm to the lives and livelihoods of the Syrian people, stop politicizing the humanitarian issue and putting up a hypocritical political show and demonstrate a responsible attitude and a spirit of humanitarianism with concrete actions. I wish to take this opportunity to reiterate that the Syrian issue should be addressed with a holistic approach, taking into account the political, counter- terrorism, security, humanitarian and other aspects as a whole. China calls upon the relevant parties to strengthen dialogue and consultation and to actively promote a Syrian-led, Syrian-owned political process. China will continue to play a responsible and constructive role in the efforts to achieve a peaceful, just and proper settlement of the Syrian issue at an early date.
