Mr. Gombo (Chad) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank Mr. David Nabarro, Mr. Anthony Banbury and
Mr. Thomas Mauget for their relevant briefings on the
development of the Ebola epidemic. The emergency
meeting of the Security Council on the Ebola epidemic,
held on 18 September (see S/PV.7268), made it
possible to assess the scale of the epidemic's threat to
international peace and security.

It is true that there have been encouraging signs
on the ground in recent weeks, but the Ebola epidemic
is unpredictable and it continues spreading to other
African countries, such as Mali, at present, which is
unfortunate. The fact that non-African countries have
been affected and their citizens counted among the
victims justifies the fear of the threat of the Ebola
virus epidemic to international peace and security. The
consequences of the disease are numerous. There are
more than 5,000 dead out of the more than 9,000 people
affected. Public institutions, such as schools, are shut.
It would appear that the official figures are below the
real ones. Ebola weakens everything that was built in
the post-conflict period in Liberia and Sierra Leone,
and makes it difficult to implement Security Council
sanctions for those countries.

International assistance is crucial in the fight
against that disease. Resolution 2177 (2014), sponsored
by 134 countries and adopted by consensus by the
Security Council members, shows the degree of the
international community's mobilization in response to
that extraordinary threat. The historic momentum of
solidarity against the pandemic called for promises of
assistance, which materialized on the ground.

Chad commends the resilience of the affected
countries, which have not fallen prey to panic, and
we pay tribute to the victims, including the medical
personnel who have given their all in caring for the sick
and paid for their dedication with their lives. Given the
international dimension of Ebola, we call for greater
mobilization by the international community in order to
eliminate that scourge. The media must play a positive
role in raising awareness and not conveying through
their coverage images that sow panic and desolation.

We are pleased at the measures taken by the United
Nations to prevent the spread of the Ebola virus in the
field, in particular the quarantine of United Nations
staff before any deployment from affected countries,
awareness-raising and education on the means of
transmission and prevention measures for non-affected
countries. Further prevention measures must be taken,
for example, the building of treatment centres and the
enabling of traceability to find the source in order to
ensure that proper care is given.

We commend the tangible, but still scant, results
in the attempts to contain the spread of Ebola. We call
on the international community to redouble its efforts
to strengthen the response to the epidemic. In that
regard, we encourage doctors, medical services and
international partners to go into the field in order to
support those who are already there. Besides the fears
raised by the Ebola pandemic, we must also avoid
stigmatization. Measures to suspend air service to the
most affected countries are not the best solution. In that
regard, we call on the airlines that continue to serve
those countries to maintain their service.

In conclusion, we believe that a cure for Ebola is
what is needed.

