Mr. Zambrana (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to thank
Ms. Sandra Honore, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for her informative briefing on the
latest developments in the Republic of Haiti and the
activities of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH), and to take this opportunity
to express our gratitude to her and her whole team for
her work as Head of the Mission. We would also like
to thank the representative of Haiti for his presence
here today.

I would first like to congratulate MINUSTAH on
its work throughout the 13 years of its deployment. We
appreciate its efforts to lay the groundwork for lasting
stability and a better future for Haiti, and for establishing
priorities aimed at ensuring a successful transition and
an assessment of its work so that its progress to date can
be reviewed, as the Secretary-General's latest report
clearly reflects (S/2017/840). We also congratulate
MINUSTAH's troops on their performance. I should
note that Bolivia took part in this Mission and did so
with professionalism, dedication and the gratitude of
the Haitian people, which we are proud of.

Bolivia reaffirms its commitment to the present
and future of the Republic of Haiti. We believe that the
international community should be united in working
together to support the country's economic and social
development, bearing in mind the new challenges that
the new United Nations Mission for Justice Support in
Haiti (MINUJUSTH) will encounter in the security
and rule-of-law sectors. That support must be given
in consultation and coordination with the Haitian
Government. In that regard, Bolivia supports Haiti's
wish to switch the basis of the new Mission's mandate
to Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations
rather than Chapter VII, as it is currently. The mandate
should also be reviewed in the light of the results and
information that the Council obtained during its most
recent visit to Haiti, which should serve as input for the
new Mission so that when its mandate is renewed, it
will be easier to understand, clearer and more specific.
It should particularly be borne in mind that the Mission
will be expected to accomplish a number of tasks and
strategic goals over a period of two years.

However, the transition should not be a reason to
disregard some fundamental and as yet unresolved
issues such as those of sexual exploitation and abuse,
and cholera. In that regard, we believe that the United
Nations bears some responsibility towards the cholera
victims in Haiti, as we have reiterated at every Council
meeting on the subject of the Council and as the
Special Representative mentions in paragraph 52 of the
latest report. We welcome the commitment to dealing
with this crisis through the Secretary-General's new
approach to the fight against cholera. The victims of
cholera, which has led to the deaths of some 9,600
people since 2010, should be compensated. During the
Council's visit to Haiti, the people we spoke to saw this
as a key topic, given the damage that the cholera crisis
did to the reputation of United Nations peacekeeping
operations in Haiti. It is clear that a failure on the part
of the international community to meet its obligations
under the new approach will significantly affect the
new Mission's credibility and effectiveness. It will be
important for MINUJUSTH to work on a new plan of
action in that regard.

We would also like to reiterate that it is also the
obligation of the international community to support
the Republic of Haiti in building robust water-supply,
sanitation and health-care systems in order to end the
cholera crisis. We call on the Members of the United
Nations as a whole to support the Secretary-General's
new approach and General Assembly resolution
71/161B, adopted on 13 July, which established a trust
fund for that purpose, and encourage Security Council
members and all States Members of the United Nations
to consolidate the fund.

With regard to sexual abuse and exploitation, we
take note of the Special Representative's commitment
to supporting the victims through a trust fund and to
appoint a special defender in such cases. We believe
those efforts should continue on the principle of zero
tolerance and that those responsible for sexual abuse
and exploitation should be punished. We should not
omit to express our concern about the problem of
children who are fatherless as a result of sexual abuse.

Concerning the Government of Haiti's progress
on the political front, we commend the designation
of members for 140 municipal assemblies. We urge it
to appoint a replacement for the Ombudsman and to
continue to strengthen Haitian institutions in order
to ensure the rule of law and firm up the foundations
that will enable it to achieve greater political and
social cohesion and to tackle the country's current
socioeconomic and development challenges. We also
welcome the Government's work in establishing a
permanent Electoral Council, calling on candidates
for the Superior Council of the Judiciary, inviting the
opposition parties to dialogue in order to discuss ways
of improving the functioning of political parties and
working on a road map for the security, justice, energy,
education, health and farming sectors. Those advances
clearly demonstrates the Government's commitment to
democracy and stability, as does the progress on the
Caravan of Change and the joint legislative agenda. We
also commend the progress that has been made in the
security sector, particularly the growing capacity of
the Haitian National Police and its infrastructure. We
will continue to encourage efforts in that area with a
view to achieving the goals of its 2017-2021 strategic
development plan

In conclusion, Bolivia recognizes the national
ownership and primary responsibility of the Government
and the people of Haiti for all aspects of their country's
development, and encourages MINUJUSTH to
coordinate with the Government in providing it with
logistical and technical experience while respecting its
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity.

