Mr. Pedersen (Norway): In order for members
to be able to go home before midnight, I have decided
to circulate my speech but not read the whole thing.
Members will thus have to promise to read it.

The civil war in Syria is a catastrophe with no end in
sight. The situation of the millions of civilians in Syria
and in neighbouring countries continues to deteriorate
and has reached unbelievable dimensions. The country
is being reduced to rubble, and the Syrian State is
gradually collapsing. Cities and neighbourhoods are
being destroyed under constant fire from missiles and
heavy artillery on an appalling scale. There seems to be
no end to the suffering of the civilian population. We
are witnessing brutal suppression and indiscriminate
killings. The conflict is spilling across borders and
threatening regional stability.

The paralysis of the Security Council makes the
situation worse. As a result, the dynamic of the conflict
is becoming entrenched in a logic of violence. Norway
urges the Council to take a clear and unanimous
stand against the continuing and gross violations of
international humanitarian law. The international
community must, at an absolute minimum, stand up
for the basic principles of international humanitarian
law, even if it is divided over how to achieve a political
solution.

We urge all countries to stop the flow of weapons

into Syria. A political solution to the conflict is the only
way to save the Syrian people from further suffering,
for which the regime bears primary responsibility.
Therefore, our message to Al-Assad is that he must start
transferring executive power with a view to enabling a
meaningful political transition towards a pluralistic and
representative Syria. Our message to the opposition
groups is that they must contribute to a meaningful
political dialogue and negotiate within the framework
of the Geneva communique (S/2012/523, annex). Our
message to the Security Council members is that they
must find a way to promote a political transition based
on the Geneva communique. We must give our full
support to the work of Joint Special Representative
Brahimi.

Norway is committed to a democratic, pluralistic
and unified post-Al-Assad Syria. We support the
efforts of the opposition groups to organize themselves
on a more inclusive and representative basis. In the
current situation, Norway regards the Syrian National
Coalition as the legitimate representative of the Syrian
people. We are assisting the Coalition in building up
capacities to provide practical help on the ground and
to train people for a future pluralistic and democratic
Syria. The litmus test is whether we succeed in making
the situation better for all Syrian people, ensuring that
the rights of all minority groups are protected. Thus,
whether they are men or women, Alawite, Druze,
Kurd, Sunni, Shia or Christian, all Syrians should be
guaranteed a role in shaping the future of Syria.

We are facing a humanitarian crisis of colossal
proportions. The Syrian Government has shown a
flagrant disregard for the humanitarian consequences
of its indiscriminate warfare. The opposition groups
are also guilty of serious disrespect for fundamental
humanitarian principles regarding the protection of
humanitarian personnel and installations. We therefore
call on the Syrian Government and the opposition
groups to respect international humanitarian law
and fundamental human rights and desist from the
despicable practice of gender-based violence. Those
responsible for crimes against humanity and war crimes
must be held accountable.
Since March 2011, Norway has provided $75 million
in humanitarian assistance to Syrian refugees and to
those who are suffering inside Syria.

Let me now turn to the Middle East peace process.
On 19 March, Norway chaired the spring meeting of
the donor support groups for Palestine - the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee (AHLC) - held in Brussels. Twenty
years have passed since the AHLC was set up to build
the foundations for a Palestinian State and to develop
its institutions. To fully succeed, the State-building
exercise may need to be accompanied by meaningful
steps towards the two-State solution. If that vision is
lost, the willingness of donors to contribute will indeed
diminish.

The financial situation is serious. Palestinian
revenues are insufficient for a balanced budget, while
donor contributions have declined in recent years.
Last year, the Palestinian Authority's deficit reached
$1.4 billion, with donor contributions covering only
$826 million. At the meeting in Brussels, the donors
promised that they would continue to provide funds,
and contributions may reach $1 billion for 2013. That
could cover most of the Palestinian budget deficit this
year, but it will not resolve the long-term challenges.

More and more donors are questioning the
sustainability of the current approach. They are asking
whether we are not in fact financing a permanent
occupation, given that there are no substantial
improvements in those areas or signs of a rapid
resumption of negotiations. The recent resignation
of Prime Minister Fayyad reflects the increasing
frustration of the Palestinians. I salute my good friend
Mr. Fayyad for his steadfast work over many years on
building up a sustainable Palestinian economy and
laying a solid foundation for the establishment of a
Palestinian State.

The parties need to recommit themselves to
achieving a two-State solution. The Israeli occupation
and Israeli settlement activities remain the main
problem and must stop. Rocket attacks against
Israel from Gaza must also stop. Donors need to see
meaningful progress before the next AHLC meeting in
September, which should be convened at the political
level. We need to address the tough questions regarding
the continued relevance of our efforts and strategies as
donors. I appeal to the donors to continue to provide
funding for the Palestinian Authority during this
difficult transition.

