Mrs. Albright (United States of America): I, along
with my colleagues, would like to congratulate you, Mr.
President, on a remarkable month, which was indeed calm.
You did an exemplary job. I should also like to offer my
personal congratulations on your retirement and your
brilliant career. We will miss you and we wish you
Godspeed.

Today the Council faces once again the tragic situation
in Liberia. My Government supports today's resolution
extending the mandate of the United Nations Observer
Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL) despite our deep
disappointment over the progress of that Mission. My
Government, along with many others, has laboured hard
to bring about peace in that country. The United States
has contributed the bulk of the money in the special Trust
Fund for Liberia - over $20 million. We have appointed
a Special Envoy to assist with the Liberian peace process.
Sadly, we have not had the cooperation of the Liberian
parties, which remain engaged in a brutal struggle for
power that no faction can win.

Despite the diplomatic efforts by Ghanaian President
Rawlings to bring the Liberian factions together, there is
no accepted political settlement. Despite the commendable
efforts of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOMOG) forces to provide security, the fighting
continues.

The international community sent UNOMIL to
monitor a cease-fire. But the fighting did not cease.
Instead, UNOMIL troops have been abused and
humiliated by the warlords whose country and people
they came to assist. Humanitarian relief workers also
came to help. But the ravages against innocent civilians
did not stop. Instead, relief workers have been harassed
and treated with inhumanity.

The political future of Liberia depends on the
willingness of the Liberian factions to compromise. We
have been patient. We have extended UN OMIL for over
a year now, each time with sterner warnings to the
Liberian factions. But patience must have a purpose. In
April we pinned our hopes on the regional summit,
providing the Liberians with a series of recommended
steps to show their dedication to the cause of peace. But
again we have been disappointed. Not one of those steps
has been carried out.

The Council agrees today to one more extension of
UNOMIL, at the urging of the States in the region that
see a faint glimmer of hope. But the Liberians must
understand that words will no longer be enough to
convince us that they want peace: there must be actions.
Unless by 15 September there is a real cease-fire, the
installation and assumption of real authority by a new
Council of State, a serious commitment by all the factions
to disarmament and disengagement and a specific
schedule for the rest of the peace process, UNOMIL will
end.

The members of this Council and the Members of
the United Nations still have hope for Liberia. This final
extension of the mandate of UNOMIL is an expression of
our hope. But it is a hope that can be fulfilled only if

 

those who are prolonging the conflict recognize that there
is no real future for them or their country in the absence of
a commitment to peace.

