Mr. Hoshino (Japan): At the outset, I would
like to thank the briefers for their passion and
important insights.

Cultural heritage represents the history and identity
of a nation or State. At the same time, it embodies the
values of our common humanity. Yet, as demonstrated
in Afghanistan, Syria, Iraq, Libya, Mali and many
other places in the world, we are facing a cruel reality
in which cultural heritage is targeted for destruction,
looting and smuggling by terrorist groups as a tactic of
war. Japan strongly condemns such heinous acts.

For that reason, protecting cultural heritage is
more than just a cultural issue. It is an issue of peace
and security. We must not neglect the cultural aspect
when talking about peace and security. Japan therefore
commends the Italian presidency for bringing this
important topic to the Security Council again.

Japan has long attached special emphasis to
international cooperation for the protection of
cultural heritage, as demonstrated by our public,
private and academic partnership to restore Angkor
Wat in Cambodia and to safeguard the Bamiyan site
in Afghanistan, among other projects. Through those
efforts, we have come to realize that protecting cultural
heritage is a form ofpeacebuilding ofhearts and minds.
It undoubtedly contributes to the reconstruction and
sustaining of peace in a nation or State. Based on our
own experiences, I would like to present several insights
that Japan wants to share with the Council's members.

First, Japan reaffirms its full commitment to
promoting the deepening, universalization and
implemention of international norms. In that regard,
Japan welcomes the adoption of resolution 2347 (2017),
as it is a significant step forward in the normative
aspect. Japan is resolved to steadily implement the
obligations that derive from the resolution. Japan is a
State party to the 1954 Convention for the Protection
of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict,
the 1970 Convention on the Means of Prohibiting and
Preventing the Illicit Import, Export and Transfer of
Ownership of Cultural Property, the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,
and other related conventions. Under those legal
frameworks, various domestic measures have been
introduced. I would like to encourage other States that
are not yet parties to those conventions to join us in
our efforts.

Secondly, we need to put into practice a global
criminal justice response that focuses on holding
perpetrators accountable. Coordination among
the United Nations system and other international
organizations, such as the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime and INTERPOL, to assist Member
States is critical to accomplishing that objective. In
that respect, Japan has carefully followed the judicial
case of Mali, in which the International Criminal
Court sentenced an individual responsible for attacking
religious buildings in Timbuktu to nine years in prison
and issued reparation orders. That is the firstjudgment
to clearly demonstrate that the destruction of cultural
heritage amounts to a war crime, and perpetrators
should be held accountable.

Thirdly, safeguarding cultural heritage through
capacity-building should be encouraged. The
Government of Japan established the UNESCO
Japanese Funds-in-Trust for the Preservation of the
World Cultural Heritage in 1989, in response to the
Government's decision to set cultural contributions as
one of its priority areas for international cooperation.
We have so far contributed approximately $68 million
to the fund for 44 projects in 61 countries.

Lastly, I would like to underline the importance of
enhancing partnerships, as we need a comprehensive
and multifaceted response in terms ofprotecting cultural
heritage. Information-sharing and coordination among
a broad range of stakeholders, such as the tourism
sector, museums and dealers, are critically important.

To conclude, I would like to state that enhancing
respect for other cultures is a fundamental starting
point for the success of our collective actions. Japan is
fully committed to engaging and cooperating with the
United Nations and Member States to protect cultural
heritage and thwart atrocities committed by terrorists
and violent extremists, focusing on the four points I
have just stated.

