The President: In a moment I shall give the Special
Envoy a chance to come back on any of the comments
or questions raised. The representative of Lithuania
raised two questions - one on how the Special Envoy
would assess progress in countering terrorism and
violent extremism; the other was how her Office has
been strengthened in this period.

I shall first make a brief statement in my national
capacity.

I want in particular to reiterate the United Kingdom's
full support for the United Nations multidimensional
approach and its partnership with the African Union,
the Economic Community of West African States
and other regional organizations. This really is about
prevention, security and development, and it really
matters. As others have pointed out, Friday's terrorist
attack in Bamako sadly illustrates the security threats
still facing Mali and the Sahel region. We strongly
condemn, as others have done, this act of barbarity, and
we still in solidarity with the Malian authorities and the
families of those killed and injured. Now is the moment
for countries of the region and their international
partners to redouble their efforts to tackle the terrorist
scourge and ensure security for their people.

Elsewhere in the region, Boko Haram continues
to threaten populations in north-eastern Nigeria and
the wider Lake Chad Basin. Their terror is not only
targeting innocent people but is also forcing millions out
of their homes, triggering a humanitarian crisis. This is
only further worsening the overall food insecurity in
the Lake Chad Basin region.

However, we cannot let these terrible acts cloud our
perspective. In Mali, where security has such an impact
on the whole of the region, we have seen progress in
recent months. The fighting among armed groups
in the summer has receded, and it has been replaced
by a willingness to find a political solution to Mali's
problems. We congratulate the Malian Government
and other parties to the peace agreement for the
commitment that they have shown. However, progress
is fragile. We urge all parties to redouble their efforts.
They owe it to all of the people of Mali, who deserve
peace and security.

This year we have also seen progress in the region's
ability, together with its neighbours, to confront those
threats. In September, the coup in Burkina Faso was
successfully dissolved, as a result of regionally led
efforts. We expect that elections will soon mark the end
of the transition back to democracy. That is a notable
success.

We cannot lose sight of the challenges ahead.
As the Special Envoy has mentioned, the Sahel is
interconnected, and the challenges facing one country
also affect its neighbours. Many are also transitional
in nature. The report rightly highlights food security,
organized crime and a demographic explosion, all of
which put pressure on one of the poorest regions of the
world. In that context, we will study very carefully the
recommendations that she has just made to us.

Against that backdrop, the three pillars of the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel - governance,
security and resilience - remain the right way of
bringing sustainable peace and development to the
region. I am pleased that the range of projects that
have been launched and delivered under those three
core themes have been noted in the report. We look
forward to progress being made, in particular on human
rights, including the rights of women, on organized
crime, on terrorism - as the Special Envoy has just
highlighted - and on finding upstream solutions,
including on food security. We also look forward to the
outcome and strategic review.

Finally, I want to thank Special Envoy Sellassie
and her team. Together, they have made an important
contribution to delivering the Integrated Strategy over
the past year. I wish her every success as she takes that
work forward in 2016.

I new resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to Special Envoy Sellassie to address
any of the comments we have heard and, in particular,
the two questions that were raised.

