Mrs. Holguin (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to begin by congratulating you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council,
as well as by thanking you for organizing, and
presiding over, this debate. I would also like to thank
Mr. Jan Egeland, Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, for his briefing on the issue of
the protection of civilians in armed conflict.

With regard to that subject, which is of particular
importance, States with solid democratic institutions
have an opportunity and responsibility to work to
ensure progress and development for their citizens in a
safe and violence-free environment. It is incumbent
upon Governments to carry out that task; the
international community has an important role to play
in providing support and cooperation through specific
programmes that contribute to the strengthening of
national initiatives.

The protection of civilians in armed conflict
should be governed by international law and be
respectful of its guiding principles. It is essential that
the humanitarian issue not be confused with the
political component, as that would put an end to the
transparency and objectivity that should govern
humanitarian affairs. In that regard, the trend to include
humanitarian assistance in the political and military
missions of the United Nations jeopardizes the
fundamental principles of the Organization.

Building trust among civilian populations and
working with authorities requires joint coordination
and concerted action between States and humanitarian
organizations. We believe that the example provided by
the International Committee of the Red Cross should
be the rule, and not the exception, in any humanitarian
situation.

The tendency in the civilian protection system
has been to focus on displaced populations. It is in that
context that we would like to express some of our
views.

The worldwide problem of illicit drugs gives rise
to many ills in Colombia, including displacement.
Colombia's population is the victim of organized
transnational crime, as arable land is illegally seized
for the purposes of drug trafficking by illegal armed
groups linked to that scourge. Such illegal seizures
violently expel people from their land, thereby causing
displacement. The results of the war on drug
trafficking during President Uribe's Administration
have had a direct beneficial impact on the civilian
population. Civilians are safer on their land with each
passing day, and they are increasingly returning
voluntarily to those lands.

Drug trafficking - a multi-million-dollar
business - respects neither democratic institutions,
laws nor the rule of law. Neither does it respect
civilians. Drug trafficking generates violence and is a
threat to the stability and security of States.
Comprehensive cooperation is essential to overcome
this scourge, which is at the origin of many others. The
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime is working
closely with our Government and has had successes in
recent years. It understands the complexity of the
problem; that understanding accounts in part for the
success of the strategies and programmes undertaken
with national authorities. Colombia has the greatest
interest in restoring security for Colombians and
ensuring that all persons can live in their places of
origin without having to be displaced in order to escape
violence. My country is working steadfastly to meet
those goals and has achieved significant results in
recent years.

Since the current Government of President Uribe
Velez came to power, displacements resulting from the
activities of illegal armed groups have been
consistently and permanently reduced. On the basis of
annual tallying - and not on a cumulative basis, as the
phenomenon has been presented by certain non-
governmental organizations - of 420,000 displaced
persons in 2002, there were only 220,000 remaining in
2003 and 170,000 in 2004. We calculate that were will
be some 150,000 by the end of 2005, which does not
jibe with the 700 daily mentioned this morning by
Mr. Egeland. Unfortunately, we have not managed to
correlate the figures of the State with those of the
United Nations system, but in any case we need to
work more on finding a solution to the overall problem
than on adjusting figures.

Colombians are increasingly returning to their
homes thanks to the resolute action of the State to
provide security in all corners of the country and in
difficult conditions involving great logistical and
financial challenges. The official figure for registered
displacements is 1.5 million. This is a cumulative
figure covering the past 10 years, and not just recent
months. Colombia is working to ensure that there will
be not one displaced person in the future and is
effectively caring for the population. In that work, it
cooperates and maintains permanent open
communication with the United Nations system and the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA). Although we may disagree with OCHA on
certain approaches - and particularly on the question
of access - we believe that the State has paved the
way for trust and joint effort. This year, the
Government agreed to implement a humanitarian
proposal with the United Nations system, in which it is
hoped that the donor community will play an important
role in financing specific programmes and projects.
The Government is providing more than 80 per cent of
the scheme's budget. The concerted action will propose
long-term solutions for displaced communities, and we
are certain that it will yield positive results.

In this debate we have to consider not only the
numbers of displaced persons, but also the nature of
the State in which the populations in need of protection
are located, before devising general formulas
applicable to all situations. We have discussed the so-
called collapsed States, States incapable of caring for
their own populations, and States where, while the
needs of the people are met, for one reason or another
they have been displaced or are vulnerable due to
particular circumstances.

It is important to take into account the special
circumstances of each situation and the response of the
State to a specific problem. On the basis of such an
assessment, we need to develop support policies and
assistance that distinguish between cases and are
adapted to each. We need to focus on identifying and
defining the objective features of the State and its
capacity to choose the kind of cooperation assistance
required to protect its civilian population. In that
analysis, figures and considerations of political
preference must be relegated to a secondary level,
because, whatever the situation may be, the most
important thing - and what the United Nations
enables us to carry out most effectively - is an
assessment of national capacities and needs in order to
provide the ideal response guaranteeing the protection
of civilians.

Since we favour access to the people in order to
provide them with their needs, we refuse to recognize
the need to dialogue with illegal armed groups to
ensure humanitarian access. We do not believe that we
need to talk with such groups if we wish to undertake
effective humanitarian work. Similarly, every situation
is specific and different, and it is therefore not useful to
draw up formulas for general implementation. Not all
illegal armed groups can be approached in all parts of
the world. There is a need to reaffirm their association
with transnational crime, drug trafficking and
terrorism.

Since the issue of children in armed conflict has
been raised this morning, we believe that the United
Nations must focus on disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programmes for that sector in order
to enable such children to begin their lives anew.
Colombia is working with the United Nations
Children's Fund on relevant projects and on
strengthening national reintegration programmes.

In conclusion, I reaffirm my country's
commitment to international humanitarian law and the
protection of civilians affected by violence and
terrorism. We believe that there is a need to create a
legal framework for establishing the responsibility to
protect, and in that regard the United Nations could be
much more effective in the protection of civilians. We
believe that cooperation among the various actors is
essential to strengthening the policies and mechanisms
of national protection, to the benefit of civilians.

