Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I thank Mr. Le Roy for his extensive briefing. I
join previous speakers in thanking Chairman Mkapa
for his briefing and his colleagues for their efforts in
the Secretary-General's Panel on the Referenda in the
Sudan. I also thank Minister Siddiq and Mr. Amum for
their statements.

Only a few weeks remain until the deadline set
out by the leaders of the Sudan in the historic 2005
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) to hold a
referendum on the self-determination of Southern
Sudan. Earlier deadlines have been met thanks to the
cooperation of the parties to the CPA and the
outstanding efforts of international and regional
organizations, including the United Nations, the
African Union and the League of Arab States.

The completion of the voter registration process
has been a positive step, accompanied by other
processes that have taken place. That reflects the
Sudanese leadership's commitment to the people and to
the international community not to have any recourse
to violence, to respect the provisions of the CPA and to
respect the results of the referendum. Those
commitments have been reaffirmed on many occasions.

While paying tribute to those efforts and to the
sacrifices made by all parties, we appeal today more
than ever for a continuing commitment to those
processes, which have put an end to a decades-long
war that has had many victims and caused destruction
and disasters. We are all aware of the high price paid
by all. Let us hope that there is no return to war. We
call upon the international community to continue to
support the Sudan, to understand its needs and to
provide it with political and economic assistance.
There are many issues that need to be followed up,
including, of course, the status of Abyei, post-
referendum period issues, such as citizenship,
distribution of oil resources, water and the debt burden.

The referendum is not and should not be an end
in itself. Coexistence and cooperation between the
North and the South must continue in all
circumstances, whatever the outcome of the
referendum. It is our firm hope that the referendum
will take place fairly and peacefully, allowing people
to determine their own future.

We would like to take this opportunity to
commend the efforts of Qatar, which has been hosting
the peace talks on Darfur. It is our hope that all parties
will take part in those negotiations in order to achieve
a final settlement, which has been long awaited and
which we earnestly hope for.

As we approach the new year, we should
acknowledge the many electoral deadlines that States
in the region will be meeting. We understand the close
relationships among those deadlines and other
important dates, as well as the importance of
eliminating violence perpetrated by the Lord's
Resistance Army. We call for the implementation of
border security agreements reached between countries
of the region, such as that between the Sudan and
Chad, because they can only help stability in the
region.

We would also like to pay tribute to the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan and the African Union-
United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur. We
reassert the need to ensure that there is agreement by
all parties before there is an increase in the
international forces contingents. We wish to pay tribute
to the efforts of Mr. Mbeki, Mr. Mkapa, Mr. Gambari,
Mr. Bassole and other players and States in these
critical and fateful times that the Sudan is going
through.

