Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): Ithank the members
of the Security Council most sincerely for inviting me
to provide a briefing on strategic force generation for
United Nations peacekeeping operations.

Earlier this week, Bangladesh hosted a preparatory
meeting for the forthcoming Vancouver Defence
Ministerial Meeting in November, with a focus on the
innovative topic of smart pledges. The meeting was
an occasion to review the pledges previously made by
Member States to address the capability gaps faced by
United Nations peacekeeping missions, especially those
operating in certain difficult environments. I believe
my Canadian colleague will further elaborate on that.
Let me just say that the idea of smart pledges holds a lot
of promise, but will need further deliberations among
Member States to identify the right opportunities.
The challenges concerning force generation and
rapid deployment have remained under discussion for
quite some time. It was appositely brought to the forefront
in the 2015 report of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations (HIPPO) (see S/2015/446). The
Panel highlighted the struggle to get sufficient forces on
the ground quickly enough and the continued reliance
on underresourced uniformed capabilities with little
or no interoperability and weak command and control.
We would reiterate the importance of addressing
each aspect of those challenges. In our efforts to find
answers to force generation, we should not lose focus
on the related questions of adequate resources for
peacekeeping missions and effective command and
control structure within missions.

The high-level open debate organized by the
Ethiopian presidency last month (see S/PV.8051) and
resolution 2378 (2017), adopted by the Council on
the occasion, once again reaffirmed support for the
HIPPO observations and recommendations. The debate
furthermore stressed the importance of well-staffed
and well-equipped missions and the right skill sets in
order to respond to the increasingly robust complex
and multidimensional peacekeeping mandates. As
a leading troop- and police-contributing country,
Bangladesh has remained particularly engaged in those
ongoing discussions. It is encouraging to note that the
issue of force generation and rapid deployment has
been identified as one of the areas where substantive
progress has been made in terms of implementing the
HIPPO recommendations.

We have repeatedly made a case for discussing
issues concerning strategic force generation under
the purview of triangular consultations among the
Security Council, troop- and police-contributing
countries and the Secretariat. The establishment of the
Peacekeeping Capability Readiness System (PCRS),
which replaced the Standby Arrangements System, has
was aimed at instituting a comprehensive platform for
enhanced collaboration between Member States and
the Secretariat towards redeeming the pledges made by
Member States. On our part, we made efforts to readily
adapt to the new arrangement and were perhaps the
first Member State to have registered 13 contingents
and 50 observers and staff on the PCRS.

Just to illustrate, from our armed forces we
registered one infantry batallion, one engineering
company, one level 2 hospital, one signal company
and one transportation company. From our navy, we
registered one riverine unit, two maritime units, made
up of frigate and offshore patrol vessels, and one port
operations unit, among others. From our air force, we
provided one utility aviation unit, made up of three
Bell-212 helicopters, and, lastly, two formed police
units.

In addition, thus far, we have made a number
of additional informal pledges. We look forward to
announcing further pledges during the Vancouver
Defence Ministerial Meeting. We also signalled that we
would be in a position to deploy some of our contingents
at rapid deployment level in fewer than 60 days. We
have taken a principled approach to train our potential
peacekeepers on the protection of civilians and on
combating sexual exploitation and abuse, among a host
of priority issues.

We have taken due note of the establishment of the
Strategic Force Generation and Capability Planning
Cell within the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
(DPKO) and underscored, in the context of last year's
annual report (A/70/19) of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations, the need for enhanced prior
consultations with troop- and police-contributing
countries on such major initiatives. Our delegation has
developed a sound working relation with the Cell and
has so far worked in close partnership in facilitating
DPKO assessment missions to Bangladesh in order to
ascertain the deployment and training status of our
registered contingents.

The leaders' summit on peacekeeping in 2015,
which we had the privilege of co-hosting, was a
milestone in the area of strategic force generation. It
helped generate pledges by Member States for over
40,000 police and military personnel, as well as critical
enablers including helicopters, engineering, logistics
and transport units. The momentum was sustained
through the London Defence Ministerial Meeting last
year, and now the Vacouver Meeting, scheduled for
next month.

We would encourage all troop- and police-
contributing countries, including Council members, to
consult the updated current and emerging uniformed
capabilityrequirements forUnitedNationspeacekeeping
and tailor their further pledges accordingly. There are
critical mission-specific gaps in the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, the United Nations Mission in South Sudan and
the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
that need to be addressed in order to respond to the
challenging circumstances prevailing in the two former
and effectively manage the transition in the latter.
The realistic, sequenced and prioritized mandates
that we urge the Council to design and pursue in
response to evolving ground realities will be able to
deliver results only if the corresponding demands for
capabilities and resources are sufficiently met. It would
perhaps be advisable to review the current assessment
criteria, frequency and consistency for the PCRS in
order to make sure that the pledges registered indeed
remain deployable at any given point in time.

The mandated scope of the PCRS may
disproportionately affect potential troop- and
police-contributing countries with limited or niche
capabilities. It also merits further consideration if the
current reimbursement arrangements for contingents
and capabilities at rapid deployment level are viable
in the medium to long term. It will be important for
Council members to gain first-hand ideas about the
prevailing gaps and challenges on the ground during
their field missions.

The question of enhanced participation by
female peacekeepers is integral to strategic force
generation. The United Nations aims to increase female
participation by 15 per cent by the end of 2017 - an
initiative we support in principle - but, as we discern
in our national context, that is far easier said than
done. Bangladesh has made sustained contributions
in the form of all-female formed police units in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Haiti.

However, despite a strong push from our political
leadership, we have not been able to reach our target
with individual staff officers and observers. Our armed
forces and police remain seized with this issue, not
least due to our traditional commitment to the women
and peace and security agenda. We look forward to
further discussions on that issue during the Council
open debate scheduled for later this month.

The issue of language skills for peacekeepers was
discussed at the Paris Defence Ministerial Meeting
with a focus on francophone theatres. As a co-host
of the Meeting, Bangladesh made renewed pledges to
developing the language skills of our troops and police
in particular. This is perhaps an area where smart
pledges, including the in the form of South-South
cooperation, could come into play with tangible results.

To conclude, I would like to assure the
Council of sustained commitments by troop- and
police-contributing countries to mobilize our strength
and capabilities to deliver on the mandates given for
peacekeeping missions. In turn, we would expect the
Council to remain sensitized and responsive to our
suggestions and concerns and ensure that the mandates
given are matched with adequate resources and support
by all concerned in order to pave the way for our
collective success.

