I would like to thank Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy of the Secretary- General for Yemen; Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator; Mr. David Muldrow Beasley, Executive Director of the United Nations World Food Programme; and Mr. Omer Badokhon, Founder and Executive Director of Solutions for Sustainable Society, for their valuable briefings. I welcome the Permanent Representative of Yemen to this meeting. It has been two months since Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and Under- Secretary-General Mark Lowcock briefed the Security Council about the deteriorating situation in Yemen (see S/PV.8757). Until now, we have not seen any significant improvements. Fighting has escalated across more than 40 front lines, causing a high number of casualties, including women and children. We are extremely concerned about the threats of a famine facing the Yemeni people. The briefings today, as well as the recent reports of the World Food Programme and other United Nations agencies, have shown us an extremely gloomy picture. The humanitarian situation is expected to get worse if the World Food Programme and other United Nations agencies do not receive adequate funding from pledged donors. In fact, the United Nations aid programmes in Yemen have been scaled back in the past several months. Moreover, the second wave of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic is believed to add another layer of complexity to the conflict and the dire humanitarian situation in Yemen. It would aggravate the living conditions of the Yemeni people and undermine the humanitarian efforts. The inaccessibility of the FSO SAFER oil tanker remains our continued concern. The United Nations technical team has been unable to do its job on the tanker without written approval. Time is not on our side. We need to prevent environmental and humanitarian catastrophes for Yemen and the Gulf region. The United Nations expert team must be allowed to carry out its urgent assessment and repair work on the tanker. Against that backdrop, I would like to make the following points. First, it is extremely urgent for all parties concerned to heed the ceasefire call of the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy, cease hostilities immediately and resume negotiations so that the joint declaration towards the nationwide ceasefire can be reached. That will lay a crucial foundation for achieving the United Nations peace proposal for Yemen. Secondly, we reiterate our call on international donors to fulfil their financial commitments so that the humanitarian work in Yemen can be implemented without disruption. We see the urgency of the appeal by the United Nations for more than $50 million to scale up nutrition programmes. The children in Yemen deserve to receive basic services, like other children in the world. We must act to protect Yemeni children and prevent another crisis for Yemen's future generations. We also call on the parties concerned to fully cooperate with United Nations agencies by providing protection and favourable conditions for humanitarian workers to carry out their work in parts of Yemen. Famine cannot be averted if we do not act enough now. Thirdly, we stress the need for the parties in Yemen and the United Nations agencies, especially the World Health Organization, to spare no effort in containing the spread of the second wave of the COVID-19 pandemic. It is essential for the parties to ensure access and the unhindered passage of humanitarian and medical supplies to those in dire need in Yemen. We also join other members in calling on all parties to uphold their obligations under international humanitarian law with respect to the protection of civilians, especially women and children, and civilian objects. Last but not least, we would like to emphasize that the parties concerned should uphold and fully implement the Stockholm Agreement and the Riyadh Agreement with United Nations mediation. The meaningful participation of women in the political process should also be ensured and further promoted. We reiterate our support for the work of Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and his team in Yemen.
