Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I thank Under-Secretaries-
General Alan Le Roy and Valerie Amos for their
comprehensive briefings today.

One year after the earthquake and its devastating
toll, compounded by the tragic loss of lives to the
cholera epidemic, the situation in Haiti continues to be
extremely difficult. We are closely following the latest
developments in Haiti, in particular those related to the
political process and the humanitarian situation.

The current political crisis demands a solution
that is both legally sound and politically viable, the
ultimate goal being the consolidation of democracy,
stability and institutions in Haiti. To this end, it is
crucial that the electoral process be allowed to run its
course in a transparent and effective manner, with full
respect for the pertinent legislation.

Equally important, it is up to Haiti itself and its
leaders to ensure that the will of the people expressed
in the polls is fully respected. It is also incumbent on
them to help maintain calm, including by refraining
from all acts of provocation or violence, regardless of
political developments. It is the collective
responsibility of all Haitian political actors to preserve
the stability achieved in recent years.

The international community has supported Haiti
in all these areas and, Brazil believes, is ready to
continue to do so. In this regard, we commend the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH), the Organization of American States
(OAS) and bilateral and multilateral partners for their
invaluable contribution, especially at the current stage
of the electoral process. The OAS has been particularly
active in its efforts to assist the Haitians throughout the
electoral process and, at this moment, with the
verification stage. We are confident that the report
prepared by its verification mission, which has now
been officially submitted to the Provisional Electoral
Council, will prove useful in its deliberations regarding
the future of the electoral process.

The role of MINUSTAH will also remain critical.
We commend the Mission's support for the electoral
process and its continued engagement with the
authorities, particularly the Haitian National Police, to
ensure a stable environment in the difficult
circumstances that followed the announcement of the
preliminary results of the first round. We are confident
that the Mission will continue to play its part.

Electing a new President and installing a new
Parliament are important, not only to democracy in
Haiti, but also to the reconstruction of the country.
Recovery is under way, and we commend partners,
donors and the Interim Haiti Recovery Commission for
their commitment to achieving concrete results sooner
rather than later.

More is needed, however. Disbursements
continue to be insufficient and adequate funding for
critical activities, such as cash-for-work programmes,
is lacking. Partners will have to step up their support if
we are to achieve the Commission's strategic targets in
key areas in 2011. Humanitarian assistance also
remains a priority while efforts continue to effectively
address the political crisis.

Regarding the cholera epidemic, Brazil has
contributed $2 million to the Pan American Health
Organization to enable the procurement of medical
supplies and equipment. We have also shipped nearly
2.5 tons of medical and non-medical supplies and sent
medical teams to help provide treatment to people
affected by cholera and training to local staff. We
welcome the Secretary-General's decision to set up an
independent panel of experts to look into the cholera
outbreak in Haiti. Transparency in all contexts is key to
the ability of the United Nations to address security
and humanitarian concerns.

We are pleased to note the significant decrease in
the population living in camps. That is a positive fact,
but one that renders cooperation with Haitian
authorities even more urgent in order to overcome
existing obstacles to the safe and dignified return of
internally displaced persons. It is crucial that the needs
of the displaced and the returnees with regard to food,
water, sanitation, housing, protection and health be
met.

In all these areas - elections, recovery, security
and humanitarian assistance - the importance of
national ownership can hardly be overemphasized.
Haiti's future prosperity and peace depend on the
strengthening of the national State and national
institutions. In all our collective and individual efforts,
this imperative must guide our action.

