Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): Once again, the
Security Council is meeting to discuss an emergency
situation created by the unilateral declaration of
independence by the province of Kosovo from the
Republic of Serbia. I thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his report on the situation. I also thank
His Excellency Mr. Boris Tadie, President of the
Republic of Serbia, for his statement.

As a State Member of the United Nations and a
member of the Security Council, Viet Nam has been
consistent in its position that any solution to the issue
of Kosovo, including the issue of its future status, must
be based on the fundamental principles of international
law, the United Nations Charter and the provisions of
resolution 1244 (1999), adopted by the Council with
the consent of the parties concerned. All fundamental
principles of international law and of the Charter are
important because they are fundamental. Among the
most important of those principles is that of respect for
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of States.

It should be recalled that resolution 1244 (1999),
while providing for a future status for Kosovo to be
negotiated and agreed upon by the parties concerned,
reaffirmed the commitment of United Nations Member
States to the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia - of which the
Republic of Serbia is now the successor State - and of
the other States in the region.

Proceeding from that position, Viet Nam has
persistently urged the parties concerned to engage,
with the support of the international community, the
United Nations and, until recently, the Troika
comprising the United States, Russia and the European
Union, in good-faith dialogue and peaceful
negotiations to resolve their differences and arrive at a
durable comprehensive solution conforming to the
fundamental principles of international law, the United
Nations Charter and the provisions of Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999), in the interests of peace and
stability not only in Kosovo, but also in the rest of the
Balkans, in Europe and throughout the world.

In the context of the earnest appeals by the
international community and many United Nations
Member States, including many members of the
Security Council, for continued efforts to reach a
negotiated settlement, Kosovo's unilateral declaration
of independence was not in conformity with resolution
1244 (1999) and will only add to the tension in Kosovo
and the Balkans and deepen division in Europe. By
creating a dangerous precedent, this development has
negative implications for international peace and
security. The prompt reactions in the Balkans, in the
very heart of Europe and in the rest of the world attest
to those worries.

Viet Nam will continue to follow the situation
closely. We call upon the parties concerned to act
responsibly, to exercise restraint, to refrain from acts of
violence and to undertake measures to protect civilians
and United Nations personnel carrying out their duties
on the ground. We urge the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo to provide such
protection in the implementation of its mandate.

