Mr. Mogae: At the outset, I should like to thank
you, President Umarov, for your kind invitation to brief
to the Security Council today.

Just before Christmas, six months of hard work
came to fruition with the successful convening of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
High-level Revitalization Forum in Addis Ababa, where
14 South Sudanese parties and other key stakeholders
came together to confront the challenges facing
South Sudan after 18 months of devastating chaos.
The first phase of the Forum dealt with the cessation
of hostilities and, like the Council, I am pleased that
the comprehensive Agreement on the Cessation of
Hostilities, Protection of Civilians and Humanitarian
Access was signed by all parties on 21 December
2017. According to the Ceasefire and Transitional
Security Arrangement Monitoring Mechanism, the new
cessation of hostilities agreement has had a generally
positive effect on reducing the overall level of violence
in the country. However, I am disappointed to note
that, within a few weeks of its signing, the Agreement
has now been violated by no fewer than three of the
signatory parties.

Since 24 December 2017, when the Agreement
came into effect, fighting and troop movements have
been reported in Unity, Jonglei, Upper Nile and Central
Equatoria states, causing further displacement and
disturbance of civilians. The Ceasefire and Transitional
Security Arrangements Monitoring Mechanism quickly

published reports on two outbreaks of violence, in Koch
and Mundri, apportioning blame to the Sudan People's
Liberation Army in Opposition and Sudan People's
Liberation Army in Government, respectively. The
Chair of the Mechanism has advised me that a number
of other incidents and alleged violations are currently
under investigation, and I hope to receive further
reports very soon. I condemn those acts of violence and
call upon all signatories to the cessation of hostilities
agreement to disseminate the terms of the Agreement
to their subordinate commanders and ensure immediate
and consistent compliance.

Within the past week, I have had cause to
publicly demand full support for the Ceasefire and
Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring
Mechanism. Statements have been made in the media
by the Transitional Government of National Unity that
have the potential to undermine public confidence in
regional and international peacekeeping efforts. The
Mechanism's teams are direct representatives of IGAD
and the wider international community for the purpose
of verification on ceasefire compliance in South Sudan.
As such, they deserve full respect and total cooperation.
Such denigration of international peacekeeping
missions, including the Regional Protection Force,
is unacceptable. I call upon the Security Council to
reiterate its support for the Mechanism.

As I speak now, the Ceasefire and Transitional
Security Arrangements Monitoring Mechanism
is leading a workshop in Addis Ababa with all its
signatories, which seeks to put in place the practical
mechanisms and cooperation required to deliver
and enforce that cessation of hostilities agreement. I
commend the Mechanism for taking the lead on that, and
all the signatories for their participation. I furthermore
urge the parties to cooperate fully under the terms of
the Agreement so as to ensure unhindered access to the
monitoring and verification teams in the field.

As we begin a new year, it remains my belief that
the IGAD-led revitalization process provides us all with
the most effective platform upon which to confront and
resolve the severe security, governance, economic and
humanitarian crises that continue to overwhelm South
Sudan. I wish to commend the IGAD Special Envoy,
Ambassador Ismail Wais, for his tenacity in leading
that process.
The High-level Revitalization Forum will convene
again in two week's time and continue its systematic
review and invigoration of the Peace Agreement. It is
beholden upon us all to keep our faith in that process
and support it with all the resources at our disposal. The
single most important contribution that can be made by
the regional and international community is to speak
with one voice. Only if we stand together, unified in our
approach, will we help the South Sudanese leaders find
and sustain the spirit of compromise and engagement
that will deliver peace and stability.

In four days' time in Addis Ababa, His Excellency
Mr. Hailemariam Desalegn, Prime Minister of Ethiopia
and Chairperson of IGAD, will host another consultative
meeting with the United Nations, the African Union
and the Heads of State and Government of IGAD.
The resolute unity and determination of those three
institutions will be necessary to bring about positive
and sustainable change in South Sudan.

The speed and alacrity with which some parties
and individuals violated the cessation of hostilities
agreement leads me to raise, once again, the key issue
of enforcement. For the revitalization process to be
successful and have the value and meaning that we would
all wish it to have, there must be a clear understanding
among all South Sudanese leaders of the consequences
of non-compliance and of the determination of the world
to ensure that the agreements they sign are complied
with. We cannot stand by as South Sudanese leaders
sign an agreement one day and then authorize, or allow,
its violation with impunity the next. We must address,
with one voice, the issue of non-compliance and make
clear the consequences to be faced by those who
wilfully violate, spoil or derail the Peace Agreement in
South Sudan.

As set forth by articles 14.2 and 14.3 of the current
cessation of hostilities agreement, facilitated by IGAD,
the Chairperson of the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission shall report any serious breaches to the
Transitional Government of National Unity in the
Republic of South Sudan, IGAD, the African Union
Peace and Security Council and the United Nations
Security Council for their action. The actions referred
to may include the measures decided by the twenty-
eighth Extraordinary Summit of IGAD Heads of State
and Government issued on 7 December 2014, namely,
the enactment of asset freezes, the enactment of regional
travel bans and the denial of the supply of arms and
ammunition and any other material that could be used
in war. It is now time to revisit the range of practical
measures that can be applied in earnest to those who
refuse to take those processes seriously and to make it
clear to all concerned that the world will not tolerate
any further disruption to our efforts to deliver peace.

Over the coming weeks, IGAD will continue along
its path to revitalize the Peace Agreement. Along
with the members of the Council, I wish to take this
opportunity to reaffirm my total commitment to that
process. Together, with one voice, we can challenge
those who peddle violence and self-interest. We urge
the Transitional Government of National Unity and all
parties to continue to engage in that inclusive, political
process. As I said earlier, the IGAD Revitalization
Forum is the best opportunity to restore peace and
rebuild governance in South Sudan, and the process
must not be delayed.

