Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): What will the Russian-speaking Ukrainians
have to deal with once the new law comes into force?
Let me say it straight out, they will be dealing with
the forced total Ukrainization of social life. In a short
time they will be able to use Russian only in private
conversations and religious rites. A commissioner in
charge of protecting the State language, with a broad
range of controlling functions, will monitor compliance
with the law. He will be permitted to interfere in the
activity of social organizations and political parties by
requiring internal efforts to comply with the established
rules. There will be a draconian system for enforcing
measures through stiffadministrative fines for breaking
the law. Concern about a nation's primary language is a
responsibility of the Government of any country, but let
us call a spade a spade. What is happening before our
eyes in Ukraine is a language inquisition.

Council members may consider that normal, but
that situation does not work for Russian-speaking
Ukrainians. It is putting a time-bomb under all the
efforts to restore stability and social unity in our
neighbouring State, for which the new President of
Ukraine has appealed many times. We believe it is
essential to bring what is going on in Ukraine to the
attention of our colleagues on the Council, which is,
essentially, a guarantor of the Minsk agreements and
responsible for ensuring compliance with its measures
by all parties. That is because what is involved is a
measure that directly contradicts paragraph 11 of the
package of measures for the fulfilment of the Minsk
agreements and the right of the inhabitants of various
districts of the Donetsk and Luhansk areas to linguistic
self-determination. No more than a month ago everyone
in this Chamber was criticizing the decision by Russia's
President to introduce a simplified procedure for
granting Russian citizenship to the residents of these
regions (see S/PV.8516), despite the fact that it does not
damage the Minsk agreements in any way. And today
we are dealing with a direct attack on those agreements,
not a speculative one.

Furthermore, the new law also signals an end to
Kyiv's fulfilment of other obligations under the package
of measures, such as paragraph 8, on assistance for
the economic and social development of the eastern
regions, and paragraph 5, on banning the persecution
and punishment of individuals in relation to events in
Donbas. But the law is also an open violation okaraine's
own Constitution, in particular part 2 of article 10,
which states that Ukraine guarantees the freedom to
develop, use and protect Russian and other languages
of Ukrainian national minorities. Article 11 establishes
that the Government will assist in the development of
the ethnic, cultural, linguistic and religious identity of
the native peoples and national minorities of Ukraine.
According to article 22, any enactments of laws or
changes in existing legislation should not reduce the
content or scope of rights and freedoms. Article 24
states that citizens have equal constitutional rights
and freedoms and are equal before the law, including
linguistically. In addition, the new law is a violation
of article 6 of Ukraine's law on national minorities,
which enables them to receive schooling in their native
language in State educational institutions. I should also
point out that the Ukrainian law was not submitted for
evaluation by the Venice Commission and does not
meet basic European standards.

It would be interesting to take advantage of this
occasion to ask our Belgian colleagues how they would
react if for some reason Brussels suddenly decided to
ban French or Flemish in their country, and how people
would react to that in Paris or The Hague. And how
would our German colleagues react if German were
suddenly outlawed in Switzerland? Imagine if Swedish
were banned in Finland, where about 10 per cent of the
population speaks Swedish. I am giving these absurd
examples so that the Council can fully understand the
level of disappointment and concern that the Russian-
speaking people of Ukraine are feeling now. The
enactment of this law is an obstacle to attaining peace
and social comity in Ukraine, leading to excessive
polarization of its peoples, not to mention the fact that for
a country that has declared its aspiration to the highest
European standards, such steps are unacceptable.

Againstthatbackdrop, it is evenmore understandable
why the Crimeans made a historic choice to rejoin
Russia and thereby preserve the possibility of using
the Russian language, which is the mother tongue of an
overwhelming majority of the peninsula's inhabitants.
Incidentally, Ukrainian and Crimean Tatar are also
State languages in Crimea, and the representatives of
those communities, however few their numbers, have
no problems preserving their identity.

I propose that we undertake a frank, impartial and
fair assessment of the Ukrainian law and the linguistic
inquisition it provides for with the aim of prevent
any further deterioration in the social and political
situation in Ukraine, which is creating a real risk of
civil confrontation throughout the country, not just in
the east.
Lastly, in spite of the fact that we did not have a
full discussion of this issue in the Council today, we
are not disappointed. In their attempt not to allow a
discussion, the members have once again demonstrated
their hypocrisy with regard to discussing Ukraine in
the Council, a subject they have often convened us
for. They felt that their Ukrainian protege's would find
the subject of today's meeting would be unpleasant,
and the result clearly highlighted the true goals of the
outgoing Ukrainian Government, which are to sow
enmity between Russians and Ukrainians and drive
two brother peoples even further apart. They have
thereby once again confirmed before the whole world
that they have no interest in Ukraine and Ukrainians.
They are concerned only about their geopolitical aims
and their ability to inflict even more pain on Russia. I
thank them from the bottom of my heart for such a clear
demonstration of double standards.

