Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank you, Mr. President, for having convened
this morning's important meeting. We welcome the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, and thank her for her statement
and her briefing.

Within the complex transition process which
Libya is now undergoing, we welcome the progress
made by the Office of the Prosecutor of the ICC in the
cases against Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah
Al-Senussi. We trust that as the transition process
continues, a greater institutionality will take hold
that will allow Libya to build a State that guarantees
human rights, the rule of law and an end to impunity.
We therefore believe that it is of great importance for
Libya to continue to cooperate with the International
Criminal Court and the Office of the Prosecutor. It is
vital for those bodies to enjoy the support and necessary
assistance of all States, including those that are not yet
parties to the Rome Statute.

Guatemala believes that the Libyan authorities
have the obligation to respect the work of the Court and
the Office of the Prosecutor. To that end, they must be
able to work without impediment or restriction of any
kind. We hope that the security situation in Libya will
improve and that the new Government will be able to
provide the necessary support to all staff of the Court
so that they can conduct investigations appropriately. In
that respect, we wish to acknowledge the efforts made
to designate a focal point for contact with the ICC, and
the discussions aimed at improving cooperation and
coordination between the Government and the Office
of the Prosecutor.

We appreciate the work done until now by the
Office of the Prosecutor, and we see the involvement
and interest of the Libyan authorities in the process as
positive signs. We await with interest the decisions of
the Court on both challenges made by the Government
of Libya to the admissibility of the cases against
Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi.
We believe that the situation will help determine the
impartiality, independence and ability of the Libya
judicial system to function. As a result, it will also
help strengthen the judiciary, which is essential to
developing the rule of law. Whatever the decision of
the ICC on the admissibility of the two cases may
be, we believe that the Office of the Prosecutor must
closely follow and remain involved in the progress and
decisions made in both cases. In particular, we believe
that all the necessary steps must be taken to preserve
evidence and protect witnesses while the decision is
taken on the challenges to those cases.

Furthermore, with respect to cooperation pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011), Libya is obligated to cooperate
with the Court and the Office of the Prosecutor. We
note that many of the requests for assistance made in
connection with the situation in Libya have not yet
been responded to satisfactorily. We therefore believe
that the possibilities of cooperation between the
Council and the International Criminal Court have not
yet been exhausted, not only when it comes to Libya,
but also when it comes to other interested States and
organizations.

Guatemala believes that the Security Council must
continue to monitor the events and situations referred
to the Court, as well as the obstacles that the Court may
encounter in the conduct of its work. As to other crimes
committed in Libya, we believe that it is extremely
important to investigate them and we call on the Office
of the Prosecutor to pursue its important work. We
reaffirm our call for all possible violations of human
rights and crimes against humanity that may have been
committed in Libya to be investigated, no matter who the
perpetrator might be. In that context, we are especially
concerned about gender-based crimes that took place
during the conflict. We hope that investigations of such
crimes will help bring justice to the victims of those
crimes. We likewise call for potential ethnic crimes
and those committed in detention centres outside State
control to be investigated.

Lastly, we wish to reiterate our support for
and commitment to the Court and the Office of the
Prosecutor, and we hope that they will continue to do
their good work in Libya.

