Mr. Cunningham (United States of America): It
is especially good to see the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Adeniji, and Lieutenant-
General Opande here, and to do so in a context where,
as others have said, there is real reason to be
encouraged. It is also good to see that the Secretariat,
as set out in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2001/627) and in Mr. Adeniji's very good briefing,
is embarking on strategic planning for the way ahead: a
plan to extend the authority of the Government of
Sierra Leone throughout the national territory;
conducting free and fair elections; and restoring to the
people of Sierra Leone the mineral wealth to which
they are entitled. Those are all certainly critical to
consolidating peace.

Others have recalled that it was only a year ago
that United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL) was almost driven out of Sierra Leone
and that the Government was almost driven from
power by Liberian-backed rebels, and that it was less
than a year ago that the departure of some contingents
generated concern that UNAMSIL could never be
staffed and indeed that it might collapse entirely.
Today, UNAMSIL has recovered. It is achieving the
results that the Council wants.

One year ago, the people of Sierra Leone looked
helpless in the face of one of the world's most violent
insurgencies, but today they can look to the future with
at least a degree of cautious optimism, as the Secretary-
General's report said.

That is a genuine success: a success for the
Council, for the United Nations, for the leaders of
UNAMSIL and for the troop contributors.

As UNAMSIL reaches its authorized ceiling, it is
important that the United Nations continue to expand
its area of operation, and that the Government of Sierra
Leone come in behind UNAMSIL with credible
restoration of State authority, coupled with increased
international humanitarian and human rights activity.

As the author of the resolution envisaging the
Special Court, resolution 1315 (2000), I want to say a
special word about that, because it was not mentioned
very prominently in the briefing, although others have
referred to it. Ten months ago, the Council decided that
it wanted those most responsible for the commission of
war crimes and crimes against humanity in Sierra
Leone to be brought to justice. That means a narrowly
defined group of ringleaders whose actions have
disqualified them from participation in the political life
of the country. It means a finite process that will hold a
small number of leaders accountable while allowing
the rest of Sierra Leone to proceed with the political
life of the country. We regret that this vital project has
turned into an extremely complex, time-consuming,
expensive and inconclusive affair. We need to get on
with this.

Now, we finally have before us, under
consideration, a new, more sustainable approach at a
reasonable cost. The Secretary-General has recently
renewed his appeal for funding. My Government urges
all of our partners, and all those interested in justice, to
join us in contributing to the fund for the Court so that
we can bring it into being. The next step must be for
the Court to state whom it intends to prosecute. In our
View, this should begin immediately with one person
we know to be in detention and who, we all agree,
should be brought to justice: Foday Sankoh.

Our deliberations on the Special Court and the
difficulties in bringing it into being have taken place
against the backdrop of a new report on the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda. That
report, by the International Crisis Group, tells us that a
staff of almost 800 people, working for seven years, at
a cost of $90 million a year, has produced nine
convictions, with 43 suspects still awaiting trial and a
number of key suspects still at large. The International
Crisis Group's report, which I commend to my
colleagues, tells us that we must avoid the mistakes
made there as we establish the Sierra Leone Special
Court.

Ambassadors Greenstock and Ryan, and others,
have talked about the importance of establishing the
Truth and Reconciliation Commission, but also about
the need for it to be brought into being along with the
Special Court. We agree: both elements of the process
ofjustice need to be created. They both equally need to
be brought into being. The Special Court is an element
that we consider to be of particular importance.

We have heard some reservations about the
wisdom of moving forward with the Special Court,
given the stated commitment of the Revolutionary
United Front (RUF) to the peace process. But we think
that there is no conflict between the pursuit of peace
and the pursuit of justice; indeed, they must go
together. To imply that we must set aside a call for
justice in the interest of the desire for peace would, we
feel, he to repeat the mistakes of the past.

The Secretary-General has raised serious
concerns about the lack of resources for disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration. He has also implied
that, should voluntary funding not be forthcoming, he
will seek assessed funding. Certainly, proceeding with
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration is an
essential element of the process; indeed, the situation
we now confront has been outlined by Mr. Adeniji and
is, as he said, an indication of success. That has created
a problem. Disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration are not, in the end, the responsibility of
the Security Council, and we question whether assessed
contributions are the best means of meeting the need
that exists. We note that the donors' conference in Paris
sent encouraging signals. We join others in strongly
urging that donors come forward with clear pledges to
the trust fund to get this effort on a secure footing.

I have outlined a few areas of concern to my
Government, but I did so in the belief that a policy that
is working needs to be fine tuned. I commend the
Secretary-General, Mr. Adeniji and the Force
Commander, Lieutenant-General Opande, along with
the men and women of UNAMSIL, for their dedication
to peace in Sierra Leone, and I assure them of our
continued support.

