Mr. Viinanen (Finland): I have the honour to
address the Council on behalf of the Nordic countries:
Denmark, Iceland, Norway, Sweden and my own
country, Finland.

We wish to thank Germany for convening this
debate and you, Mr. President, for all your work as
Chair of the Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict. Under your leadership, Sir, the Council
has adopted important new tools. The timeliness of
considering situations of concern, including emerging
ones, has also enhanced.

Let me express our deep appreciation to Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, who recently stepped down as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General after six years
of dedicated and groundbreaking work. We warmly
welcome Ms. Leila Zerrougui to that important position.
She has our full support. We hope that the Council
will continue the excellent practice of inviting her to
brief the Council and its relevant sanctions committees
regularly, especially as situations of concern emerge.

In a decade, the Council has made a significant
contribution towards ending grave violations against
children. We welcome resolution 2068 (2012) adopted
today. It reaffirms the normative basis of the Council's
work and signals the determination to move ahead.

The mechanisms created by the Council have
focused our attention and resulted in concrete action.
Thousands of children used in hostilities have been
released and the response to victims has improved.
Attention to the protected status of schools and hospitals
has increased. We are pleased that the Secretary-
General's annual report (8/2012/261) for the first time
lists armed forces and groups for attacking schools and
hospitals.

We know that the mechanisms work. To date,
19 action plans have been signed. They commit
States and non-State actors to ending the recruitment
and use of child soldiers and other grave violations
against children. In the past 18 months alone, parties
in Afghanistan, Chad, the Central African Republic,
South Sudan, Somalia and Myanmar have entered into
action plans. Also, over time, a total of nine parties
have verifiably complied with their obligations, ended
violence against children and have consequently been
delisted. The parties in Nepal and Sri Lanka were
the most recent. That demonstrates very well that the
mechanisms are also useful in situations that are not
on the Council's agenda, but where grave violations
against children occur.

We commend the efforts of the Security Council
and all parties that have taken those significant steps.
We call on all parties listed in the report that have not
yet committed to action plans to do so.

Despite the progress, it is alarming that serious
violations against children continue to occur every
day, while the perpetrators go unpunished. We are
particularly concerned about the significant increase
in the number of persistent perpetrators. We encourage
the Council to make full use of the toolkit on children
and armed conflict to increase pressure on persistent
perpetrators. We thank the Secretary-General for the
recommendations in his excellent annual report. We
join him in calling for increased political engagement
and the use of targeted measures against persistent
perpetrators. By including grave violations against
children in the designation criteria of four of its
sanctions committees, the Council has already sent
a powerful message that grave violations are not
acceptable and cannot go unpunished.

Judicial mechanisms are another way to increase
pressure and to ensure accountability for violations.
They also help to preserve the credibility of the
Council's determination. The primary responsibility to
investigate and prosecute the most serious international
crimes lies with States themselves. There are persuasive
arguments for enhancing the national capacities to try
alleged perpetrators.

In cases where national trials are not possible, the
International Criminal Court (ICC) is indispensable
in ensuring justice and accountability. In March, the
ICC found Thomas Lubanga guilty of the war crime
of conscripting and enlisting children under the age of
15 and using them to participate actively in hostilities.
In August, the Court gave its first-ever decision on
reparations for Victims in the same case.

We very much welcome those decisions of the ICC
and their contribution to fighting impunity for the most
serious international crimes. We encourage the Council
to continue to demand increased accountability through
national and international mechanisms.

