Mr. Hamer (Netherlands): We are witnessing today
quite an extraordinary event. An independent expert
panel, established by this Council, has investigated the
violations of sanctions against UNITA, lifting the edge of
a veil that had for so long hung over the complex
structures and networks that have allowed UNITA to
maintain its stronghold over the years. This effort is
without precedent, and it is an achievement in itself.

Like others, we commend the expert panel and the
sanctions Committee, under the chairmanship of
Ambassador Robert Fowler, for their work. Their report
will send a strong signal that this Council is serious about
the sanctions it imposes. We expect that the report's
publication, in and of itself, will make a difference in

 

terms of the effectiveness of the United Nations sanctions
against UNITA.

The report itself concludes that its effects can already
be seen and that it has become harder for UNITA to sell
diamonds and to buy weapons because of increased risks to
those involved now that their shady dealings stand in the
international limelight. The Expert Panel and the sanctions
Committee Chairman are to be congratulated for this.

My delegation agrees that the effects of the report can
be lasting only if there is a sustained follow-up. We have
often spoken out in favour of the more effective monitoring
of sanctions, and we have made some concrete proposals to
that effect. The report's suggestion that the Panel should be
succeeded by some monitoring mechanism, so as to avoid
a return to business as usual, is important and deserves our
full support.

The recommendations in the report deserve careful
study by the Council. We will surely be revisiting the issue
over the coming weeks and months, with more specific and
detailed comments and suggestions. Allow me at this stage
to limit myself to a few preliminary remarks on some
elements of the report and its recommendations.

First, on diamonds: in a sense UNITA's access to
mineral wealth constitutes the core of the problem. If
UNITA were unable to pay for its military and diplomatic
efforts, it would never be able to continue its senseless war.
Therefore it is essential that we devise ways and means to
establish the origin of rough diamonds. Without
documented evidence as regards the origin, it is impossible
to distinguish legal trade from illegal trade, and this is
obviously in the interest also of bona fide exporting
countries such as Namibia, Botswana and South Africa.

More generally, the Security Council needs to address
in a systematic manner the problem of how conflicts are
fuelled and prolonged by the access of the parties - legal
or otherwise - to vast quantities of strategic resources.
This issue goes beyond diamonds, and it goes beyond
Angola. In fact, three of the bloodiest conflicts in Africa -
in Angola, Sierra Leone and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo - are fuelled by the illegal export of resources.

Secondly, on arms: the Netherlands welcomes the
concrete and practical recommendations of the Panel in
response to the violations of the arms embargo against
UNITA. The Panel touches upon a number of very
important issues that for very good reasons are high on the
agenda of other forums as well. These issues include
brokerage, arms registers and end-user certificates. The
Panel's conclusions and recommendations merit study and
wide distribution, so as to feed the discussions in other
relevant forums.

Exchange of information and transparency are key if
we are going to be serious about combatting violations of
sanctions. In this respect we should intensify our dialogue
with exporters and potential exporters of arms and
military equipment. More specifically, my delegation sees
a role for regional organizations, such as the Southern
African Development Community (SADC), in particular,
but not exclusively, with regard to embargoes on arms
and military equipment. Similarly, one could think of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), since some of its members are linked, in one
way or another in this report, to illegal arms deliveries
and ECOWAS, after all, has such a splendid record in
dealing with issues like small arms at the regional level.

Finally, as I said earlier, the most important thing
now is to see to it that the Panel exercise gets the best
possible follow-up to avoid a return to business as usual
and to the culture of impunity which has so far prevailed.
We would like to be actively involved in any future
efforts to develop the monitoring mechanism proposed in
the report. It also seems to us that many of the proposals
and recommendations in this report contain important
lessons for the improved effectiveness of other sanctions
regimes. This is an issue the Council should revert to
with some urgency.

