Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I would like tojoin
Security Council colleagues in welcoming Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Ukraine, Mr. Leonid Kozhara, to
the Security Council today. May I also thank him for
setting out his priorities as Chairman-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe
(OSCE) in 2013 and his view of the progress so far.

The OSCE remains a crucial forum for dialogue
aimed at creating a security community across a vast
area, from the North Atlantic to the Far East, that
commits its participating States to a Wide-ranging
acquis across its three dimensions. It provides a
platform for holding participating States to account for
the commitments they have made, and offers a forum
for discussion of the issues that at times continue to
divide East and West, in particular in the areas of
human rights and democracy.

We support the Ukrainian Chairperson's programme
of work across the three dimensions, and we continue to
work with him towards making progress on his priority
areas, notably the protracted conflicts in Moldova and
the South Caucuses, and promoting human rights and
democratization. Those are issues that not only matter
to the OSCE, but are important to the United Nations
as well.

We support the work that Ukraine is doing
to advance discussions on arms control in the
politico-military dimension, and we look forward to
engaging constructively both with the Chairperson and
with his successors in the "Helsinki-MO" process, which
seeks to reinvigorate and strengthen commitments
across the organization.

The promotion and protection of human rights,
fundamental freedoms, democracy and the rule of
law remain central to the OSCE's comprehensive
concept of security. The OSCE has one of the most
extensive sets of commitments, standards and
principles of any international organization, but there
are increasing gaps in the compliance with those
commitments by participating States. We support the
Ukrainian chairmanship's efforts to encourage better
implementation.

The OSCE's institutions have an important role
to play in assisting States in complying with their
commitments. We take the opportunity today to thank
them for their outstanding contributions.

Likewise, OSCE field operations within
participating States remain important in assisting
their hosts to meet their commitments. We continue to
support those mandates across the OSCE region.

We attach particular priority to the OSCE's efforts
to ensure that the freedom of the media is respected
both online and off-line, and that those exercising their
right to the freedom of expression are able to do so
free from violence, harassment and intimidation. We
hope that participating States will agree to strengthen
commitments in this area at the Kyiv meeting of the
Ministerial Council.

We support Ukraine's efforts to make progress
in the protracted conflicts in Moldova and the South
Caucuses, and we were interested to hear the views of
the Chairperson's Special Representative Ambassador
Deshchytsia when he visited London recently. As a key
player in the Transdniestria "5+2" process, Ukraine
is well-placed to reinvigorate talks. We continue to
believe that the Geneva talks being co-chaired by the
OSCE with the European Union and the United Nations
provide a necessary dialogue for a resolution of the
conflict in Georgia. On Nagorno Karabakh, we support
the Chairperson's efforts to engage with the Minsk
Group, and continued dialogue with Azerbaijan and
Armenia.

On the politico-military dimension, the OSCE'S
existing overarching framework of conventional arms
control and confidence- and security-building measures
contains many important elements that we should
carefully preserve and implement comprehensively.
However, it is also clear that the regimes are not
functioning optimally, and need to be modernized so
that they can be made fit for purpose in the context
of the evolving international security landscape. The
current status quo is inherently unstable and unlikely
to be sustainable.

The United Kingdom believes that the OSCE can
play a useful regional role on transnational challenges,
including in areas such as Central Asia. There is an
increasing body of compelling evidence that the OSCE
can add significant value through its work on border
security and resolution 1540 (2004). Addressing issues
of women, peace and security is essential to conflict
resolution, which goes to the heart ofthe OSCE's raison
d'etre.

Colleagues know the deep commitment of the United
Kingdom to addressing sexual violence in conflict.
We welcome the continued focus under the Ukrainian
chairmanship on effective cooperation between the
OSCE and other international organizations, not least
the United Nations. There is more that could be done
in collaboration on wider security matters to ensure
complementary activity and to avoid duplicating efforts,
including on work to combat trafficking, whether in
human beings, narcotics or other illicit goods.

It is important that all OSCE members adhere to
their commitments. The role of Chairperson-in-Office
of the OSCE provides an opportunity to promote and
model the principles of human rights and fundamental
freedoms, democracy, good governance and the rule of
law, on which the OSCE is founded. The United Kingdom
looks forward to continuing to work with Ukraine and
other participating States towards the strengthening
and implementation of these commitments across the
OSCE region.

Ihave a couple of questions for the Foreign Minister.
The first is on the human dimension. The United
Kingdom sees great value in the commitments that
OSCE participating States have made under the human
dimension in promoting human rights and democracy
across the region. We were very disappointed that
no agreement on strengthening those commitments
was possible at either of the past two meetings of the
Ministerial Council. We would be grateful to hear the
Minister's views on what he sees as the prospects for
progress in that area under his chairmanship at Kyiv in
December.

Secondly, on cooperation with other international
organizations, we were very pleased to hear the
Minister talk of increased cooperation between the
OSCE and United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
in the area of transnational threats, and of greater
coordination with other international actors in the
context of the upcoming transition in Afghanistan. I
wonder what other opportunities the Minister sees for
joint work between the OSCE and other international
organizations, including the United Nations, where
such coordination would be complementary and allow
the OSCE to add value and expertise.

