Mr. Biam Lian (Norway): Today's meeting of the
Security Council comes at crucial point in the Middle
East peace process. Last year saw serious difficulties in
that process that at long last now seemed to have been
overcome. The signing and swift implementation of the
Hebron protocol in January was a long- awaited, practical
reconfirmation by the parties of their commitment to the
Oslo accords. We were gratified that the parties had yet
again demonstrated their capacity to transcend
disagreements and conclude agreements. The United
States deserves particular praise for its active support
during that negotiation process.

The consequent establishment of a multilateral
observer corps in Hebron, manned by personnel from
Denmark, Italy, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland and
Turkey, also served to underline the undiminished
international support for the parties in their quest for
peace. And with the resumption of talks last month on
outstanding issues in the Interim Agreement, lost
momentum was regained and confidence rebuilt in the
Middle East peace process.

Against this background, Norway is deeply
concerned by the decision taken by Israel's Government
to establish a new settlement in Jabal Abu Ghneim/Hat
Homa in East Jerusalem. Such settlement activities would
not only contravene the present legal status of East
Jerusalem but would also be in conflict with the spirit of
the Oslo agreements. At this critical juncture of the peace
process, when negotiations on final status issues are to
be initiated shortly, it is more important than ever that the
parties show restraint.

My authorities therefore urge the Israeli Government
to reconsider its'decision. And 'we call- upon both Israel
and the Palestinian Authority to refrain from any action
that could change the facts on the ground and thus
secunty Council 3745lh meetlng
Fifty-second year 5 March 1997

 

preempt the outcome of the negotiations on the final status
of Jerusalem.

Rather than making unfortunate unilateral decisions,
the parties should now promote understanding between their
peoples and advance the negotiations towards a peaceful
settlement. We see this as their moral and political
obligation. The" international community thus expects the
parties to follow the challenging course set out by the
Declaration of Principles and the subsequent agreements.
While difficult problems remain, the rewards will be high
in terms of prospects for lasting peace as well as economic
prosperity and well-being for their peoples.

