Mr. Matulay (Slovakia): Let me thank you, Sir,
for calling this meeting and for giving us the
opportunity to speak on this vital issue at a very critical
juncture. We welcome the presence here of
Mr. Guterres, the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Cooperation of Timor-Leste, to participate in this
debate, and we thank Mr. Martin for his statement.

Since the representative of Finland will make a
statement on behalf of the European Union with which
we associate ourselves, we will confine ourselves to
making some supplementary remarks.

We share the concern of others over the incidents
that have occurred in the past three months in Timor-
Leste, and note with concern that the population is still
suffering the consequences of violence and destruction
that arose from them. We agree that the security
situation in Timor-Leste has changed visibly, thanks to
the presence of the international police and military
forces from Australia, Malaysia, New Zealand and
Portugal. It is necessary to emphasize that many of the
elements that gave rise to the original crisis are merely
dormant, while the crisis itself has created new
potential sources of instability that add to the
complexity of the situation, including the large number
of missing firearms. The Secretary-General has duly
noted that fact in his latest report.

A new Government was sworn in a month ago. In
the short term, it will have to deal with the instability
and disgruntlement of various groups in society in the
aftermath of a traumatic crisis. In the long-term, it will
be confronted with the complex challenge of building a
new nation.

The United Nations has achieved a great deal in
Timor-Leste, but significant challenges remain in
realizing long-term security and sustainable
development. The emerging institutions in that country
are still fragile. With the upcoming parliamentary and
presidential elections next year, Timor-Leste is rapidly
approaching yet another crucial crossroads in its
history. The elections will be of the utmost importance,
although we agree with Mr. Martin that they are only
one of the elements in building a successful democratic
society. The elections will be important for the future
stability and democratic development of Timor-Leste
and must be conducted in a fair and free procedure. In
that respect, we fully recognize the need for the
continued involvement of the international community
to help Timor-Leste to restore order and build a
democracy.

A new international presence in Timor-Leste is
needed to meet the changed circumstances. We support
the establishment of a new, robust and complex United
Nations mission in Timor-Leste. Its role would be to
consolidate the gains that the United Nations has
already achieved in the country, help the Timorese
Government ensure political stability, support the 2007
presidential and parliamentary elections and maintain
public security. It would also help Timor-Leste to
rebuild its whole security sector and its economy, fight
poverty and promote and protect human rights. At the
same time, it is important to note that the Timorese
Government and the Timorese people must assume full
ownership and responsibility for the transformation
process, with the continued support of the international
community.

As a final note, we also wish to underline that an
important element of peacebuilding and peace
consolidation in Timor-Leste includes fostering
national reconciliation. Prime Minister Ramos-Horta
and President Gusmao have both committed
themselves to that goal, without sacrificing
accountability for crimes committed during recent
months. We note with satisfaction that the Independent
Special Commission of Inquiry for Timor-Leste has
completed the first of two visits aimed at establishing
the facts and circumstances surrounding the incidents
of April and May, including their causes. We would
also like to highlight the need for continued attention
to the necessity for accountability for past human
rights crimes in Timor-Leste.

