Mr. Moeller (Denmark): Let me first express my
gratitude to you, my colleague Dora Bakoyannis,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Greece, for convening
this meeting. I would also like to thank Secretary-
General Kofi Annan for submitting his report
(S/2006/590) and in particular, for the very useful and
practical recommendations it contains. I associate
myself with the statement to be delivered later by the
Under-Secretary of State of the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs of Finland on behalf of the European Union.

I would like to highlight two areas - both
reflected in the draft presidential statement - which
need further and timely attention: the need for further
involvement of African organizations in peace efforts,
and the fight against terrorism.

We welcome the continued efforts to strengthen
cooperation among the United Nations, the African
Union and African subregional organizations such as
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS). The value of cooperation has already been
demonstrated in the conflicts in the Sudan, Cote
d'Ivoire and Liberia. At the same time, those conflicts
have clearly shown that a much stronger partnership
between the United Nations and African organizations
is of vital importance.

The goal should be real impact on the ground. To
that end, we need efficient partnerships and a practical
division of labour between organizations involved in
conflict prevention, crisis management and post-
conflict stabilization. While the Peacebuilding
Commission is designated to have the overall
coordinating responsibility for the international
response to peacebuilding, the African Union and the
subregional organizations are in a unique position to
mobilize African resources to assist nations on the
African continent.

I therefore encourage the Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission to explore how to best
support efforts to develop the African security
architecture, and to work closely with the African
Union and the subregional organizations on issues such
as conflict preparedness, planning and capacity-
building. Denmark, as members know, is also actively
contributing to those efforts through our substantial
bilateral assistance to African organizations - the
African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) - as well as through the
European Union. Denmark provides, through its
African Programme for Peace, $40 million for
capacity-building.

On the second point, Denmark firmly believes
that regional organizations can play a particularly
important role in the fight against terrorism.
Increasingly, regional organizations are developing
their own agendas in that field. As Chair of the
Security Council's Counter-Terrorism Committee,
Denmark particularly welcomes that trend. Regional
organizations have a key role to play in ensuring that
action against terrorism is taken across a region. It is
crucial that we support that important work.

Politically, regional organizations can help
solidify the global consensus by condemning terrorism
in all its forms consistently, clearly and vocally. Such
an unambiguous message is essential to help eliminate
any remaining suggestion that terrorism in some form
could be acceptable, because it never is. On the
technical level, regional organizations can help
member States implement their international
obligations. As the Council has noted on several
occasions, many States are willing to do more in the
fight against terrorism but lack the capacity to do so.
Regional organizations can disseminate information,
provide and facilitate assistance and support the
development of regional and national capacities.

I should like to end on a positive note. Improved
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations is a work in progress. Today, we have
significant practical experience to build on. With the
overall goal of enhancing international peace and
security and ensuring real impact on the ground,
Denmark remains committed to support concrete
initiatives to further improve cooperation in the future.

