We would like to thank the Secretary-General for his presentation of the youth, peace and security report (S/2020/167). We are also grateful to the Secretary- General's Envoy on Youth, Ms. Wickramanayake, as well as to the other briefers, Ms. Olla Al-Sakkaf and Mr. Gatwal Augustine Gatkuoth, for sharing their views. It goes without saying that youth have a great potential and an important role to play in the development of society, inter alia, through meaningful participation in a wide range of peace-related tasks such as conflict resolution, peacebuilding and sustaining peace. The need for the constructive engagement of youth in activities aimed at maintaining peace and security in situations of armed conflict is also reflected in Security Council resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018). At the same time, the involvement of young people in any political activity should be meaningful and based on their professional knowledge and skills, rather than driven by the desire to produce beautiful statistics or to fill certain quotas pertaining to age or gender. Moreover, young people should not be drawn into any political activities until they reach the legal age to do so. The task of promoting a positive image of youth should not overshadow the real challenges we have to address as members of the Security Council. It is well known that, unfortunately, young people are especially vulnerable to radical ideologies. Their search for self-identification against the backdrop of a lack of life wisdom, experience or education, as well as their efforts to find their place in society, are often exploited by extremist and terrorist groups in order to involve youth in illegal activities. In this regard, United Nations anti-terrorism mechanisms could and should be useful in helping young people by promoting stronger cooperation on the part of the international community in shielding young people from the influence of terrorist and radical ideologies, cutting off the channels through which such groups incite young people and combating the use of the Internet by terrorist groups for the recruitment of young people. Special attention should be also paid to the phenomenon of external stakeholders meddling in the internal affairs of sovereign States by indoctrinating and brainwashing young people, in particular with the aim of shaping the domestic political landscape or overthrowing legitimate authorities under the guise of promoting democracy or human rights. External support for youth should not trigger unrest or protests. We are convinced of the importance of promoting a culture of peace and tolerance among young people. To that end, each State has to create favourable conditions to help young people realize their full potential and be well-integrated into society and its social, economic and political activities. Providing youth with high-quality education and employment opportunities are important steps in that regard. It is also vital to encourage young people to participate in socially meaningful activities, help them improve their skills and talents, boost their self-confidence and self-esteem and teach them the value of peaceful coexistence. In Russia we prioritize support for youth organizations and the promotion of intercultural and interreligious dialogue among youth. The Russian Federation is doing a lot to help young people to achieve those aims. They are at the core of our national policy on youth until 2025, which was adopted by the Government in 2014 and has been implemented at the federal, regional and municipal levels. We also focus on preventing the spread of radical and terrorist ideology among the younger generation. We are holding numerous seminars and forums on this topic at the national and international levels. In particular, in October 2017, we were pleased to host the nineteenth World Festival of Youth and Students in Sochi, which assembled more than 20,000 people from over 180 countries.
