Mr. Lucas (Angola): We thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),

for the eleventh report presented pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011).

A degenerated security situation, an economic
crisis, a humanitarian disaster, and an institutional and
political stalemate are the main features of the situation
prevailing in Libya. By exploiting the volatile security
situation, the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant,
Ansar Al-Sharia and other violent extremist groups
have expanded their operations in Libya and beyond,
constituting an unprecedented threat to the entire
region.

Meanwhile, the internationally recognized
Government of National Accord struggles to gain
legitimacy and extend its control beyond the capital
city, Tripoli. The peaceful arrival and cheerful welcome
to the Presidency Council in Tripoli confirms the
Libyan people's strong desire for peace, security and
progress and for an end to the institutional and political
divisions that have been the cause of so much damage
in the country. The ICC Prosecutor's report hints how
the stalemate impedes the application of justice in
Libya. Despite the cooperation between the ICC Office
and the Office of the Libyan Prosecutor General, only
an atmosphere of institutional stability and peace will
permit that cooperation to bear fruit in compliance with
standards set in resolution 1970 (2011).

The Libyan leadership carries the fundamental
responsibility for moving the Libyan political process
forward in an inclusive manner with determination,
courage and good will. Angola supports and encourages
all efforts of the parties involved in the political
process to unite in order to swiftly overcome the grave
political and security challenges that impede the full
implementation of the Libyan Political Agreement.

Among the many challenges that the authorities
in Libya must address, the most pressing one is to
combat the expansion of extremist and terrorist groups,
the proliferation of weapons and the great number of
armed groups, thugs and political military factions that
indiscriminately attack civilians and perpetrate horrific
crimes, such as abductions, mass executions, torture and
illegal detentions - actions that amount to violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law.

Meanwhile, the Libyan political and social context
does not provide the conditions required to investigate
and prosecute perpetrators of these heinous crimes,
which, according to the Rome Statute that established
the ICC, fall within Libya's national jurisdiction. We
recognize, as the Prosecutor's report implies, that the
current conditions in Libya do not allow for due legal
process or fair trials. Only peace and stability will lead
to the establishment of a functional legal system and
effective judicial institutions. We renew our support for
the United Nations and the international community
in pursuing efforts with the parties involved towards
the effective implementation of the Libyan National
Accord for the establishment of durable peace and
towards holding accountable all those responsible for
atrocity crimes and human rights violations.

In closing, as the report of the Prosecutor states,
Libya and the Libyan people deserve peace and stability
on which to secure and build their future. They deserve
the rule of law rather than lawlessness in the current
climate of perpetual insecurity and flux.

