Mr. Strommen (Norway): I congratulate you,
Sir, on assuming the presidency of the Council. We
wish you every success for the month of November.

Our thanks go to Ambassador Belinga-Eboutou of
Cameroon for the way he steered us through the month
of October.

Let me also wish a warm welcome to New York
and the Security Council to the Foreign Minister of
Uganda.

Norway welcomes the final report of the Panel of
Experts on the Illegal Exploitation of Natural
Resources and Other Forms of Wealth of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. I thank
Ambassador Kassem and the other members of the
Panel for their most commendable efforts in this
regard.

Despite the positive developments in the Great
Lakes region over the past months, such as the Pretoria
and Luanda peace accords and the rapid withdrawal of
troops from the territory of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, the systematic exploitation of the natural
resources of that country seems to continue unabated.
According to the report, a large number of actors,
Governments, individuals, armed groups and
companies are in some way involved in the exploitation
of natural resources. To the extent that an important
motive for the continuation of the conflict is the
exploitation of resources, as indicated by the Panel,
there might be reason to question whether all parties to
the conflict are negotiating in good faith. Norway urges
all the parties to the conflict to prove that this is not the
case by demonstrating that further results can be
reached in the peace process without delay.

It is imperative that the recent progress made on
the political level be translated into improved
conditions on the ground, with increased security for
the local populations, in particular in the eastern parts
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, including the
Ituri region. Beyond the immediate short term,
permanent Government structures must be established
on the basis of an all-inclusive political dispensation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, allowing for
the natural resources to be utilized to the benefit of the
local population in an equitable manner.

We share the View that the political resolution to
the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
including progress in the inter-Congolese dialogue and
the establishment of effective governing structures, is
the main key to preventing the exploitation of natural
resources. We agree with the Panel that

"The main purpose should be to enable the
legitimate transitional government to control the
country's natural resources and borders without
foreign intervention". (S/2002/1146, para. 163)

In this regard, we are encouraged by the latest news on
the progress in the power-sharing talks between the
parties to the inter-Congolese dialogue.
Norway would like to underline its support for
the methodological approach that the Panel of Experts
takes. We encourage the continuation of the use of
panels of experts to assist the Security Council in its
work. As is highlighted by the current discussion on
the exploitation of natural resources in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Panel not only presents its
findings and recommendations, but triggers useful
discussions involving all relevant actors. It is our belief
that this is a contribution towards finding good and
sustainable solutions to the problems we are facing in
the region.

The Secretary-General recently submitted the
twelfth report on the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC) (S/2002/1180). In September, a special
report on MONUC was submitted that included
recommendations for strengthening MONUC's
capacity, especially in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Norway would
have liked to see more cross-references between the
current report of the Panel of Experts and the reports
on MONUC. An analysis of the link between economic
interests and security aspects would be useful.

The report recommends the creation of forceful
incentives and disincentives in order to minimize
illegal exploitation. Legal utilization benefiting the
population at large should be encouraged. However, we
agree that it is necessary to find measures to deal with
the parties involved in illegal exploitation and their
fears of losing revenue. Norway has noted with keen
interest the various recommendations provided by the
Panel of Experts. Those recommendations are put
forward with the View to bringing to an end the illegal
exploitation of natural resources and to breaking the
link between the exploitation and the continuation of
the conflict. The fact that the exploitation continues
despite recent troop withdrawals is alarming, and the
Security Council must explore all possible avenues to
bring the exploitation to an end. Norway will
contribute to that objective in the Council's further
deliberations by supporting concrete measures. As an
absolute minimum, various institutional reforms call
for Governments to ensure that companies and
individuals under their jurisdiction observe agreed
standards of the Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development, and a further
monitoring process related to the exploitation activities
must be agreed upon and put in place.

As we are all aware, some of the actors accused in
the report - most notably, Rwanda, Uganda and
Zimbabwe - have presented their comments and replies
to the report. Most of the Panel's findings have been
challenged, and we will probably see further discussion
between the Panel and those parties. We have noted with
interest that steps have been taken by the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo against one of the
companies mentioned in the report.

Finally, Norway urges the parties to the conflict
and to the peace process in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to maintain the momentum created over the
past weeks and months. We believe that full
commitment to the Peace Agreements and the inter-
Congolese dialogue is vital in the search for a lasting
solution to the conflict in the region and for ways to stop
the illegal exploitation that is so obviously taking place.

