The President (spoke in Spanish): I will now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Colombia.

We support this open debate of the Security
Council, and we are participating in it in the most
constructive spirit and with the sincere hope of
contributing to creating conditions that will make
possible the end of violence in the Middle East and the
resumption of negotiations between the parties as soon
as possible. We are also doing this because we have
always maintained that the Security Council can and
must act when there are threats to international peace
and security, in full accordance with the
responsibilities attributed to the Council by the Charter.

This is the context in which we would like to
raise a few concepts related to the sensitive situation in
the Middle East, including the question of Palestine.
Our statements are pervaded by an awareness of the
need to exercise the greatest serenity and caution
possible, avoiding in all instances aggravation of an
already volatile situation.

The situation in the Middle East has fallen into a
spiral of violence that is not favourable to anyone. The
excessive use of force by Israel, which indiscriminately
affects the Palestinian population, as well as the
selective assassination of Palestinian individuals, are
practices that do not contribute to the cause of peace.
Similarly, terrorist attacks attributed to extremist
groups that have indiscriminately affected the civil
population are also unacceptable.

The occupation of Orient House in Jerusalem and
of other buildings of Palestinian institutions in the
surrounding area by Israeli forces also deserves
international condemnation. It involves facts with
significant political meaning that flout previous
agreements between the parties and delay confidence-
building between them. We call upon the Government
of Israel to withdraw from these installations.

The economic situation of the Palestinian people
also does not contribute to the creation of favourable
conditions for a genuine peace process. We wish to
appeal to the international community to help the
Palestinian people financially, and to Israel to put an
end to the blockades and restrictions that are stifling
the precarious Palestinian economy.

It has been reported that the United Nations
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process
has said that more than one third of Palestinians live
below the poverty threshold. The same source has
categorized the blockade, the worst since those
imposed in 1967, as the cause of a shortfall in the
Palestinian Authority's finances that reached 22 per
cent ofits total budget at the end of 2000.

We believe that the recommendations of the
Mitchell report of 30 April 2001 are urgent and must be
supported and fully implemented, in particular those
referring to the cessation of violence, the reaffirmation
of the commitments undertaken by the parties to date
and the implementation of confidence-building
measures to facilitate the resumption of negotiations.

We recognize that the international community
has taken various initiatives to bring about these very
objectives. Colombia fully supports these efforts and
encourages the involved actors of the international
community not to desist. But in so doing, we would
like to point out our concern about the scarce results
produced since the beginning of this phase of the
violence in September 2000 in the Middle East.

We believe that the Security Council therefore
has a role that must be assumed responsibly to prevent
greater polarization between the parties and to
contribute to helping them find alternative solutions to
the escalating violence. We see the Council's task as an
effort that is in accord with and complementary to
those carried out by other actors of the international
community, including, of course, the actions of the
Secretary-General. Therefore, we believe that Council
action should essentially be oriented towards full
implementation of the Mitchell report
recommendations. This document was welcomed by
the members of the Council on 22 May 2001. This can
be achieved only if we act in unison, protected by the
strength provided by solid political consensus among
all members.

I now resume my function as President of the
Council.

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Qatar. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.

