Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): Let me first extend my
delegation's appreciation to you, Mr. President, for
convening this timely open debate on a very important
challenge regarding the protection of children in armed
conflict.

Indonesia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Viet Nam on behalf of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).

It is deeply regrettable that children and other
vulnerable segments of the population continue to bear
the brunt in a number of armed conflicts. Indeed, too
often children are despicably and with impunity used
as tactical agents, becoming fodder in a conflict and
enduring physical and emotional scars. That tragedy
is worsened when non-State actors are involved, as
they may simply refuse to heed the international
legal standards for safeguarding children and other
vulnerable groups, by which the States must abide.

Indonesia stands for zero tolerance when it comes
to violations against children in armed conflict.
Notwithstanding the valuable work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and other
United Nations entities to protect children - and while
we welcome the encouraging progress made thanks to
the "Children, Not Soldiers" campaign since its launch,
in March 2014 - the United Nations needs to send out a
more unequivocal message that is backed with actions.
Whether State or non-State actors, all perpetrators of
violence and abuse against children in armed conflict
must know that our international system will not give
them any space. They will have to answer for their
violations against children under the full extent of the
law.

We recognize that, in some situations involving
non-State actors, relief might be secured for children
and other vulnerable groups through negotiations.
Non-State actors may well be persuaded to exercise
restraint, and we should capitalize on such opportunities.
Therefore, we support the incorporation of the issue
into mediation in peacemaking. While we can only
support such a respite - and hopefully, the eventual
permanent rehabilitation of victimized children - the
United Nations and the international community should
develop a systematized approach. In that regard, we
would like to share some of our views.

First, the key and ongoing objective should be
to assist conflict-affected States to establish well-
functioning institutions that are accountable to their
citizens, which can enable a legitimately representative
Government to extend its writ across the entire territory
of the country. The rule of law should prevail. There
must not be any no-go areas where non-State actors
can build sanctuaries, thereby providing oxygen for
domestic or external conflict and terrorism.

Secondly, we must all contribute more to
strengthening the implementation of the global
normative framework on the protection of children in
armed conflict, within the United Nations and beyond.
Our action should signal that there will be neither
tolerance for child soldiers nor lax measures in our
efforts to safeguard children and their rights in conflict.
Recognizing that sensitizing non-State actors on the
imperative and benefits of the protection of children
poses special difficulties, the United Nations and all
concerned entities should nonetheless be relentless in
their efforts. While those imperatives should be clear
in the United Nations peacemaking, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding engagements, it is equally vital that
United Nations personnel continue and strengthen
their consultations and cooperation with national
Governments and local authorities.

Thirdly, regional and subregional organizations,
such as ASEAN in our region, have demonstrated that
they can be critical enablers for peace and development.
The United Nations should further strengthen its
partnerships with such organizations, as well as with
civil society groups that are carrying out useful work.
We are therefore pleased that the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General places priority on partnering
with regional and subregional organizations. That will
bolster the United Nations agenda on children and
armed conflict.

Standing resolutely together, we must all ensure
that the observance of international human rights
and humanitarian law on the protection of children is
given the utmost priority. Indonesia also underlines the
need to provide greater support for child victims, be
they former under-age combatants or those affected by
violence or displacement. Since their physical health
and educational and emotional needs may persist for
a long time, we also stress the role of the family and
the community in creating an enabling environment
for them. As a State party to the Optional Protocol
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict, Indonesia is
internationally committed to improving the training and
capacity of its peacekeepers on the subject, including
through the use of its national peacekeeping centre.

Finally, I would like to underscore that the most
important step in protecting children's rights is
preventing conflict itself. In addition, enhanced efforts
to protect children in armed conflict should be carried
out, even during peace time, including by building
national capacities and institutions and by sensitizing
the public at large to the issues. Indonesia will continue
to put a high priority on safeguarding children.

