Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, I would first like to thank Mr. Kai Eide,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, for presenting the latest report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in that country
(S/2009/135) and for his remarks regarding the work of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA). I would also like to thank the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan, Ambassador Tanin, for
attending this meeting.

Mexico finds that the elections process to take
place next August in Afghanistan is both a major
challenge and an opportunity to achieve peace and a
political solution to a conflict that has been going on for
over eight years now. The elections should herald a new
chapter for national reconciliation and strengthening
sovereignty and democracy in Afghanistan.

That is why we support the work of the
Independent Electoral Commission and we hope that
elections take place in a free, impartial and transparent
fashion, in an atmosphere of security that will
guarantee the rights of the Afghan people. We call on
the United Nations system, and especially the Mission
in Afghanistan, to redouble their efforts and work with
the Electoral Commission, political parties, civil
society and other actors to encourage successful
elections this year.

Mexico believes that ensuring the security of the
population in the framework of the rule of law is one of
the main challenges that Afghanistan faces in the short
and medium term. The report is very clear in this
regard, bearing in mind the deterioration of the
situation in this area and the extremist violence that is
spreading in various regions. It is unfortunate that there
is an upsurge of victims in the civilian population, and
we trust that greater cooperation between the Afghan
armed forces and the international forces will make
itself felt through a reduction of damage to civilians
and an improvement of the general security situation in
the country.

Once again, we emphatically reject terrorism in
all its forms and expressions. We condemn the attacks
on innocent persons and express our condolences to the
families of the victims of the terrorist attacks and to the
people and the Government of Afghanistan.

For Mexico, the security of humanitarian workers
and of the most vulnerable sectors of the population,
such as children, calls for priority attention, in
accordance with the standards and principles of
international humanitarian law. Specifically, we believe
that all measures should be taken to prevent the
recruitment of children by armed groups and ensure
their return to a safe environment.

Moreover, we recognize the efforts of the
Government of Afghanistan and the international
community to move forward in the removal and
destruction of mines, other types of explosives and
remnants of war in the country. Nevertheless, these
artifacts continue to be a serious threat to the civilian
population. For this reason, additional support should
be given to demining programmes.

We commend the efforts undertaken by the
Government to reform various ministries and police
forces and to reduce and fight against corruption.
These efforts contribute to the institutional
normalization of the country and to building the
population's confidence in its authorities.

The fight against drug production and trafficking
is another priority area for Afghanistan's stability. We
are gratified to see that the Government's efforts to
bring down production in several provinces are starting
to show positive results. In this area, cooperation with
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the
regional focus on the problem are of particular
importance.

We agree with the Secretary-General that
UNAMA has the appropriate mandate to play a role in
coordinating the various efforts to promote stability
and development in Afghanistan. The additional
resources approved for the Mission will enable it to
strengthen its institutional capacity and extend its
presence in several areas of the country. The
establishment of an office of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs is therefore
timely, and we trust that the Mission will continue to
strengthen its activities in the field of human rights
protection.

Stability in Afghanistan does not depend solely
on the success of military and security actions. In line
with national priorities, a comprehensive approach
should be maintained, which will strengthen
institutional capacity-building and promote socio-
economic development. This should take into account
the regional dimension of a number of problems
affecting the country.
The international conferences that will take place
in a few days in The Hague and in Moscow, where the
situation in Afghanistan and its linkage with
neighbouring States will be discussed, are a clear
demonstration of the firm commitment of the
international community to the country. Based on that
comprehensive approach and regional view, it will be
possible to reach a long-term solution that will be
consistent with the efforts made by the Government of
Afghanistan.

