Mr. Ettalhi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I wish to associate my voice
with all those who came before me in conveying my
gratitude to Ambassador Urbina of Costa Rica,
Ambassador Grauls of Belgium and Ambassador Jurica
of Croatia, who had the leadership of the 1267, 1540
and 1373 Committees, respectively, for their very
informative and valuable presentations and their
untiring efforts.

With regard to the 1373 Committee, on counter-
terrorism, Libya welcomes and appreciates the positive
developments in its activities and the work undertaken
by its Executive Directorate with regard to organizing
targeted visits covering all States, developing and
developed, as well as its efforts to ensure transparency
in its activities. We also welcome efforts within the
framework of the provision of technical assistance and
national capacity-building. Here, my country harbours
the hope that assistance provided within the framework
of the United Nations will be improved to replace
bilateral assistance. We especially welcome the efforts
by the Committee and its Executive Directorate in the
implementation of the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy and its cooperation and work with
United Nations bodies.

Over the last few years our actions focused on
one of the axes of the Strategy - the prevention of and
fight against terrorism. Today it is incumbent on us to
strengthen the Committee's role to ensure that it
addresses all the axes of the Strategy, especially
tackling the conditions that promote terrorism and
respect for human rights for all.

Occupation, aggression, defamation of cultures
and civilizations and of peoples, as well as the denial of
the right of legitimate resistance, the application of
double standards with regard to international legality -
all are factors that create fertile breeding grounds for
terrorism and constitute sources of tension and terrorist
acts. After all the progress achieved in counter-
terrorism, my country is convinced that the time is ripe
to devote attention to that aspect of the issue. The fight
against and prevention of terrorism require more
inclusive and effective measures that take into account
the provisions of the Global Strategy. Without dwelling
on details, my country believes that preventing and
suppressing the financing of terrorism require special
attention and the adoption of effective measures.
Granting asylum should be surrounded by guarantees
that ensure that it is used for the noble humanitarian
objectives for which it was created.

With regard to the 1267 Committee, which deals
with sanctions against the Taliban and Al-Qaida, my
country welcomes the Committee's efforts to improve
its methods of work, including the listing and delisting
procedures to make them more comprehensive and
precise. The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya urges the
Committee to submit as soon as possible, narrative
summaries and the grounds for the listing of
individuals and entities on the consolidated list. We
believe that it is only just that the individuals and
entities who are on the list and subjected to sanctions
be informed of the reasons for which they were listed.
The Member States, which bear the responsibility for
the implementation of those sanctions, also have a right
to be informed of the reasons for those sanctions.

The 1267 Committee should also devote special
attention to reviewing and updating the consolidated
list, including any additional information, in particular
information on the identity of individuals and entities,
and to following up with a review of which names need
to be de-listed.

The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya is gratified that the
Security Council adopted resolution 1730 (2006)
setting up a coordinating focal point to gather requests
for the de-listing of individuals. That is an important
step towards ensuring further transparency in the
sanctions regime. However, we believe that that is not
enough in itself and does not meet transparency
standards. We encourage the Committee to apply
exemptions in conformity with resolution 1452 (2002).
Those exemptions are aimed at lessening the impact of
sanctions on individuals and their families, providing
for humanitarian situations that might arise and
ensuring that Security Council resolutions do not lead
to the collective punishment of the families of
individuals on the lists. We underscore here the need
for the Committee to consider the obstacles to rapid
decisions on exemptions and to consider such
de-listing requests in a timely manner.
Turning now to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), my country is fully
conscious of the grave threat posed by weapons of
mass destruction. The international community is

meeting that challenge via multilateral legal
instruments. The fact that those instruments have not
yet acquired universality and that a number of Member
States have not yet implemented them at the national
level means that the instruments remain inadequate,
because they provide no guarantee against the
proliferation of biological, chemical, nuclear or other
weapons of mass destruction.

The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya again reiterates its
opposition to weapons of mass destruction. We are
convinced that the only way to prevent the acquisition
of weapons of mass destruction by non-State actors is
to eliminate them entirely. The Libyan Arab J amahiriya
is convinced that disarmament and non-proliferation
are two interconnected processes that reinforce each
other mutually and require continuous progress to be
achieved on both fronts.

Resolution 1540 (2004) imposed a number of
restrictive obligations on States in the field of
non-proliferation. The Committee's most recent report
notes tangible progress in the implementation of its
provisions. My country is among those that have
submitted their first national report. The number of
countries that have submitted reports and additional
information has increased quite significantly. We now
urge all States to submit their reports to the Committee
so as to ensure the effectiveness of the Committee's
work.

The Libyan Arab J amahiriya welcomes the efforts
of the Committee to assist States that require it and
encourages States with assistance needs to submit them
to the Committee. We invite the Committee to
strengthen its role in the field of technical assistance,
to implement the resolution, including by ensuring that
the assistance provided is in line with the established
requirements of the resolution.

My country supports the efforts of the three
Security Council Committees and all efforts that would
enable us to achieve our objectives in the field of
counter-terrorism, including identifying the causes and
symptoms of terrorism, to create a world of peace and
security for all people.

