Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank you, Sir, for convening this meeting.

The Chinese delegation would like to thank the
Permanent Representative of Belgium, Ambassador
Johan Verbeke, for his leading role as head of the
mission and in drafting the mission's report. China
endorses the information and recommendations
contained in the report.

Through this mission, the Security Council has
obtained first-hand information on the Kosovo issue
and direct experience of the achievements, difficulties
and expectations of the people of Kosovo, of all
communities, in the process of reconciliation and
reconstruction. We noted the remarkable progress in
implementing the agreed standards between the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government and
UNMIK.

In addition, the different sides are also aware that
there is still room for continued improvement insofar
as the implementation of resolution 1244 (1999) and
the agreed standards are concerned, especially the
return of internally displaced persons and refugees, as
well as the protection of rights of ethnic minorities.
Comprehensive implementation of resolution 1244
(1999) and the agreed standards has a bearing on the
well-being of all the communities of Kosovo, which
should not be compromised because of the political
divergences.

We are deeply concerned at the continued
segregation and the lack of interaction between the
Albanian and Serbian communities in Kosovo. We
hope that the political leaders there will abide by their
commitment to build a Kosovo for all its communities
and will try their best to take all necessary measures to
create a favourable basis for the ultimate settlement of
the future status of Kosovo.

Ever since the submission of the comprehensive
settlement proposal by the Special Envoy Marti
Ahtisaari, the future status of Kosovo has drawn
increasing attention from different sides. Indeed, one of
the focal tasks of this mission was to listen to different
sides in order to get to know their concerns. As stated
in the report of the mission, the positions of the sides
on the settlement proposal remain far apart. We are
always of the View that the best option is to encourage
both Serbia and Kosovo to continue their negotiations
in order to gradually narrow their differences in an
effort to achieve a settlement acceptable to all sides.
We believe that it is normal to have differences, and
these differences accentuate the need for further
negotiations, rather than constitute a reason for the
international community to give up efforts to promote
talks.

The Kosovo issue is quite involved and
convoluted. It also has extensive implications for other
issues. Maintaining the status quo is not a solution.
Furthermore, the status quo will be difficult to sustain.
How to handle this issue properly will be a major
challenge for the Council. All sides need to reflect on
the ways and means to promote reconciliation and
common development between the communities to the
greatest possible extent, maintain lasting peace and
security in the Balkan region and preserve the integrity
and authority of international law. On this major issue,
adequate patience, flexibility and caution are necessary
and worthwhile. China is ready to work with other
members of the Council in a constructive manner to
find an appropriate solution.

