Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
France voted in favour of resolution 1546 (2004),
which the Council has just adopted unanimously. My
country approached the discussion of this resolution
with three goals for the Iraqi people and for the United
Nations: first, to ensure that after 30 June the Iraqi
interim Government will have all the attributes of
sovereignty and complete authority to govern the
country, in spite of the need to maintain a very large
foreign military presence; secondly, to give the Iraqi
people credible assurances that the political process is
continuing and that the presence of foreign troops is
temporary and limited in time, in order to clarify the
political outlook of the Iraqi people and to assure them
that the coming transition period will end as soon as
possible; and, finally, to entrust to the United Nations a
mandate which guarantees the credibility of the
Organization and which is realistic in the light of what
it can do in the present circumstances in Iraq.

The first two elements are, in our opinion,
essential for the Iraqis to support the current political
process and for them have confidence in the new Iraqi
Government. The third enables the role of the United
Nations in the settlement of crises to be preserved and,
to the extent possible, ensures the security of those
who will act on behalf of the Organization in the field.

From the first informal consultations in the
Security Council, France had emphasized the
importance it attached to the mandate that the Council
would entrust to the United Nations and to the legal
framework for the action of the multinational force. On
the first point, the aim was to allow the Iraqis to take
maximum advantage of United Nations expertise in
extending the activities of Mr. Brahimi and Ms. Perelli
- to whom we pay tribute - while taking the security
conditions into account. On the second point, the aim
was to take into account the change resulting from the
restoration of Iraqi sovereignty to retool the mandate of
the multinational force while spelling it out clearly
within the framework of international law.

Throughout the negotiations, France was both
demanding, because the stakes are considerable, and
constructive, because we believe that the unity of the
international community is needed more than ever
before. On many points, the final text meets the
demands sought in the French and German proposed
amendments. Accordingly, first of all, the interim Iraqi
Government will have complete responsibility and
authority to govern the country. Several provisions of
the draft resolution were adjusted to comply with that
principle, particularly those on the control of the Iraqi
armed forces and security forces, the coordination of
international aid, the use of the country's natural
resources and the conditions for making foreign
advisers available.

Secondly, the various stages of the political
process are endorsed by the resolution, particularly the
timetable for elections and for the end of the transition,
no later than the end of 2005 . We already know that the
organization of the national conference planned for
July by Mr. Brahimi and, above all, the holding of the
elections no later than in January 2005 will be crucial.
Those elections must be organized freely and
democratically and must permit all Iraqis to vote. In
that context, we are pleased that the future interim Iraqi
Government will continue to enjoy the support of the
United Nations within the framework of the clear
mandate, adapted to circumstances, provided for in the
resolution.

Thirdly, the sovereign Government may at any
time ask that the mandate of the multinational force be
revised or that it end, and such a request will be
binding on the Security Council. Moreover, the
mandate is limited in time: it will be re-examined
within 12 months, and in all likelihood it will end at
the end of the political transition, whose expiration
date - 31 December 2005 - is explicitly mentioned.
Until then, the multinational force and the Iraqi forces
must act in accordance with international law,
particularly the law of armed conflict.

Finally, the resolution states clearly that, from
this point on, the Iraqi armed forces and security forces
will not be part of the multinational force. They are to
be placed under the sole authority of the Iraqi
Government, which will have to decide whether to
commit them - if it deems it necessary or desirable to
do so - to multinational force operations.

France had insisted on those last two points so
that the relationship between the interim Government
and the multinational force would reflect the
sovereignty that the Iraqi interim Government will
have after 1 July. We note that our wishes have been
largely taken into account, for which we thank the
sponsors.

However, with regard to the implementation of
the multinational force's mandate - particularly the
conditions of engagement in the event of sensitive
offensive operations - the resolution indicates that the
interim Government and the multinational force will
have to reach an agreement, but it does not specify
what would happen in the event of disagreement. That
is why France would have preferred that the text state
that the Iraqi interim Government, sovereign in the
territory of Iraq, would have the final say in such a
case. As that provision was not explicitly requested by
the Iraqi leaders, France was satisfied at the final
adjustment made to paragraph 11 of the provision.
Moreover, France cannot imagine that the multinational
force would go against the opinion of Iraq's sovereign
Government.
With regard to the aid that regional organizations
might provide to the stabilization of Iraq, France would
like the decision-making autonomy of such
organizations to be preserved within their own
executive bodies. A member of several regional
organizations itself, France will make a decision, if it is
necessary, when the time comes. Furthermore, it is
natural, as the text says, that the agreement of the Iraqi
Government be sought.

All in all, today the Security Council has assumed
its share of responsibility. It has done so by taking into
account the demands presented by the Iraqi interim
Government, within the limits the Government had set
for them. It will be up to that Government - which we
hope will succeed and with which we are prepared to
work - to win the Iraqi people's confidence through
its capacity to govern fully in complete independence.
That is our wish, for the stability of Iraq and of the
region depends on it.

