Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to begin by welcoming Prosecutor Moreno-
Ocampo and thanking him for his work, for which
Costa Rica is always grateful.

The Prosecutor's presentation of the tenth report
of the International Criminal Court to the Security
Council is an opportunity to advocate respect for the
United Nations Charter. This basic obligation cannot be
flouted by States without their suffering the
consequences of their anti-juridical conduct. It is well
known that any State that has joined this Organization
is committed to accepting its obligations under the
Charter. Therefore, when, on 12 November 1956, the
Republic of the Sudan became a Member of the United
Nations, it solemnly committed to respect the
obligations imposed by the Charter, including its
obligation under Article 25 to accept and comply with
Security Council decisions.

Five years ago, this Council decided that the
Government of the Sudan should cooperate fully with
the International Criminal Court regarding crimes
committed in Darfur. To date, the cooperation of the
Government of the Sudan has been non-existent. In
June 2008, in a presidential statement initiated by
Costa Rica(S/PRST/2008/21), the Council once again
reiterated its demand for cooperation. That has been
the only action taken by the Council in this matter
since the adoption of resolution 1593 (2005). However,
the Government of Sudan has ignored the decisions of
this Council and fails to honour its obligations under
the Charter, without any consequence whatever.

It is not true that the Government of the Sudan is
not required to cooperate with the International
Criminal Court because it is not party to the Rome
Statute. What obliges the Government of the Sudan to
cooperate with the International Criminal Court is not
the Statute of Rome but its membership in the United
Nations and its obligation to comply with the decisions
of this Council, including resolution 1593 (2005).
Non-compliance with obligations under the Charter
should have consequences for any Member State, and
the Sudan should be no exception.

This Council should not fool itself. The damage
caused by the anti-juridical conduct of the Government
of the Sudan is neither negligible nor limited to merely
legal technicalities. This Council, by its tolerant
attitude towards that Government, has contributed to
eroding trust in international justice and has defended
impunity. Meanwhile in Darfur, indiscriminate attacks
against the civilian population continue, sexual
violence continues to be used as a weapon of war and a
means of intimidation, and the recruitment and
non-demobilization of child soldiers persist. All of
those crimes have their roots in impunity.

Referring the situation in Darfur to the
International Criminal Court does not in itself
exonerate the international community from its
obligation to demand accountability for the genocide in
Darfur, nor has it been an effective instrument in
countering impunity for the crimes that have been and
continue to be committed in that region of the Sudan.
The intervention of the International Criminal Court is
only a sign of the need for greater commitment, as the
Prosecutor pointed out. The intervention of the Court is
must be a catalyst for decisive national and
international action in response to challenges to justice
in situations of conflict.

Instead of taking such decisive action, some time
ago the Government of the Sudan set up tribunals,
prosecutors, committees and administrative units in an
effort to show some will to carry out justice and
combat impunity. To date, the result is that the
Sudanese indicted by the Court have not been brought
to justice and continue to occupy important positions in
the apparatus of the Sudanese State. The exception is a
Sudanese opponent to the Government who has
appeared voluntarily before the Court.

The international community has been much
more consistent in promoting justice, combating
impunity and working towards sustainable peace. The
League of Arab States has made steps towards
accountability, and in mid-2008 the African Union set
up a high-level panel on Darfur, presided over by
former President Thabo Mbeki, to consider the
interlinked matters of combating impunity and
promoting peace and reconciliation. The panel's report,
which will be discussed by this Council in the near
future, was unanimously adopted in October. Its
recommendations mark the way forward.

09-6333]

Costa Rica welcomes the decisive stance of the
African States that have implemented the commitment
to comply with their obligations under the Rome Statute,
and regrets the inaction of this Council, which for
18 months has failed to achieve the necessary consensus
to secure the implementation of its own decisions.

An analysis of the information provided by the
Prosecutor raises other concerns that should not be
ignored. The international community should take an
interest in the protection of witnesses. It should also
carefully consider the repercussions of the expulsion of
the humanitarian organizations that worked in Darfur
and the so-called Sudanization of assistance. Taken
together, those situations have had an enormous impact
on the lives of displaced persons living in camps,
including on their most basic rights. They have also
resulted in forced returns to unsafe areas, engendered
intimidation, provided cover for new crimes and
fostered impunity.

Concerns about the harassment of, and attacks on,
humanitarian personnel, and the deaths of many of
them, cannot just mean figures on a page. They should
lead to a more decisive stance on the part of the
international community, in particular the Security
Council.

