Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Sir, for having organized this debate. I will
address two points: first, the particular links between
security and development, and then the specific case of
peacekeeping operations.

First, the links between security and
development. While there is no unequivocal
relationship between economic growth and
international security, the unequal distribution of
wealth and the marginalization of particular groups or
vulnerable regions are often factors in a conflict,
particularly intrastate conflict. Other factors can be
sources of conflict, including competition for access to
basic resources such as water or agricultural land and
rivalry for control over precious raw materials and
energy resources.

More recently, new threats to security have
emerged. I will cite two examples. First is climate
change, which can have tragic consequences for people
and countries. This is why France and the European
Union urge the community of nations to redouble
efforts on the basis of the momentum launched at
Cancun last December. Second is the issue of food
security and the volatility of agricultural prices, which
have destabilizing effects. That is one of France's
priorities during its presidency of the Group of 20. The
French Minister of Agriculture will be in New York
next week for the General Assembly before organizing
a ministerial meeting of the G-2O on this topic.
In turn, the need for security as a prerequisite for
development is well established. In post-conflict
situations, national capacity-building in the area of
security in keeping with norms for the rule of law is
essential in order to establish favourable conditions for
development. For example, in a number of countries
where the economy relies almost entirely on the work
of women, there is a direct link between security and
development. When insecurity prevents women from
going out to the fields, the ability of families to survive
is compromised. That in turn can lead to further
escalation in violence. Development actors must
therefore take the safeguarding of security into account
in their strategies.

For all of those reasons, it is the responsibility of
the international community to establish conditions for
shared and sustainable development that limit the risk
of conflicts breaking out, or continuing. Thus the
Peacebuilding Commission, in the countries on its
agenda, has made the emancipation of young people
and women one of its priorities, alongside security
sector reform, as both factors contribute to stability. In
the same spirit, the agencies, funds and programmes of
the United Nations must all play their role in seeking to
improve effectiveness and coordination of their
activities on the ground.

Here we note the important contribution of the
European Union, the leading donor of development aid,
accounting for almost 60 per cent of the aid provided
by the member States of the Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD),
totalling approximately €50 billion. To take a well-
known example, the European Union spends in
Somalia one quarter of the €215 million devoted to
development just on security capacity support.

Nonetheless, we must not lose sight of the
responsibilities of States themselves. Respect for the
law, good governance, the strengthening of civil society
and the economic integration of marginalized
populations - which can be achieved first and foremost
through decisions taken by national authorities - are
determining factors for peace and security.

I shall now turn to the specific case of
peacekeeping operations, where we must draw on three
principles for action.

First, we must give greater attention at an earlier
stage to the link between security and development.
This Council has several times affirmed the need not

only to ensure the security of a given area but also to
support the political processes as soon as possible and
to support the national institutions, particularly in the
areas of the rule of law and security. We therefore
believe that the links between security and
development needs must be taken into consideration as
early as possible, starting with the drafting of the
mandate for the operation by the Security Council. The
implementation of security sector reform and of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes will be effective only if they are carried
out in the framework of an improvement of the living
conditions of the population.

Secondly, there is the adaptation of tools to
situations. We are convinced of the need to give greater
attention to development aspects in the peacekeeping
mandates. I will refer to two examples. The Blue
Helmets of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti, among whom the Brazilian contingent plays a
remarkable role, ensure security and take on a number
of civilian tasks in logistics and health support, which
are necessary in reconstruction and development. In the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is supporting the authorities in
their efforts to clean up the mining sector in order to
prevent the plunder of resources.

At the same time, the central factor of
peacekeeping operations must remain that of
maintaining peace and security. Other stakeholders,
including United Nations agencies and bilateral
partners, have as their mission to take on the tasks
more directly related to development. It is therefore
essential to clarify the tasks and responsibilities of
each party in the framework of a coherent and
comprehensive strategy.

Thirdly, let me address the coordination of
partners and national ownership. Aid provided the
international community, be it multilateral, regional or
bilateral, must be coordinated and integrated as part of
a strategy set out in close coordination with the host
country. National ownership by the country concerned
in that strategy is the fundamental prerequisite for
addressing the underlying causes of instability.
The Peacebuilding Commission carries out such
activities through integrated strategies in collaboration
with the countries on its agenda. Such coordination is
crucial in the transition phases when responsibilities
are transferred to host countries once they are capable
of taking on again all the prerogatives linked to
sovereignty. That is a condition for achieving lasting
peace on the ground.

The links between security and development are
proven, numerous and complex, calling not only for a
comprehensive, coherent and coordinated strategy but
also for determination and subtlety on our part.

I therefore once again thank you, Sir, for having
organized this important debate, which will allow us to
further our reflection on strengthening international
peace and security.

