Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): The entire world has witnessed the killing and
destruction in the Jenin refugee camp, Nablus,
Ramallah and other Palestinian cities and villages
where the media have yet to arrive. A tragedy has been
visited upon the Palestinian people.

In this regard, I should like to express our
appreciation once again to you, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting in response to the request by
the Group of Arab States.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
by the Permanent Representative of sisterly Tunisia on
behalf of the Group of Arab States. We had hoped to
share the optimism of many State representatives who
addressed the Council last week with regard to
persuading Israel to cease the barbaric and destructive
policies that it is pursuing and to withdraw
immediately from Palestinian cities and villages
recently reoccupied. We believe that it is now clear to
everyone - even the most optimistic among us - that
the Israeli war Government is not only far removed
from peace and the logic of peace, but is also waging a
war against the principles and values of peace. Israel's
only intentions and methods seem to be to kill peace, to
perpetuate Israel's occupation of Arab lands and to
frustrate the aspirations of the Palestinian people to end
Israel's occupation, oppression, spite and racial hatred
and its war against the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State on Palestinian land. Such Israeli acts
can have no other meaning.

In its insistence on implementing those policies,
the Israeli Government did not even heed the advice of
its closest allies - those who have always promised it
their full support. Thus, Israel rejected all calls to
withdraw immediately from Palestinian cities and to
end its attacks on Palestinian civilians. Instead, in
defiance of those allies and the Security Council, Israel
persisted in its attacks on the defenceless Palestinian
people. It carried out new massacres, then proceeded to
destroy what it had been unable to destroy at the
beginning of its campaign of aggression.

As for Israel's total disregard of the Council's
resolutions, it requires no proof or evidence. Since the
adoption of resolution 1402 (2002), which was
reaffirmed by the adoption of resolution 1403 (2002),
Israel has not explicitly rejected either of those
resolutions. Instead, it has acted consistently against
their substance, in addition to issuing a torrent of
statements directly attacking the Council's credibility.
What is worse, it has attempted to mislead the
international community by pointing the finger of
blame at the Palestinians and the Arab States in order
to divert attention from the realities on the ground. On
a number of occasions, our delegation and other Arab
delegations have warned that we must be very careful
with regard to the Israeli Government's position, as it
has attempted to ride the wave of anti-terrorist
sentiment and has used the tactic of buying time to
carry out more war crimes, genocide and ethnic
cleansing under flimsy and mendacious pretexts.

It is very sad that the Council - indeed, the
entire United Nations system - has been unable thus
far to end the massacre being carried out by Israel
under the international community's nose. Such
impotence was explicitly shown by the failure of the
United Nations to respond even to the cries of its own
officials in the Palestinian territories. Those officials
found the Organization's deafening silence very strange
in the light of the damage caused to institutions it had
built through the efforts of the international community
since 1948. Israel was allowed to demolish what the
United Nations had built over a period of more than 50
years with the help of the donor community:
institutions, schools, clinics - the infrastructure built
to reduce the suffering of those whom Israel had
forcibly expelled in 1948.

It is not surprising that those refugees should bear
the brunt of Israel's war machine today. Israel does not
want them to remain alive - rather, it wants to bury
them, and with them the cause of a people forced to
seek refuge in a diaspora, exiled from their land and
their homes. We all heard the statement by Mr. Peter
Hansen, Commissioner-General of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA), describing Israel's gross
violations of the Geneva conventions. He stated that
Israeli forces had intentionally destroyed medical
equipment owned by the United Nations. He explained
how ambulances owned by UNRWA had been targeted,
adding that Israel had destroyed medical supplies and
equipment in some medical centres and had used
UNRWA's schools as interrogation centres. Mr. Hansen
continued that Israeli soldiers, before waging war on
the camps, placed ammunition in UNRWA vehicles on
two occasions and were caught by UNRWA personnel.
At this very moment, while we are meeting, Israel is
escalating its barbaric practices against the Palestinian
people. They are carrying out massacres that are a
breech of all international laws, instruments and norms.
They are laying unjust siege to Palestinian cities and
villages, and even when pretending to withdraw from
some cities they remain at the gates and encircle the
cities. All these are war crimes and crimes against
humanity, including crimes of genocide and ethnic
cleansing. Israeli occupation forces have been
preventing international humanitarian organizations,
including the International Committee of the Red Cross
and UN RWA, from performing the humanitarian role of
providing supplies and medical assistance to the
wounded and from trying to rescue and save civilians
from under the rubble of their homes. These acts must
all be firmly and strongly dealt with by the
international community. They must be directly
condemned by all States. We must intervene
immediately to put an end to the Israeli policy of
killing and destroying.

Israel's disregard for Security Council resolutions
must in no way lead to a paralysis of the Council's
actions in response to Israel's aggression and anti-
peace policies. Once again, what is required is for the
Council to respond to international will, to shoulder its
fundamental responsibility to maintain international
peace and security. We reaffirm that the massacre
perpetrated by the Israeli Government in the Jenin
refugee camp and in other Palestinian cities must not
be condoned in any way whatsoever.

The draft resolution presented by the Arab Group
contains a paragraph requesting the Secretary-General
to dispatch a committee to the Jenin refugee camp to
investigate the Israel's massacre of innocent Palestinian
civilians and to witness first hand the destruction
visited upon that camp.

The draft resolution presented by the Arab Group
is yet another attempt that ought to be supported by all
members of the Security Council. We hope it will be,
because it responds to the wishes of the international
community and reflects our desire to safeguard the
prestige, unity and role of the Security Council and
consistency in its actions.

The last Arab Summit meeting in Beirut drew a
map for a comprehensive, just peace and for an end to
the Arab-Israeli conflict in the region. The Arab
Summit proposal proceeds from the implementation of
relevant Security Council resolutions and the principle
of land for peace. The implementation of these
resolutions would insure full Israeli withdrawal from
occupied Arab lands and would end the occupation that
is the fundamental, genuine source of all the problems
and instability that prevail in the region.

The establishment of the independent Palestinian
State on Palestinian soil with East Jerusalem as its
capital, the rightful return of Palestinian refugees, a
right affirmed by the resolutions of the international
community - those are the elements of a peaceful
settlement that will lead to peace and security in the
region. Continued occupation and the continual killing
of Palestinians will not lead to peace.

Yesterday we heard the statement of the
Secretary-General in which he spoke of the tragic
situation of the Palestinian people. We have also been
following the statements of his personal
representatives, Terje Roed Larsen, the Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, and
Peter Hansen, the Commissioner-General of UNRWA.
We heard from them an accurate description of Israel's
crimes in Jenin and in other Palestinian cities and
villages. While we highly appreciate the calls for an
end to this tragedy from the Secretary-General and his
representatives, we call on the international community
to help in preventing a catastrophe on Palestinian land
and against its people.

Let me point specifically to the proposal made by
the Secretary-General pertaining to the dispatch of a
multinational force to the occupied Palestinian
territories. It is my pleasure to express the strong
welcome and support of the Syrian Arab Republic for
the Secretary-General's proposal to dispatch such a
force.

