Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome the participation in today's
meeting of Mr. Ivica Daeie, First Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia,
and we share the grave concerns he expressed about
the state of affairs in Kosovo. We would like to
thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Zahir Tanin, and his team for their work
and objective briefing on the activities of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK), which shows that the persistent serious
problems in the province continue and are in urgent
need of solutions and of oversight by the international
community. We also listened attentively to Ms. Vlora
Citaku's statement.

Ten years ago, at the initiative of Russia, the
Security Council convened in this Chamber to respond
to Kosovo's unilateral declaration of independence
(see S/PV.5821). We gave a warning at the time about
the pernicious consequences of that step both for the
situation in the province and for regional security,
and today it is perfectly clear that the sponsors and
executors of the questionable Kosovo project should
reflect on the results of that misadventure. The illegal
secession, whose forerunner was the NATO aggression
of 1999, made a resolution of the Kosovo issue
significantly more difficult. The result is that to this
day there are still no clear prospects for a settlement
and Kosovo continues to be one of the main problems
on the regional, European and international agendas.
Above all, the flouting of the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of a Member State continues, in violation of
fundamental principles of international law.

The expectations of Pristina's supporters that
the number of States recognizing Kosovo's so-called
independence would keep going up have proved
unfounded. On the contrary, there have recently
been calls for retracting that recognition. Kosovo's
applications for membership in a number of international
organizations have been rejected. On the security
front, the potential for serious conflict continues, and
any incident is liable to spark an outbreak of violence.
On top of that, the province continues to be a comfort
zone for recruiting radicals. Attempts to sweep this
issue under the rug could have costly consequences for
both the Balkans and for Europe as a whole, especially
since returning terrorists are fleeing there from Syria
and Iraq.

The attempts to cultivate a self-sufficient political
system with pretensions to being a legal democratic
State have been fruitless. Behind the facade of
public institutions we glimpse clannish interests and
unresolved contradictions and conflict, and corruption
and organized crime are rampant. The moderate
political forces have been pushed into the background,
and the current authorities, where former Kosovo
Liberation Army fighters are running things, are being
challenged by even more radical nationalists and those
supporting the creation of a greater Albania. In spite
of the promises, there has been no economic boom or
influx of investments in the province, and as a result the
socioeconomic situation is still disastrous. From that
point of view, Kosovo remains the most unsuccessful
area in the region.

We have always believed that the only solution to
the Kosovo problem is a political one, which should
be based on dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina
in accordance with resolution 1244 (1999). Yet for the
second year in a row the Brussels dialogue between the
parties, in which the European Union took on the role
of mediator, is stalled. The main reason for that is the
Kosovo Albanians' refusal to fulfil their obligations,
and in particular to implement the key First Agreement
of Principles Governing the Normalization of Relations
between Belgrade and Pristina of April 2013 on
establishing an association/community of Serb-
majority municipalities in Kosovo. It is astonishing that
the European mediators' attitude to this stagnation is
strangely complacent.

In contrast, we note Belgrade's constructive attitude,
demonstrating a willingness to continue the dialogue
and seek ways to arrive at a long-term settlement of
the relations between Serbs and Albanians on a basis
of compromise. Unfortunately there has so far been no
serious response to those calls from either Pristina or
Brussels. At the same time, the signs are increasing
that preparations are being made to ramp up pressure
on Serbia's leaders in order to compel it to recognize
a de facto Kosovo independence. In our view, if the
negotiations on Serbia's admission to the European
Union are used as a way of cranking up the pressure,
that would call into question Brussels' objectivity and
impartiality as an intermediary.

The recent murder of Oliver Ivanovie, a prominent
Kosovo Serb politician, is alarming and has further
highlighted the fragility of the situation in the
province. Whoever was responsible for the crime, it is
a clear reflection of the catastrophically low level of
security and law and order in Kosovo, the particular
vulnerability of the Serb community and the lack of
effective mechanisms for responding to such challenges.
Only the courageous decision by Serbia's President
Vucic' to take the risk of visiting Kosovo, with the aim
of giving support to his compatriots, has brought some
calm to the situation.

However, it would be premature to suggest that
this crisis has been completely dealt with. In particular,
we want to emphasize that it is unacceptable to
use the current situation as an excuse for enforcing
Kosovo Albanian control of the province's Serbian-
majority areas. We support Belgrade's calls for a full-
fledged investigation into the murder of Ivanovic' by
the international entities in Kosovo and for giving
the competent Serbian authorities the opportunity to
participate as well, especially given that the possibility
of a Serbian police presence in the province is explicitly
provided for in resolution 1244 (1999). In our view,
special responsibility lies with the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), which has
claimed a key role in recent years in the maintenance of
law and order but is now passing the baton to the Kosovo
police, within whose purview it says the issue falls.

One wonders who, if not EULEX, is deciding to
transfer such functions to the Kosovo police? On what
grounds and according to what law has it been done,
considering that at issue are powers delegated to EULEX
by UNMIK, pursuant to a resolution of the Security
Council? Who verified the ability of Kosovo Albanian
security forces to objectively investigate crimes against
Serbs? Is Pristina actually interested in doing that in
any way? Its refusal to provide any of the evidence
requested by Belgrade suggests the opposite, including
the possibility of an attempt to conceal something.
Immediate efforts must be undertaken to rectify
these mistakes so as to ensure the most effective,
comprehensive and impartial investigation possible
and to identify those who planned and carried out
the murder.

The passivity of the Kosovo Force (KFOR) is
startling, constituting as it does the international
security presence in the country, in accordance with
resolution 1244 (1999). Frankly, the meagre reports
submitted to the Secretariat do not give us a clear
picture of KFOR activities.

We cannot ignore the issue of the investigation into
the crimes of the Kosovo Liberation Army. It remains
unclear when the work of the Specialist Chambers
established under the leadership of the European Union
in The Hague will begin or if any specific indictments
will be made. The fact that the Court's activities depend
on the whims of the members of the Assembly of
Kosovo, among whom are a number of former fighters,
does not inspire great optimism. There is considerable
additional evidence of the lamentable state of affairs
in the province, some of which is described in the
Secretary-General's report (S/2018/76). It includes a
drop in refugee returns, persistent attacks on the homes
and property of Kosovo Serbs, arson, acts of material
damage and vandalism and attacks on Serbian Orthodox
church property. These are the sad legacies of 10 years
of Kosovo's independence.

Under the leadership of the United Nations as
represented by the Security Council and UNMIK,
the international community should continue to
closely follow the situation and actively fostering the
maintenance of stability and security in the province.
In view of all of this, and given the current situation, we
believe it would be absolutely inappropriate to raise the
question of changing the format and periodicity of the
Secretariat's briefings to the Council on Kosovo.

