Mr. Liden (Sweden): The draft resolution before us
testifies to the continued concern of the Security Council
about the situation in Afghanistan. It sends an unequivocal
message to the Taliban and the other parties, as well as to
Afghanistan's neighbours and other States concerned,
calling for an end to the suffering of the Afghan people and
for a peaceful solution to the conflict in Afghanistan.

Sweden remains convinced that military means will
not bring peace to Afghanistan. This should be obvious
after so many years of devastating war. The road to real
peace would start by a ceasefire, which would be followed
by a political dialogue with the aim of forming a genuinely
broad-based, multi-ethnic and representative Government.
A political system has to be established which takes into
account the legitimate concerns of the ethnic, religious
and social groups in the country.

We call upon the Taliban and the other factions in
Afghanistan to follow that road. It is equally imperative
that all States in the region and elsewhere give their full
support to such a course of action and refrain from
farming the flames of war in Afghanistan. We welcome
the fact that the "six plus two" group of countries has
provided a forum for talks on the Afghan issue and we
look forward to their proposed meeting in Tashkent. With
the participation of all major Afghan factions, that
meeting could be the starting point of a genuine peace
process. At the same time, we are somewhat perplexed by
the reports that some of those countries continue to
supply weapons and war materiel that fuel the conflict,
instead of promoting their more obvious long-term
interest, which ought to be a peaceful and stable
Afghanistan. The flow of arms into that conflict-ridden
country must cease.

The alternative to a real process towards peace
would in all likelihood be a further aggravation of the
situation. There are worrying signs that the conflict is
taking on clear ethnic and religious dimensions. Serious
violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights continue and the use of landmines is still taking a
very heavy toll on civilians. Winter may bring additional
suffering to the innocent victims of war in Afghanistan.
Moreover, we cannot neglect the risk of an extended
regionalization of the conflict. This dimension further
underscores the responsibility of the Security Council
with respect to the situation in Afghanistan.

Sweden has a long-standing involvement in
Afghanistan as a main donor of humanitarian assistance.
We remain gravely concerned about the humanitarian
situation in the country and continue to demand that all
parties comply with their obligations under international
humanitarian law. All violations of human rights must
cease, including the systematic discrimination against
women and girls, practised in particular by the Taliban.
Other fundamental international norms must also be
complied with, including those on combating terrorism
and illegal drugs. All Afghan factions must close down
training camps for terrorists inside Afghanistan and
participate in the international struggle against terrorism.
Due to war and conflict, the economy of Afghanistan is
to a large extent dependent on illegal activities. The

 

illegal drug business is the cause of human suffering far
beyond the borders of Afghanistan.

The case of Afghanistan illustrates that, in today's
world, no country can separate itself from the international
community. Events in Afghanistan have not only major
humanitarian consequences, but also serious international
repercussions.

Sweden strongly supports the continued active role of
the Secretary-General, his Special Envoy and the United
Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan (UNSMA) in
facilitating peace and national reconciliation in Afghanistan.
We support the proposal of the Secretary-General for a new
civil affairs unit in UNSMA, tasked with promoting respect
for minimum humanitarian standards. We also welcome the
proposal for an investigation into reports of extremely
serious violations of international humanitarian law in 1997
and 1998, including in Mazar-e-Sharif.

