Mr. Ulibarri (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Costa Rica thanks you, Sir, for convening this open
debate, highlighting the importance of climate change
as a critical item on the multilateral agenda. We
particularly welcome the participation of the Secretary-
General and the Executive Director of the United
Nations Environment Programme.

Costa Rica associates itself with the statement
made by the representative of Argentina on behalf of
the Group of 77 and China, to the effect that the
primary responsibility for addressing these matters
comprehensively falls to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change. All
complementary efforts to address this issue on the part
of any other organ of the Organization should take that,
and in particular the following factors, into account.
First, such efforts should seek to support work plans
and goals in the context of the multilateral negotiating
framework. Secondly, they should be based on the
specific responsibilities of the respective body - in
this case, the Security Council.

In addressing the problems of climate change
through more than merely peripheral actions, we need
to achieve an agreement that, in accordance with
scientific evidence, will allow us to stabilize and
reduce concentrations greenhouse gases to the levels
established in the Convention. We can do so
specifically through the firm and committed
participation of the countries that are the principal
greenhouse gas emitters, all of which are represented at

 

this table and therefore have an ongoing and, in many
instances, historic responsibility.

Although that responsibility is not limited to the
industrialized countries referred to in annex I of the
Convention, they should nevertheless assume
leadership, which should also be embraced by the
major emerging economies. The permanent members
of the Security Council - all major emitters and, with
their right of veto, endowed with exceptional powers
within this organ - should in particular make a clear
political commitment to reducing greenhouse gases.
That would be the best and largest contribution they
could make to ensuring that Climate change does not
become an even greater threat to international peace
and security. That group should then be expanded to
include the other members of the international
community commensurate with their emissions and
economic capacities.

Pursuant to its competences under the United
Nations Charter, the Security Council should focus on
efforts to prevent or control conflicts or traumas that
may arise as a result of the effects of climate change
and that may undermine peace and security. These
could include, inter alia, struggles for scarce water
resources, forced population displacements or the
threat of national disappearance. The most substantial
and decisive actions, however, are outside the
Council's mandate, and we reiterate that they should be
addressed in accordance with the provisions of the
Convention. We should also consider the competences
of other entities of the United Nations system, such as
the General Assembly, the Economic and Social
Council - particularly in the framework of the
Commission on Sustainable Development - and the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations.

Costa Rica believes that, in addition to the
commitments made with respect to emission reduction,
prevention and mitigation, we should strengthen
adaptation to climate change. Such measures would
have a tangible effect on such factors as sea-level rise,
flooding, droughts and food insecurity. In order to
make a significant contribution to these tasks, the
major economies must step up their financial flows
towards countries that are affected or could potentially
be affected by the problem, concentrating in particular
on small island States, many of which face the
imminent danger of disappearing as nations, as noted

 

by President Stephen of Nauru on behalf of the Pacific
small island developing States.

In my part of the world in Central America, the
catastrophic effects of climate change are becoming
ever-more frequent. Similarly, developing countries
require direct investments to strengthen our climate
monitoring and early warning systems. We also need
the transfer of technologies that will, inter alia,
improve the production of basic foodstuffs and help us
to generate clean energy. In return, developing
countries must act transparently and with
accountability, good governance, respect for the rule of
law, and set adequate priorities in the use of our
resources. Costa Rica recognizes that we, too, must
share the responsibility.

In conclusion, the climate change agenda is a
broad network of interconnected nodes. That is why the
most effective responses to the concerns raised at this
debate are to be found within the framework of the
Convention. We will make little headway against the
concrete effects of climate change if we fail to
establish the requisite conditions and to take the
effective political decisions to allow the Convention
fully to achieve its objectives.

