Ms. Loj (Denmark): I would like to thank the
representatives of the two Tribunals for their reports to
the Security Council.

Denmark has always been and remains a strong
supporter of the Tribunals for the Former Yugoslavia
and Rwanda. This is the fourth time during our
membership of the Council that we have the
opportunity to comment on the work of the Tribunals.
In looking back on our three previous statements, I
realize with regret that I could have used any one of
them again today.

We regret that once again we have to insist on the
immediate apprehension and transfer of the six
indictees at large of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and of the 18 indictees at
large of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR). That goes for Mladic, Karadzic and
Kabuga in particular. We will firmly reject all attempts
to outlast the Tribunals, and we call on all States
harbouring indictees to cooperate fully with the
Tribunals in this crucial matter.

We would also like to impress on the Tribunals
once again that it is critical that they finish their work
on time. We welcome the additional steps taken and the
results achieved by both Tribunals. It is imperative that
this work not be done at the expense of serving justice
in strict accordance with international standards.

All members of the international community have
a large part to play in enabling the Tribunals to finish
their work on time. There certainly is the matter of
tracking down, apprehending and transferring indictees
at large. But there is also the matter of agreeing to
witness protection and sentencing agreements and of
paying assessed contributions in full and on time.

I would like now to turn to more novel territory.
First, on residual issues, the closer we get to the time
when the Tribunals have fulfilled their mandates, the
more pressing the need for addressing, in a
comprehensive manner, a number of judicial and
administrative functions that will not automatically
terminate with the conclusion of the last appeal against
a judgment. This includes witness protection,
enforcement of sentences, the maintenance of and
access to archives, and so forth. The impact of the
Tribunals reaches far beyond the specific cases under
their jurisdiction and far beyond the specific countries
concerned. There is no question that their legacy
deserves and needs to be preserved. We therefore very
much encourage all organs of the Tribunals, as well as
the Office of Legal Affairs, to intensify their work on
this important matter and to engage in early discussion
with the Security Council and other interested parties.

Secondly, we have listened carefully to the
concerns raised in relation to the ability of the
Tribunals to keep functioning at full speed until the so-
called close of business. We recognize the difficulty of,
inter alia, retaining staff under such circumstances, and
believe that careful consideration should be given to
suggestions about how the Tribunals can address that
challenge.

The Tribunals continue to contribute significantly
to the fight against impunity. They are instrumental in
the process of national reconciliation that the countries
concerned need to go through in order to come to terms
with their past and look to the future. Also, after our
tenure on the Security Council, we will continue to
follow their work with great interest.

