Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I thank
you, Mr. President, and the Malaysian delegation for
your leadership this month.

Much of our time this month has been spent
addressing security challenges in Africa, and much of
that on Burundi. Yesterday, Burundi recklessly moved
forward with elections, despite the African Union (AU),
the Secretary-General and others urging delay. The
risk of mass violence in Burundi remains acute. The
elections yesterday were conducted in an environment
that was not free, fair or transparent. Those were simply
not credible elections.

In the face of real risks of instability and grave
violence, instead of allowing space for the opposition
to speak, demonstrate and organize, the Government
of Burundi has done the reverse, ratcheting up
restrictions, locking up opponents, shutting down radio
stations, arming youth militias and intimidating those
who disagree. They do this as President Nkurunziza
continues to seek a third term in office, directly violating
commitments undertaken in the Arusha Accords.

The Government of Burundi must restore
independent media outlets, release political detainees,
condemn violence, ensure credible presidential
elections and allow space for political opposition and
civil society to function without fear of retribution.
We strongly support efforts by the United Nations, the
AU, the East African Community and the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region to broker a
peaceful resolution to this crisis, and we urge the
Government to engage in a genuine dialogue with all
parties.

The situation in Darfur, of which the Council has
been seized for over 10 years, demands our attention
and our action. As we struggle to overcome political
divisions, the situation in Darfur continues to seriously
deteriorate, as the Council recognized in its resolution
adopted yesterday, extending the mandate of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) for another year. Millions of
displaced people still cannot return to their homes.
The Doha Document for Peace in Darfur and AU High-
level Implementation Panel political processes have
stalled. The Government of the Sudan has not indicated
that it intends to reinvigorate those processes or stop
its unrelenting aerial bombardments and attacks in
Darfur, Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile. Meanwhile,
the Government continues to systematically restrict
UNAMID's freedom of movement and access to the
extent that a peacekeeper needlessly died last month
after the Government shamefully refused to grant a
flight clearance for medical evacuation. The Council's
attention is needed now more than ever, and so too is
UNAMID.

Turning to our discussions on South Sudan, I want
to recall UNICEF Director Anthony Lake's 17 June
statement on the violations being committed against
children in South Sudan, with survivors reporting that
boys have been castrated and left to bleed to death
and girls as young as eight years old gang raped and
murdered. Children have been tied together, their throats
slit. Just today, the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan has released a report that people in Upper Nile
state have been burned alive. I want to read an excerpt
from the report that came out today from our mission
in South Sudan that states that a survivor from Koch
county narrated to the human rights division how she
was dragged out of her tukul and gang raped alongside
her neighbour by Government soldiers in front of her
3-year-old child. The soldiers then taunted them that
they would appreciate what men from Mayom county
were made of. In another instance, a witness from
Rubkona county narrated that she saw Government
forces gang-raping a lactating mother after tossing her
baby aside, while in another case, two witnesses from
Nhialdiu narrated how a 17-year-old girl was gang-
raped by armed militia who shot her dead. In at least
nine separate incidents, women and girls were burnt in
tukuls after being gang-raped, particularly in the Boaw
village of Koch county.
These reports are a chilling window into the
violence against and acute suffering of South Sudan's
most vulnerable citizens every day that the parties fail
to demonstrate the courage to resolve this conflict,
and these most recent reports, in our judgement, merit
urgent consideration by the Council. We will work
with the incoming presidency to convene the Council
in the coming days on them. This crisis is man-made,
and those responsible for it must put the well-being of
the South Sudanese people ahead of their own narrow
political interest. To date, they have refused to do so,
and that must change.

In Yemen, we strongly support the efforts of
Special Envoy Ismail Ould Cheikh Ahmed to begin
a preliminary dialogue with the Yemeni Government
and the Houthi/Saleh-affiliated delegation in Geneva.
Geneva could serve as the beginning of a long
and - we hope - useful dialogue process. We must
not let momentum falter. To this end, all Council
members must use their influence with the parties to
press them to engage constructively with the United
Nations as it builds on the six principles put forward
in Geneva. These constitute a promising basis for the
United Nations future engagement. A peaceful political
transition consistent with the Gulf Cooperation Council
Initiative, the National Dialogue Conference outcomes
and relevant Security Council resolutions is the only
way out of the current crisis. All parties must show
greater willingness to compromise than they have done
to date.

We remain deeply concerned about the humanitarian
situation and fully support the United Nations call for a
new humanitarian pause. For a new pause to be possible,
all sides must be prepared to concretely implement the
pause and be bound by its terms. Resuming commercial
imports is a humanitarian concern of the utmost
importance.

Yesterday, we met to discuss the grave crisis in
Syria. We said it before, and it bears repeating, that no
solution to the Syrian conflict can be imposed by force.
An inclusive political settlement towards a peaceful
transition is the only way to end the conflict, which
has killed more than 220,000 people, injured more than
1 million, driven almost 4 million out of the country
as refugees, internally displaced 7.6 million people and
left 12.2 million others in need of humanitarian aid,
including 5.6 million children. We should not allow this
to continue.

This month, we also continued the important
tradition of hearing from Force Commanders on the
front lines of United Nations peacekeeping operations.
1 would like to emphasize again our appreciation for
their service and our gratitude to all troop contributors
who are bravely serving in peacekeeping missions
around the world. The meeting two weeks ago (see S/PV.7462) allowed us to discuss several essential
aspects of modern peacekeeping, the imperative of
appropriate training, the importance of expanding the
pool of troop-contributing countries and the kinds
of contributions they make, and the critical question
of how the system handles exceptions to the rules of
engagement. For the peacekeepers putting their lives
on the line for the benefit of humanity, we have a
responsibility to get the system right.

On a related note, President Obama will host a
peacekeeping summit during the General Assembly's
high-level week, as many members know. Our goal
for the summit will be to step up cooperation among
the United Nations, troop-contributing countries and
financial supporters of peacekeeping to ensure that the
United Nations can draw on the right resources to help
our peacekeeping operations succeed - that is, to make
them more responsive, better at protecting civilians and
more able to fulfil the mandates that we as Member
States call on them and need them to fulfil.

Speaking of fulfilling mandates, I would like to
thank the Malaysian delegation for its successful and
steady leadership of the Security Council in June. Our
colleagues from New Zealand can rely on our support
for what promises to be a busy July.

