Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): It is an honour for me to welcome His
Excellency Mr. Jose Maria Aznar, Prime Minister of
Spain, to the Security Council. I would like to assure
him that his presence represents the bright side of
Spain's commitment to the centrality of the role of the
Security Council in combating the threats to peace and
security that confront our world today. We express our
confidence in the role that Spain will continue to play,
inside and outside the Council, including in relation to
the Arab-Israeli conflict.

We would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
having convened this important meeting in the
presence of Prime Minister Aznar. The fact that he is
present is the most eloquent expression of the
importance that Spain attaches to combating terrorism.
Mr. Aznar spoke about his friendly country's vision of
the work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC)
in the coming period under the chairmanship of Spain.
We stress our condemnation of terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations, including State terrorism.
We would like to highlight once again our support for
Spain in its leadership of the CTC and our readiness to
make every possible effort to guarantee Spain's success
in guiding this important aspect of the work of the
Security Council. We are confident that Ambassador
Arias will guide the work of the Committee diligently,
with great diplomacy, skill and wisdom.

We would like to take this opportunity to say that
our people urgently need the support of the Council
and the Counter-Terrorism Committee in putting an end
to the occupation of their lands. Occupation and the
practices of occupation are the most heinous
manifestations of terrorism. We are fully confident that
the unity of the Council in working to combat true
terrorism will be a guarantee that all of us will be able
to get rid of international terrorism in all its forms and
evil manifestations.

For its part, Syria is ready to continue to
cooperate with the leadership of Spain in combating
terrorism in implementation of resolution 1373 (2001),
just as we cooperated in the past with Ambassador
Greenstock. Syria was among the first countries to
present its report to the CTC. We truly hope that we
will be able to work together, here in the Council as
well as in the General Assembly, with a view to
arriving at an international understanding and
definition of the concept of terrorism, determining the
criteria that would enable us to define terrorism, as
well as understanding and discussing its root causes
and the need to address them in the context of
international cooperation, including an international
conference on the subject. It should not be left to each
of us to develop his own definition of terrorism at
whim.

Mr. Aznar drew our attention to a very dangerous
subject: the relationship between terrorism and
weapons of mass destruction. He was right to do so.
We would like to stress here that Syria shares the
concern of the Prime Minister of Spain. That is why we
submitted a draft resolution to the Security Council
with the intention of declaring the Middle East region a
zone free from weapons of mass destruction. It
included a special paragraph noting the need to prevent
any terrorist organization from gaining access to
weapons of mass destruction. We had hoped that all
members would support that draft resolution.

We would like to thank the Prime Minister of
Spain for recalling the need to establish peace in the
Middle East region, and we would like to stress that the
peace to be brought about in the region should be
comprehensive and just and should be based on the
Madrid terms of reference, as well as the provisions of
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and the
principle of land for peace. Those principles will
constitute the basis for achieving a just and
comprehensive peace if they are accompanied by the
necessary political will and are considered in the
context of the Arab initiative launched at Beirut in
March 2002.

