Mr. Skau (Sweden) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset I wish, on behalf of the Government of Sweden,
to express our sincerest condolences to the Government
and people of Colombia with respect to the tragic loss
of life in Putumayo. We stand with Ambassador Mejia
Velez at this difficult time. Our embassy in Bogota and
the Swedish Government are ready to assist in every
way possible. I also want to extend my most sincere
personal condolences.

Almost 20 years ago, I lived in Putumayo working
for the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
I have spent a great deal oftime in the city ofMocoa and
have dear friends there. Consequently, I know that the
people will face this tremendous challenge with their
incomparable human spirit - the Colombian spirit.
(Spoke in English)

Turning to the topic of today's meeting, I would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2017/252) and Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Jean Arnault for his briefing.
Sweden has a long-standing commitment to peace in
Colombia and strongly supports the work of the United
Nations Mission in Colombia.

We commend the firm commitment of the
Government of Colombia and the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia - Ejercito del Pueblo
to the peace process, and their continuous efforts
to overcome challenges to the full implementation
of the peace agreement. In that regard, we welcome
the recent adoption by the Colombian senate on the
Special Jurisdiction for Peace in Colombia, which will
be crucial to the further implementation of the Final
Peace Agreement. Those historic steps forward are a
testament to the resilience of the peace process and the
commitment of the parties.

We particularly welcome the strong focus on
child protection and the full engagement of women
in the peace agreement in Colombia. It serves as a
model for other peace processes. The agreement sets
child-centred guiding principles, with a focus on the
treatment of separated children as victims, a gender-
sensitive approach and family and community-based
reintegration. The full and active inclusion of women in
the peace process and the inclusion of women's groups
in its implementation, will also help ensure that this
gender-sensitive approach is maintained.

The peace agreement marked a new beginning for
Colombia. The international community must stand
behind a committed and sustained effort to support the
peace process, so that it can rapidly deliver tangible
peace dividends for the people of Colombia. Now
is a unique moment for peace in Colombia and an
opportunity that must not be missed.

