I would like to thank the Prosecutor for her Office's thirty-first report on the situation in Darfur, pursuant to Security Council resolution 1593 (2005). The work of the Prosecutor and her team is an important part of efforts towards achieving accountability for those subject to appalling crimes in Darfur. The International Criminal Court (ICC) also has an important role to play in global efforts to end impunity for the most serious crimes of international concern, and the United Kingdom fully supports its efforts to hold perpetrators to account and achieve justice for victims in Darfur. The Sudan is at a historic moment, one year on from the removal of a brutal regime. Along with the people of the Sudan, we look forward towards a transition to a democratic and peaceful Sudan. Part of that future, as recognized within the Constitutional Document agreed following the 2019 revolution, is the pursuit of accountability and transitional justice. This must be delivered as soon as possible for the victims in Darfur, who are long owed justice for the crimes committed against them. As the Prosecutor details in her report, there has been progress in Darfur over the past several years, and we welcome that. But issues of concern remain. This reporting period has included incidents of violence, the most serious in El Geneina, which have resulted in death, injury and the further displacement of many civilians. Concern over sexual and gender-based violence and violence towards returnees continues, and we must not forget that more than 2 million people are still internally displaced. The Council agreed last week (see S/2020/496) to a new Mission to support the Sudan's transition and peace process and, with that, attention must remain on the protection of civilians. The United Kingdom is pleased that accountability for Darfur and justice for victims remains a central issue in the ongoing peace talks between the Government of the Sudan and armed groups in Juba. I would like to thank the Prosecutor and her team for their continued dedication and work on this situation during this reporting period. The United Kingdom welcomes the progress that has been made by the Office of the Prosecutor to further and strengthen their investigations despite a difficult operating environment, including the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). We welcome reports yesterday that one of the indicted individuals, Ali Kushayb, is in the custody of the ICC. The United Kingdom commends the authorities of the Central African Republic, France, Chad and the Netherlands as well as the leaders of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic on the role that they played in getting him into custody in The Hague. As the Prosecutor highlights, a positive development emerged in February of this year when the Government of the Sudan stated its intention to try those indicted by the ICC for the crimes for which they have been charged. United Kingdom Ministers welcomed this announcement, which signifies an important step in the Sudan's progress towards fulfilling the goals of the revolution and achieving a peace settlement in Darfur. However, we do not yet understand how the Government of the Sudan will cooperate with the ICC. We urge it to productively engage, and swiftly, with the Court and the Prosecutor. The willingness demonstrated in February is to be commended, and we sincerely hope that as a signal of that willingness, the Prosecutor will be permitted to visit the Sudan and Darfur as soon as COVID-19 implications allow. A way forward needs to be agreed, along with greater clarity on how the individuals concerned will be tried and the nature of the justice that the Government in Khartoum has committed to delivering. The United Kingdom stands ready to assist, where helpful, as part of our wider commitment to supporting the people of the Sudan. We again thank the Prosecutor and her team for their continued commitment to pursuing these investigations and achieving justice for victims in Darfur.
