Mr. Castro Cordoba (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): Costa Rica congratulates you, Mr. President,
as well as the Permanent Mission of Senegal, for having
convened this open debate during your presidency ofthe
Security Council. We believe that having an opportunity
to discuss this vital resource for the survival of this and
future generations, especially in the Council, gives
water the appropriate and necessary political priority
that it needs within the United Nations.

Many have predicted that future wars will be
fought over water, and some countries have declared
that water is a matter of national security. However, we
believe that water can also be a source of opportunities
for peace and conflict-prevention through strategic
cooperation and synergies that could be forged at the
local, national, regional and global levels.

What is certain is that water on our planet
is sometimes scarce and is unevenly distributed
geographically. But that resource is also facing major
threats due to its inadequate management, waste,
pollution and, last but not least, to climate change,
whose effects can be seen in water in the form of
droughts, floods and hurricanes, as we were warned by
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.

All those threats could increase water-related
conflicts, both internally and internationally. That
is why we believe in the need to ensure that the
protection of water protection becomes an international
political priority. Although we have an international
agreement dealing with transboundary waters, another
one on wetlands and many binational agreements
on watercourses, we need to think about a dedicated
binding international instrument that would protect
this resource as a strategic asset for the survival of
humankind, but also for the survival of ecosystems.
We must also have in place an institutional architecture
that would protect this precious liquid, so that future
generations can see in it opportunities for peace and
sustainable development, and not as sources ofconflicts
and wars as predicted.

We trust that progress in our efforts, as well as
progress in the discussion on the importance of water
resources in forums and relevant documents - such
as the Agenda 2030 for Sustainable Development, the
Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction, the
Paris Agreement on Climate Change and the New Urban
Agenda (Habitat III), among others - will allow us to
identify and to act on opportunities for the benefit of the
common good and to contribute to creating real options
to achieve lasting peace and sustainable development
throughout the world. In that regard, the achievement
of Sustainable Development Goal 6 - ensuring the
availability and sustainable management of water and
sanitation for all - and of all the interrelated goals and
objectives, should be a central element of our mission as
a multilateral body. Such progress will be fundamental
for protecting the human right of access to water and
sanitation, since the United Nations itself recognized
that this is a vital right, one that is necessary in order to
enjoy all the other human rights.

Costa Rica has had valuable experiences in terms
of cross-border cooperation, since on both borders we
have rivers that unite us with our neighbours. We firmly
believe in the need to bolster cross-border cooperation
in water management in an ongoing fashion, and not
only in the form of projects for the benefit of the cross-
border population, which in our region is among the
most vulnerable.

Our experience in integrated water management
and its impact on the well-being of the population are
proof of the contribution of water in peacebuilding and
peacekeeping, in a real and lasting peace. Hence our
interest in promoting regional cooperation mechanisms
that would pool national experiences and could be
shared with other developing countries.

We must develop management, financial and
planning mechanisms to protect the sources of water
that are necessary to guarantee future access to water
for our populations, especially the rural population and
indigenous communities, while making them active
participants in local communities in protecting that
resource, which would prevent conflicts over access
to water. Within those mechanisms, we can mention,
for example, our experience in the payment for water
environmental services and measuring the water
footprint of all our activities.

The fact that the Security Council has devoted an
open debate to the issue of water, peace and security
is of paramount importance for this natural finite and
vulnerable resource. It shows that we have begun to
realize that, if we do not protect it adequately, if we do
not measure its true value as a development instrument,
if we do not create the institutional and legal structure
that is required, water will be a threat to international
security, and not a never-ending source of sustainable
development and peace as it should be.

