Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): Let me at the
outset express our gratitude for the presence of
President Ramos-Horta. We are pleased to see him in
the Council today and thank him for his impressive
and, at the same time, candid statement. We are also
particularly grateful for the presence of the Secretary-
General and for his comprehensive and informative
briefing on an issue on which the United Nations has
truly been able to make a difference.

Let me also say that Austria fully aligns itself
with the statement that will be delivered later in the
day by the representative of the Czech Republic on
behalf of the European Union.

My country is proud that we were able to make a
contribution along Timor-Leste's way to independence.
Burg Schlaining and Krumbach Castle were the venues
of the Intra-East Timorese dialogue under the
patronage of Secretary-General Kofi Annan in 1995
and 1998, which resulted in the Burg Schlaining
Declaration. President Ramos-Horta and Bishop Belo
were amongst our esteemed guests at the time.

Looking at present developments, we welcome
the significant progress made in addressing the
consequences of the 2006 crisis, in particular the
reintegration of the Falintil-Forcas de Defesa de Timor-
Leste petitioners into civilian life and the accelerated
return of internally displaced persons (IDPs), which
allowed for the majority of IDP camps to be closed. We
therefore also support the recommendations of Walter
Kalin, Representative of the Secretary-General on the
Human Rights for Internally Displaced Persons, on the
sustainability of returns and durable solutions, and
acknowledge the Government's five-pillar National
Recovery Strategy as an important step in that
direction.
We would like to congratulate the Government of
Timor-Leste on those encouraging developments,
which have unfolded in a remarkably smooth manner
and without major violent incidents, and we thank the
United Nations and the international security forces for
their important contributions. In particular, we wish to
acknowledge the efforts of the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) police,
working together with the national police force, in
stabilizing the security situation.

Austria welcomes progress made in preparing for
the resumption of policing responsibilities by national
structures. On that point, we are in full agreement with
the Secretary-General that a phased approach should be
pursued, based in particular on the agreed criteria set
out in his report. We are pleased to note that adherence
to human rights standards will be one of the factors in
measuring the readiness of districts and units to resume
policing functions. Sustainable success in that field
requires a broad approach that also entails the effective
strengthening of the rule of law.

Let me say that the Permanent Mission of Timor-
Leste has been one of the most active participants in
the work of the friends of the rule of law, here at
Headquarters in New York, and we are therefore not
surprised that, for the Government of Timor-Leste, the
rule of law is also a key priority. It is clear that we
support the Government of Timor-Leste in its reform
efforts and the Secretary-General's recommendation to
accomplish an independent needs assessment of the
judicial sector to allow for a coordinated approach in
justice sector reform. We share the concern of UNMIT
over the high levels of sexual and gender-based
violence, which is one of the major public security
problems. We hope that the National Parliament will
soon enact the legislation necessary to ensure the
protection of and support for victims, as well as
accountability for perpetrators.

We are also encouraged to hear that allegations of
ill treatment and human rights violations during arrests
have substantially decreased following the disbanding
of the Joint Command. It is important that members of
the security forces be brought to justice for human
rights violations documented by UNMIT during states
of exception and that those responsible for criminal
acts and human rights violations during the 2006 crisis
be held accountable, as recommended by the
Independent Special Commission of Inquiry. We
support the authorities in Timor-Leste in their efforts to
build strong institutions to fight impunity for grave
human rights violations.

Finally, in order to achieve long-term stability,
review and reform of the security sector remain of
utmost importance. In this context, let me place
particular emphasis on the need for a clear definition of
the army's role in peacetime, the clarification of the
relationship between the army and the police, as well
as internal accountability mechanisms and civil
oversight.

We welcome the fact that UNMIT is already
integrating peacebuilding aspects and thus helping to
bridge a potential gap between peacekeeping and
peacebuilding as the country moves forward. In order
to gradually strengthen a peacebuilding approach to
resolving the remaining issues, we would encourage
Timor-Leste to consider starting cooperation with the
Peacebuilding Fund in the near future.

In closing, Austria wishes to acknowledge the
important role that UNMIT continues to play and to
express support for the extension of its mandate for
another 12 months. We thank UNMIT and the
Government of Timor-Leste for the elaboration of the
medium-term strategy. In our view, the achievements
that have been made during these last years of close
cooperation between UNMIT and the Government of
Timor-Leste represent a success story, and lessons
should drawn from them and applied in other
comparable places.

