Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank you, Sir, for taking the initiative to
convene today's meeting. I also welcome the presence
and statements of the President of the Economic and
Social Council, Ambassador Rasi, and Under-
Secretary-General Egeland.

Since the end of the cold war, some regions of the
world have been afflicted by frequent conflicts, mostly
intra-State, with ethnic and religious dimensions as
well as political, economic, social and humanitarian
facets. In many cases, such conflicts also affect the
peace and stability of neighbouring countries and
regions. The important issue of how effectively to
address such complex crises calls for serious
consideration by the Security Council and the United
Nations membership as a whole. In that context, I wish
to make the following comments.

First, priority must be accorded to prevention.
Conflict prevention is the first and a significant step in
the resolution of complex crises. In recent years, in the
face of multiplying complex crises, the Secretary-
General has repeatedly emphasized that the United
Nations should move from a culture of response to a
culture of prevention. The Security Council and the
General Assembly have adopted resolutions on the
prevention of conflicts. We support the increased
efforts of the United Nations to add preventive
diplomacy to the arsenal of important instruments
available to fulfil its functions.

The Security Council, with its primary
responsibilities in that regard, should formulate an
integrated preventive strategy suited to the
characteristics of complex crises. The General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and the
various United Nations agencies, on the basis of their
comparative advantages and acting within their
respective competences, should develop synergy in
their conflict prevention efforts.

Secondly, priority must be attached to
development. Granted, the resolution of complex crises
calls for a series of measures, including the
containment and resolution of conflicts, security sector
reforms, the provision of humanitarian relief, the
establishment of the rule of law and the promotion of
good governance. To eliminate the underlying root
causes of crises, development must be made a top
priority.

Post-cold war crises and conflicts occur mostly in
underdeveloped countries and regions, basically
because of their chronic poverty and backwardness and
failure to benefit from economic globalization.
Therefore, the United Nations should devote greater
attention to development, vigorously foster a culture of
development, strive to help developing countries
eradicate poverty and develop their economies and
increase its involvement in post-conflict regional and
national reconstruction. The Economic and Social
Council can play an even greater role in that regard.

Thirdly, the synergy and coordination between
United Nations and regional organizations must be
enhanced. Regional organizations have a unique
advantage in maintaining the stability of regions. In
recent years, the Security Council has had fruitful
cooperation with the African Union (AU), the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and other regional and subregional
organizations on the questions of Sierra Leone, Liberia,
Cote d'Ivoire and Burundi. In order to further enhance
such synergy and cooperation the Security Council, in
addressing complex crises, should seek the views of
regional organizations on a wider basis, share its
information with regional organizations and achieve
mutual complementarity with them.

The Secretary-General's special envoys can join
the special envoys of the AU and other regional
organizations in their good offices and mediation
efforts. In addition, the United Nations should increase
assistance to regional organizations such as the AU, to
help them enhance their overall capacity in early
warning, peacekeeping and other endeavours.

United Nations experience has shown that there is
no single formula that is universally applicable to the
resolution of complex crises. Any solution must be
tailored to local conditions, varying cultures and
historical backgrounds. At the same time, in the
process of crisis resolution the will of the people of the
countries concerned should be respected and their
Views fully sought. Only thus can the settlement plans
surely contribute to the resolution of crises and the
attainment of peace.

