Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation): I have an
innovative idea about the Thuringian hourglass. Lay
the sand watch flat when I am speaking.

(spoke in Russian)

We welcome the High Commissioner for Refugees
and thank him for his briefing. We deeply appreciate the
effective work of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in situations
of major humanitarian crisis that lead to mass flows
of refugees. We hope that the new Global Compact
on Refugees, whose adoption our country supported,
will help to strengthen the international regime for the
protection of refugees.

Assistance to refugees and stateless persons today
is an essential component of the complex efforts
aimed at maintaining international peace, security
and stability. We share the concern about the difficult
migration situation in Europe, resulting partly from
the ongoing uncontrolled arrival of people from the
Middle East and North Africa. The cases of deaths at
sea and the presence of unaccompanied children in
mixed migration flows are especially worrying. We
feel compelled to point out once again that to a great
extent this situation is the consequence ofirresponsible
interference in the internal affairs of States in the
Middle East and North Africa. The situation of refugees
and forced migrants within Libya who are being held
in detention centres and encounter various forms of ill
treatment needs attention and solutions, as the High
Commissioner said today.

Russia is contributing to the strengthening of
the international refugee protection regime. We are
receiving and making arrangements for a significant
number of refugees and forced migrants from various
countries, including Ukraine, providing a large volume
of humanitarian assistance through bilateral and
multilateral channels and assisting States of origin
in creating conditions enabling refugees to return. In
the summer of 2018 Russia launched an initiative to
facilitate Syrian refugees' voluntary return home, and
we are seeing sustained momentum in that process.
Approximately 1,000 people are travelling to Syria
every day, primarily from Lebanon and Jordan. Since
July 2018 a total of more than 177,000 people have
returned. We have to help Syrians realize that legitimate
right. We believe that the international humanitarian
organizations have an increasingly large role to play
in this, and we urge UNHCR to intensify its efforts to
assist in the repatriation of Syrians. For its part, Russia
is also working in this area. More and more areas of the
country are becoming safe for the population. We are
working actively to restore basic infrastructure such
as water and electricity supplies, schools, hospitals
and housing, as well as conducting humanitarian mine
clearance and giving those in need urgent care.

I want to particularly emphasize that the process
of returning Syrian refugees and internally displaced
persons must be voluntary and should not be hedged
about with artificial conditions or politicized, as
some are trying to do by openly intimidating people
who wish to return home and hindering them from
leaving refugee camps. Instead of helping refugees
return and get resettled in their permanent homes, the
bulk of international assistance is going to supporting
refugee camps outside Syria and thereby maintaining
the status quo. We are particularly worried about the
situation in Rukban camp, where tens of thousands of
people are being kept on a humanitarian drip in totally
unacceptable conditions. An overwhelming majority of
them want to leave the camp. Russia has opened two
humanitarian corridors to enable people to leave the
camp, and the Syrian Government has also made the
necessary preparations for people to be evacuated to
their chosen places of residence in Latakia, Khalidiya,
Al-Amar, Homs, Mkhin, Al-Qaryatayn and Palmyra as
well as the suburbs of Damascus and Aleppo.

Together with representatives of UNHCR, the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
the Syrian Red Crescent Society and the Syrian
authorities, the Russian military has organized a
number of coordination meetings for devising step-by-
step measures aimed at resettling Rukban residents. We
are willing to continue the dialogue on Rukban with
all interested parties, including the United Nations,
the United States and Jordan, without preconditions
or any politicization of the humanitarian aspects of
the problem.

In conclusion, I would like to once again
underscore that Russia intends to continue to provide
comprehensive support and assistance to UNHCR's
activities, which are vitally important to the millions
of people who have been forced to leave their homes.

