Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for convening today's
meeting. I also thank Deputy Secretary-General
Jan Eliasson, President Peter Peter Maurer of the
International Committee of the Red Cross and Director
Masood Karokhail of The Liaison Office for their
informative briefings.

Today, as we commemorate the memory of the
22 staff members who lost their lives in the 2003
bombing in Baghdad, we are once again reminded
that we must prevent the recurrence of that kind of
tragedy. The safety and protection of humanitarian
workers has been affirmed in various international
instruments, including the 1994 Convention on the
Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel.
The Security Council condemned all acts of Violence
directed at humanitarian personnel, as well as attacks
on peacekeepers, in its presidential statement on the
protection of civilians adopted during my country's
presidency of the Security Council in February 2013
(S/PRST/2013/2). Nevertheless, with the ongoing
humanitarian impacts of armed conflicts today,
humanitarian personnel are increasingly exposed to
more complex and risky environments than ever before.
A significant rise in abductions of United Nations
personnel and non-United Nations humantarian workers
has occurred in Afghanistan, Mali, the Sudan and other
places. Furthermore, in the past few weeks, 11 staff
members of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East were
killed during shelling in Gaza as they worked tirelessly
to provide humanitarian aid to those in need. Against
that disconcerting backdrop, I would like to make a
few observations on how to enhance the protection of
humanitarian workers and assets.

First, with regard to prevention, a defining
feature of many contemporary conflicts is a failure to
respect international humanitarian law by both State
and non-State armed actors. As such, it is absolutely
essential to improve compliance with international
humanitarian law as a robust preventive measure for
the protection of humanitarian workers in the field.
Fundamental international humanitarian law, such as
the 1949 Geneva Conventions, the 1977 Additional
Protocols thereto and the 1994 Convention on the
Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel,
should be fully implemented. It is also importany to
raise awareness on the need for respecting humanitarian
action and humanitarian personnel, especially among
military and security forces.

Secondly, with regard to protection, amain challenge
for humanitarian workers is striking a balance between
effectively carrying out humanitarian programmes and
the risks faced by humanitarian workers. In particular,
as the humanitarian activities of local and international
civil society organizations have recently proliferated,
the protection of non-governmental humanitarian
personnel is also emerging as an urgent challenge.
The United Nations should continue to strengthen and
refine its security management strategy. In terms of
practical measures, it is necessary to further develop
guidelines and tools to support a risk-management
approach to humanitarian activities. At the same time,
dialogue with the relevant Governments and non-State
parties will help humanitarian organizations to better
understand often-fluid security situations, as well as
social and cultural factors on the ground.

Thirdly, with regard to accountability, it is critical
to ensure accountability for attacks and other violations
against humanitarian personnel. The primary obligation
to investigate and prosecute such violations lies with
national authorities; but in reality there are relatively
small numbers ofprosecutions at the national level. It is
necessary, therefore, that the international community
provide financial and technical support with a view to
improving accountability at the national level. At the
same time, national accountability mechanisms can be
complemented by commissions of inquiry, fact-finding
missions and sanctions regimes, as well as by possible
referrals to the International Criminal Court.

Before concluding, I wish to pay tribute to all
those humanitarian workers who lost their lives while
delivering life-saving assistance to people in need. We
have come to realize that, by targeting humanitarian
workers, such attacks have brought inhumane harm
to so many civilians waiting for assistance in dire
situations. That is an important lesson that we should
never forget.

