Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): We thank the
Luxembourg presidency for holding today's public
meeting on the crisis in Ukraine and appreciate your
presence here, Mr. Minister. We are grateful for the
participation of and statement by Prime Minister
Yatsenyuk of Ukraine, and for the briefing by Under-
Secretary-General Feltman. We express our firm
support for the political process towards elections on
25 May, under the Government of Ukraine.

The Republic of Korea remains deeply concerned
over the continuing escalation oftensions in Ukraine. We
are particularly troubled by the decision of the Crimean
Parliament to hold a referendum and its unilateral

declaration of independence. Those actions will only
further exacerbate the already tense situation. Without
a doubt, it is vital that the unity, territorial integrity and
sovereignty of Ukraine be fully respected. Ukrainians
should retain full power over their country's affairs,
without intervention or influence by outside forces. In
that vein, we urge the full observance of all relevant
international and bilateral agreements, particularly the
Charter of the United Nations and the 1994 Budapest
Memorandum.

The unabated military activities in Crimea, which
are violating the sovereignty of Ukraine, are also
a source of grave concern. Any military presence or
activity not authorized by the Ukrainian Government
and in breach of the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Ukraine must immediately cease. We welcome
the ongoing diplomatic efforts of the international
community to de-escalate the situation, in particular
those of the Secretary-General and the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). We
also underscore the importance of bilateral dialogue
between Ukraine and Russia.

The Republic of Korea believes that credible
international monitoring mechanisms will have a notable
calming effect on the ground. In that connection, it is
worrying that the United Nations Assistant Secretary-
General for Human Rights and OSCE personnel have
been denied access to the Crimean region. Unhindered
access must be ensured for such missions. Any action
threatening the safety and security of international
personnel must be stopped.

The stability and prosperity of Ukraine are critical
not only to peace in Europe, but also far beyond. We
truly hope that Ukraine will emerge from the crisis as
a strong, inclusive and prosperous democracy, led only
by the will and aspirations of the Ukrainian people. It
is the responsibility of the international community to
assist the people of Ukraine in fulfilling that goal.

