Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): First, I would like
to thank Assistant Secretary-General Zerihoun for his
useful briefing this morning. I also thank the Chair of
the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, Ambassador Vieira, for the update he gave
from a peacebuilding perspective. Let me at the outset
also commend the leading role played by the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) in
Guinea-Bissau and recognize the important of the
presence of the ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-Bissau on
the ground.

There have been a series of positive developments
in Guinea-Bissau over the past few months, including
the appointment of the Prime Minister, the formation
of an inclusive Government, the reopening of the
National Assembly, the approval of a new Government
programme and the adoption of a gender-quota law.
We have also witnessed the strong commitment of the
people of Guinea-Bissau to the electoral process, as
demonstrated by the high numbers of people that have
registered to vote. Targeted measures to ensure the
equal participation of women in the electoral process
are, however, still needed. While we note yesterday's
announcement that set 10 March as the date of the
elections, we regret the postponement of the elections
and the lack of preparations in that regard. We now
call on the Government and all parties to urgently
ensure that the conditions for free and fair democratic
elections are in place and that there are no further
delays. As highlighted by the Chair of the Guinea-
Bissau configuration ofthe Peacebuilding Commission,
the six-point roadmap and the Conakry Agreement are
still valid and important. They must now be promptly
implemented in full. The stability pact is also important.
It needs to be based on an inclusive and consultative
process in order to be credible and sustainable.

We welcome the Secretary-General's report
(S/2018/1086) and his thorough assessment of the
mandate ofthe United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS). The timeline
set out for the transition seems realistic. The United
Nations system must now conduct a timely and
integrated transition-planning process. It is important
that the Council be kept updated on the progress of
that work. Predictable resources and adequate capacity
for the United Nations country team will be critical
to the transition, as the experience in, for example,
Liberia has shown. Another lesson from Liberia - as
was highlighted in the recently adopted presidential
statement (S/PRST/2018/3) on the Peacebuilding
Commission's advisory role to the Security Council with
regard to sustaining peace - is that the Peacebuilding
Commission has a particularly important role to play
in such transitions. For a transition to be sustainable,
it must be based on national peacebuilding priorities,
as well as on political will, local ownership and
inclusiveness. The Peacebuilding Commission's efforts
in that regard have our full and active support.

It is important to address the root causes of conflict
in Guinea-Bissau through measures such as moving
forward on constitutional reform, reconciliation and
political dialogue, strengthening the rule oflaw through
strong and inclusive institutions and, not least, ensuring
equal access to economic opportunities. Regional
engagement will continue to be critical. Such regional
efforts should be backed up by coherent international
support. Our international engagement must also be
sustained in the delicate post-electoral phase and
include support for the aforementioned reforms. Our
continued support will be crucial to helping Guinea-
Bissau to consolidate peace and build a stable and
prosperous future.

