Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Allow me to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, the Permanent Representatives of Rwanda and
Bangladesh and the representative of the World Bank,
who have shed light on developments in peacebuilding
and on problems and prospects in that area.
Peacebuilding assistance is one of the key factors
for the effective settlement of conflicts and the
stabilization of post-conflict situations, as well as for
avoiding a relapse into crisis. This is especially clear in
light ofthe recent events in the Middle East and the new
wave of instability in a number of States on the African
continent.

Against this backdrop, today's meeting on the
issue of peacebuilding is, in our view, a most timely
initiative, and we expect that we will have a candid and
comprehensive discussion. We welcome Mrs. Maria
Angela Holguin Cue'llar, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Colombia.

Within the framework of United Nations
peacekeeping missions, peacebuilding offices and the
country-specific configurations of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), significant peacebuilding work
is being carried out. This activity is difficult and
challenging. It requires the coordinated efforts of
Member States, United Nations programmes and funds,
regional entities, the United Nations Secretariat and
international financial institutions.

At the same time, we see that international
assistance in this field remains fragmented. There
is a need for increased coordination in the division
of labour among the relevant stakeholders, and the
effectiveness of existing financing mechanisms must
be enhanced. Solving those problems will require the
close attention ofMember States. It will also require the
systematization of peacebuilding processes, including
by harmonizing the work of the existing United Nations
peacebuilding architecture.

The Russian Federation supports the activity of the
Peacebuilding Commission. The main added value of
this body, in our view, lies in its coordinating role in
peacebuilding and in the provision of valuable advice to
the Security Council, upon its request, regarding States
on its agenda. We would like to convey our gratitude
to the Permanent Representative of Bangladesh,
Mr. Abulkalam Abdul Momen, for his statement and
for his first six months of effective leadership of the
Commission. We expect that the proposals that he has
spelled out, which were drafted jointly with the chairs of
the country-specific configurations, will subsequently
be carefully considered by the entire Commission.

Regarding the PBC's work as a whole thus far, and
despite the time that has passed since 2005, we must
note that a great deal remains to be done to optimize
the effectiveness of its work. In that respect, we are
convinced that the PBC's current mandate and its
unique intergovernmental nature and structure are all
in keeping with its intended role as a key body in the
coordination of peacebuilding assistance.

Serious work is being carried out within the
framework of country-specific configurations, and
here the PBC's main merit lies in engaging in direct
dialogue with Governments, guaranteeing their leading
role and ownership of the peacebuilding process as well
as determining and setting out the main needs on the
ground.

The country-specific configurations are a unique
opportunity for cooperation with all peacebuilding
stakeholders, both in the field and in New York.
This includes United Nations structures, regional
organizations, financial institutions and bilateral
donors. Information on assistance should be aggregated,
analysed and, most importantly, discussed in an
intergovernmental format. The result would, in our
view, be useful both to the PBC itself for the elaboration
of recommendations for various States on its agenda
and to the Security Council in making decisions on
individual States.

The reverse process is necessary as well. The
Commission must relay information on peacebuilding
priorities, on existing shortcomings in peacebuilding
assistance and on the duplication of efforts to entities
working in the field.

The PBC, within the framework of its mandate,
should also make a contribution to resolving important
cross-cutting issues related to peacebuilding and the
United Nations system as a whole and which require
multifaceted comprehensive discussions with Member
States within the framework of the main bodies of the
United Nations.

Currently, one such topic is civilian capacity-
building. Training reserves of national civilian
experts has become one of the most important fields
of assistance to post-conflict States. After all, it is to
resolve peacebuilding tasks, to provide assistance in
rebuilding State institutions, law enforcement and
other structures shaken by conflict that civilian experts
are sent to post-conflict States. The unique composition
of the PBC and its country-specific configurations
enables it to lend this process a high profile and a
genuinely intergovernmental dimension and to utilize
the South-South and trilateral cooperation mechanisms.

In practice, and despite the efforts of individual
components of the Commission, it has not always
been possible for the Commission to achieve harmony,
even in its own work. As is often said, the right hand
is simply unaware of what the left hand is doing. The
organizational committee therefore needs a clear
picture of what is going on in the country-specific
configurations, just as a thread is needed to stitch
together the various configurations.

The procedure for the preparation and taking of
decisions in the configurations needs to be fine-tuned
and the process of determining priorities for the activities
of the Peacebuilding Fund and Peacebuilding Support
Office must be made more transparent for PBC member
States. Many of these problems can be resolved through
technical fine-tuning, including the reorganization of
working methods, especially as the roadmap for the
Commission's work for this year contains the issue of
working methods as a priority.

We would like to touch on an important component
of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture,
namely the Peacebuilding Fund. This mechanism for
emergency financing, which promotes the attraction of
long-term resources for reconstruction and development,
has proven its effectiveness. For this reason, the Russian
Federation continues to contribute $2 million to the
Fund annually. The provision of assistance through the
Peacebuilding Fund on the basis of programmes and
projects elaborated by Governments and the United
Nations duly takes into account the priorities of the host
country and fosters a responsible approach to using such
assistance. It is gratifying that over half of the Fund's
resources are allocated to States on the PBC's agenda.
We continue to base our actions in that regard on the
priority given to the country principle in the allocation
of resources.

