Mr. Reinart (Estonia): Let me first join my
colleagues in thanking you, Sir, for organizing today's
debate. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his comprehensive report (S/2013/535) and Special
Representative Jan Kubis for his briefing and the
tremendous work that the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) has been doing. I
also support and align Estonia with the statement to be
delivered shortly by the Special Representative of the
European Union for Afghanistan.

Although many challenges remain for Afghanistan
to become a wholly secure, democratic and prosperous
country, we recognize with satisfaction that the Afghan
people are successfully taking over responsibilities in
their own country. That is crucial, as without ownership
neither real transformation nor development will ever
be possible or sustainable.

This summer marks a significant milestone
in Afghanistan, as the Afghan National Security
Forces have taken the security lead across the
country. We have also seen positive progress in local
administrations assuming civilian responsibilities
and in the reconciliation process. It is important that
the preparations for the elections be on track and that
the necessary legal and institutional frameworks have
been adopted. Free and fair elections are paramount to
the political transition and to consolidating democracy
in Afghanistan. We hope that the Afghan authorities
shall continue to give priority to election preparations,
including ensuring inclusive participation of all eligible
population groups and providing security during the
election period.

It is vital that the international community remain
engaged in supporting Afghanistan's efforts throughout
the transition phase and after 2014, and that the Afghans
take due note of the long-term partnerships declared in
Tokyo and Chicago. In that regard, the continuation of
development cooperation and the full implementation
of the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework are
fundamental. After the withdrawal of the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) mission, the Afghan
National Security Forces will still need advice,
assistance and training. We hope that the modalities for
further cooperation between NATO and Afghanistan
will be defined in the coming months. Furthermore,
the role of the international community, in particular
that of the United Nations, in assisting the elections
preparation process is essential.

Estonia remains committed to supporting
Afghanistan during and after the transition period.
Estonia, as one of the highest per capita contributors to
ISAF, has been a long-term partner with Afghanistan.
In order to support the Afghan Government in
safeguarding the elections, our contingent will stay
on the ground until the end of the election period. Our
experts currently participate in the European Union
Police Mission in Afghanistan and NATO training
missions, and we are ready and willing to contribute
to training and financing Afghan security forces after
2014.

Afghanistan is also a priority country for Estonia
in development cooperation, as we believe that there
is no durable solution for Afghanistan involving only
a military component. As Estonia itself has been a
recipient of development assistance, we believe that we
can contribute with our knowledge and experience of
where aid is most needed and expected by the locals.
That is the reason why we focus mainly on the promotion
of health care, rule of law, the empowerment of women
and education in Afghanistan. For instance, Kabul
University is currently establishing three master's
programmes in the field of information technology
with the support of University of Tallinn.

Estonia pays careful attention to the protection of
human rights, in particular to the rights of women and
children. Human rights awareness-raising campaigns
and education are instrumental in eliminating gender
stereotypes. We also call upon the Afghan authorities to
fully adhere to universal human rights and their pledge
to continue balanced development and empowerment

of all social groups, with special focus on the most
vulnerable groups, namely, women and children.

It is hard to underestimate the role the United
Nations and its bodies have been playing in Afghanistan;
that role is only likely to increase as they continue to
support and strengthen Afghan capacities.

