Mr. Serrano: I would first like to thank the
Mexican presidency of the Security Council for
organizing today's open debate and for preparing a
very stimulating discussion paper (S/2010/322). I also
offer many thanks for inviting the European Union
(EU) to participate in the debate. The candidate
countries Turkey, Croatia and the Former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia; the countries of the
Stabilisation and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia; the European Free Trade
Association country Liechtenstein, a member of the
European Economic Area; as well as Ukraine and
Georgia, align themselves with this declaration. I will
read an abridged version of the EU statement, which is
being circulated.

The European Union reaffirms its deep
commitment to an international order based on
international law, including human rights law, with the
United Nations at its core. In our view, it is imperative
that we all join our efforts to strengthen the rule of law
at the national, international and institutional levels.

The rule of law should be mainstreamed
throughout all peacebuilding and State-building
activities, in particular as regards transitional justice
and the integration of justice into the external support
to security sector reform. In this regard, the European
Union welcomes the establishment of the Rule of Law
Coordination and Resource Group and calls for greater
efforts by the Group and the Rule of Law Unit to
ensure a coordinated and coherent response by the
United Nations system in the field of the rule of law.
The European Union also supports the idea of an
update report by the Secretary-General taking stock of
the implementation of the recommendations contained
in his 2004 report (S/2004/616) and making proposals
for further actions.

Reforming the security sector in post-conflict
environments is crucial to the consolidation of peace
and to promoting poverty reduction. Only where
legitimate State authority is expanded through the rule
of law and good governance can countries be prevented
from relapsing into conflict and losing development
achievements. The rule of law should not be seen as a
principle exclusive to the justice or security sectors,
but as crucial in all areas where public authority is
being exercised, in particular in public administration.

Cooperation between the United Nations and
other international actors such as the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe or the Council of
Europe is essential for the effective promotion of the
rule of law, particularly in post-conflict situations. The
European Union has also gradually focused on the
re-establishment of the rule of law in post-conflict
situations. More than 4,000 civilian experts are
currently deployed in nine European Union missions,
of which 1,700 alone are in Kosovo, and they are
working together with their United Nations
counterparts.

Support to governance in its different aspects is
also at the core of EU development cooperation,
including with African, Caribbean and Pacific States.

Finally, the accession process, in the framework
of the European Union enlargement policy, is also a
powerful tool to drive reforms in these areas. The rule
of law is part of the so-called Copenhagen political
criteria for EU membership, and issues such as an
independent and impartial judiciary and the effective
fight against corruption and organized crime largely
condition progress towards accession.

Non-violent conflict resolution, be it through
negotiation, mediation, arbitration or judicial
settlement, is, at the same time, the result of adhering
to the principle of the rule of law and an important
contribution to further consolidating it. The European
Union supports the use of mediation as a peaceful,
efficient and cost-effective instrument of conflict
prevention and resolution in line with the Secretary-
General's report of April 2009 (S/2009/189). The
European Union is in the process of strengthening and
professionalizing its own mediation and mediation
support capacity so as to use these tools more
effectively. We appreciate the continuing cooperation
with the Mediation Support Unit in that endeavour.

Women's underrepresentation in peace processes
and the lack of gender expertise in negotiation and
mediation teams seriously limit the extent to which
women's experiences of conflict and consequent needs
for justice and recovery are addressed in these
processes. Resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008)
constitute an important framework for conflict
settlement activities, which need to incorporate the
principles contained therein at all stages of the process.
The European Union strongly supports the role of
the International Court of Justice and calls on all States
that have not yet done so to consider accepting the
jurisdiction of the Court in accordance with its Statute.

The European Union is also a staunch supporter
of the International Criminal Court. The Court has
already proven its value in preventing and deterring
those crimes that undermine the very essence of
humanity. With the winding down of the ad hoc and
special tribunals, the International Criminal Court will
be at the centre of the international criminal justice
system.

The Security Council can play an important role
in ensuring that justice for the most serious crimes is
brought to victims. Impunity should no longer be an
option.

As regards sanction regimes, the European Union
supports the principle of restrictive measures with clear
objectives that are targeted at those persons or entities
identified as responsible for the policies or actions that
have prompted the decision to impose sanctions.

The introduction and implementation of
restrictive measures must always be in accordance with
international law and respect for human rights, and the
European Union attaches great importance to the
application of fair and clear procedures when
designating persons and entities to be targeted. In this
regard, the European Union welcomes the
improvements introduced by resolution 1904 (2009).
We welcome in particular the recent appointment of the
Ombudsperson by the Secretary-General and express
our hope that she will be able to take up her functions
in the very near future.

For its part, following a number of recent
judgements by the European Union General Court and
the Court of Justice, the European Union has
conducted a thorough review and consolidation of its
implementation procedures. Those procedures will be
kept under constant review and further adapted where
necessary.

