I wish to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your timely choice of topic for your signature event today. Germany has joined you in hosting several informal meetings of the Security Council entitled "Monitoring food security in countries with conflict situations". These briefings have illustrated the link between conflict and food insecurity on the basis of evidence from several country situations. Today's briefers made clear that conflict remains a primary driver of acute food insecurity. In 2018, the Security Council adopted resolution 2417 (2018), condemning the use of the starvation of civilians as a method of warfare as well as the denial of humanitarian assistance in conflict situations. That landmark resolution paved the way for addressing conflict-induced hunger, underlining the clear causal link between armed conflict, food insecurity and starvation. Two years after the adoption of resolution 2417 (2018), the international community expects the Security Council to act more decisively on the interlinkages between conflict and food insecurity. The Global Report on Food Crises, released today, found that in 2019 135 million people were affected by acute food insecurity - the highest number in the four years since reporting started. The report particularly highlights an increase in acute food insecurity in crises such as those in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and South Sudan. That trend requires the mobilization of all actors involved in conflict prevention and resolution. Resolution 2417 (2018) initiated an early-warning mechanism that allows the Security Council to act prior to the onset of a hunger hazard. This can safeguard lives and preserve livelihoods. But the Council needs to reinforce its preventive approach, identify any threats to food security in conflict settings early on and take early and appropriate action to preserve international peace and security. There is still a lot of potential for this kind of early warning. We call on the Secretariat to closely monitor fragile countries and to report swiftly to the Council on risks of conflict-induced famine and widespread food insecurity in armed conflicts, if necessary also outside the usual reporting cycle. German humanitarian assistance places great emphasis on food security as well as on promoting a paradigm shift towards a forward-looking humanitarian system that can anticipate crises and act very early on. Since 2015, Germany has supported anticipatory humanitarian action on the part of various partners with more than €30 million. Of all the humanitarian sectors, food assistance has received the largest amount of funding from Germany in past years. Given the dire needs that still exist, food security will certainly remain one of our priority areas for this year as well. Germany would like to underline and support in particular the importance that resolution 2417 (2018) attaches to adherence to international humanitarian law and to sustaining humanitarian access. All parties to a conflict must comply with their obligations under international humanitarian law to respect and protect civilians, so that humanitarian actors can perform their vital jobs. We call on all relevant actors to provide safe, rapid and unimpeded access to all people in need. We as Security Council members should help create the conditions that allow humanitarian workers to deliver principled humanitarian assistance and bring relief to those most in need. That is also the purpose of the Humanitarian Call for Action, which Germany initiated together with France in April 2019 and which has been endorsed by 44 States Members of the United Nations. Many conflict-affected countries are also experiencing the adverse effects of climate change first-hand, including drought, water scarcity, desertification, land degradation, erratic rainfall, flooding and other climate-related disasters. There is growing evidence that conflict and climate change, followed by economic shocks, are the two main drivers of acute food insecurity in the world. The interaction between conflict, climate change and food insecurity in an already vulnerable context has devastating impacts on civilians and poses a serious threat to the achievement of sustainable development. In the Sahel region, we see the tangible repercussions of the link between climate change, security and food insecurity, as conflicts are flaring up between herders and farmers owing to competition over scarce resources of water and land, which serve as their livelihoods and means of food production. To secure and sustain peace in some of the world's most fragile contexts, such as the Sahel, support for agricultural livelihoods should be considered as one part of a holistic response. Climate change and food insecurity have serious effects on the maintenance of international peace and security with respect to the crises already on our agenda, and they threaten to cause and aggravate conflicts elsewhere. That is why the Council has to deal with these issues. In view of the fact that approximately 183 million people are at risk of slipping into acute food insecurity if confronted by an additional shock or stressor, as underlined by the Global Report on Food Crises released today, we are concerned about the impact of pandemics on food security. Today's raging coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic makes us aware that, althougha virus spreads indiscriminately, those hit hardest are those who were at greatest risk before the pandemic. Unfortunately, the pandemic disproportionately affects those people that already belong to the most vulnerable groups, among them women, who are often on the front lines in the fight against the pandemic, and children, for whom, in too many cases worldwide, skipping school also means skipping lunch. In the words of Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed, "The risks faced by people everywhere go far beyond the virus itself. The pandemic, and the measures taken to mitigate it, are already having very serious social and economic consequences, including on our food systems." (see DSG/SM/1401) At the moment, sufficient amounts of food are available, but the threat of supply-chain disruptions due to work, travel and trade restrictions is obvious. To avoid rising hunger levels due to COVID-19, not only does unimpeded access to means of production have to be maintained but workers in agriculture, logistics, processing and distribution also have to remain available, and therefore need to be adequately protected. Therefore, we expect that large-scale humanitarian assistance will be required to prevent and cope with the consequences of the disease for food security and to deliver support to millions of people, especially to the most exposed and vulnerable groups. We call on all relevant actors to take measures to ensure the delivery of humanitarian assistance despite border closures, travel bans, quarantine orders and difficulties in procurement processes.
