Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I speak in my capacity as a critical stakeholder
on this agenda item.

The ongoing Israeli occupation of the Arab
territories poses a great challenge to the credibility
and significance of the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations and of international law. Despite the
unprecedented manipulations of Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions on the Israeli occupation
of Arab territory in Palestine, southern Lebanon and
the Golan, rhetoric continues to be used to try to turn
essential issues into items of secondary importance and
vice versa through a flood of details of little import to
the detriment of what is essential - the need for the
Israeli occupation to be brought to an end. This is the
crux of the agenda item: ending the Israeli occupation
of Arab and Palestinian territories and empowering
Palestinians to enjoy their legitimate rights. It appears
that some choose to engage in discussions on issues that
have nothing to do with an end to the Israeli occupation
of Arab lands and the Palestinian question, talking, for
example, about Iran and going on about other matters,
knowing full well that this runs counter to consensus
within the Council and diminishes the importance of
addressing the agenda item at hand.

We have recently seen a series of provocative
unilateral measures. Those behind them are trying
to capitalize on the Security Council's inability to
implement its own resolutions on ending the Israeli
occupation in order to turn the facts upside down
and shirk their legal obligations and the established
terms of reference. This was illustrated by the
United States President's recognition of occupied
Jerusalem as the capital of Israel and of what he
called "Israeli sovereignty" over the occupiedSyrian
Golan, completely flouting commitments made by
previous United States Administrations to comply
with all relevant United Nations resolutions, including
resolution 497 (1981), which states that by imposing
its legislation and administration in the Syrian Golan,
Israel, as an occupying Power, is acting in a manner
that is null and void and that its acts of aggression have
no legal validity. These direct provocations targeting
our country have continued unabated, including
through armed terrorist groups, leading most recently
to the deaths of four civilians, including a baby, and the
wounding of 21 others, mostly women and children.

Israeli practices also include the seizure of goods
and lands of Golan residents for the purposes of
expanding settlements or building wind-power stations.
These actions are often a mere pretext, given that our
compatriots in the Golan, having omitted their lands
from the proper registries, have seen their goods
and property seized or confiscated. This scandalous
behaviour by the Israeli occupying Power also continues
in Jerusalem and the West Bank. Yet that is not all: the
occupying Power held a Cabinet meeting in the Golan,
where it announced the creation of a new settlement
called Trump Heights as a gift from the Prime Minister
ofthe occupying Power to the United States President for
having violated the resolutions of the Security Council
and international law by unilaterally recognizing Israeli
sovereignty over the Syrian Golan.

Regretfully, this matter was not addressed by
Ms. DiCarlo, who has repeated the long-standing error
of Mr. Nickolay Mladenov. When she, Under-Secretary-
General for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, fails
to address the matter of the occupied Syrian Golan
under this agenda item, it constitutes a grave breach by
the Secretariat and a new iteration of Mr. Mladenov's
failure to address the issue of the occupied Syrian
Golan in his briefings before the Security Council. We
wish to voice this grievance to the Secretary-General
so that the matter will be duly addressed.

Our Government reaffirms that the Golan is an
integral part of the Syrian Arab Republic. Our claim to
it is an inviolable right that cannot be negotiated. The
Syrian Golan and the Syrian presence in the area is,
under international law, at the heart of our priorities.
We call on the Security Council and the United Nations
to take robust action without delay in order to ensure
that the principles of international law are applied so
as to bring an end to the Israeli policies of aggression
and its scandalous violations of international law,
the provisions of the Charter and Security Council
resolutions, including resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973) and 497 (1981).

We reiterate our demand that Israel, the occupying
Power, release prisoner Sidqi Al-Maqt and all other
Syrians it has imprisoned. Mr. Al-Maqt is a Syrian citizen
of the Golan who has spent 27 years in Israeli jails, as
many years as Nelson Mandela spent in apartheid-era
jails. His crime was documenting, through audiovisual
media, the cooperation of Israeli authorities with armed
terrorist groups. He was convicted to 14 years in prison.

Those present in the Chamber today should note
that the statements delivered by the representative of the
Israeli occupation before the Council are an unparalleled
rejection of Council resolutions and international law. I
would recall that President Mahmoud Abbas stated that
the Organization has adopted more than 800 resolutions
on the issue of Palestine. The statement delivered by
Israel speaks of everything except what is essential,
namely this agenda item, which is why this meeting
on ending Israeli occupation of Arab territories and
denying Israel's access to the occupied lands, including
pre-l967 Jerusalem, all of the Syrian Golan and what
remains of Lebanese territory has been held regularly
since 2002. Contrary to what the representative ofIsrael
would have us believe, it is the main reason behind
the prevailing tensions in the region. By speaking one
day of Lebanon, another day of Libya, another of the
Sudan and another of Yemen, the Israeli representative
denies at every meeting of the Council in which Israel
participates the essence of the agenda item, namely, the
occupation of Arab lands and the Palestinian question,
and the recognition of the legitimate right of the
Palestinian people. That is the essence of this agenda
item - not Iran, the Sudan, Yemen or Libya.

In conclusion, the Syrian Arab Republic maintains
its unwavering support for the Palestinian people's
right to self-determination, their desire to establish an
independent State with Jerusalem as its capital, and
their right of return, as set out in General Assembly
resolution 194 (III) of 1948. Furthermore, we support
the accession of Palestine as a full-fledged Member
of the Organization through the implementation of a
principle that cannot be blocked or lobbied against by
the occupying Power.

