Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General on Myanmar. It is
very good to know that her office in Myanmar is up
and running.

At the start, I apologize ifI may have to slip away
before the meeting is over. I am hosting an event for
Brian Urquhart, who turned 100 today. Colleagues
will know that Brian Urquhart was one of the original
officials of the United Nations, working closely with
very many Secretaries-General, and indeed was
instrumental in setting up peacekeeping and also
the International Atomic Energy Agency. I therefore
ask members to forgive me ifI need to step away for
that event.

The Council has focused great attention on the
events in Myanmar and particularly the Rohingya, and
I think it is fair to say that it remains one of the most
pressing issues before us. The forced displacement
of several hundreds of thousands of people across
an international border is bound to be something the
Council needs to keep before it, and the alleged crimes
against humanity committed against the Rohingya also
deserve the most serious attention of the Council. I am
also very grateful to the Special Envoy for setting out
the situation across the country, which I think we also
need to have regard to in the Council.

I want to start, if I may, on political developments.
The United Kingdom is a long-standing supporter ofthe
Burmese people's efforts to emerge from many decades
of military rule and to transition to democratic civilian
Government. As did the Special Envoy, we recognize
that Burmese democracy is still young and fragile, but
the upcoming elections next year will be an important
moment and efforts to consolidate the democratic
transition are ongoing. This is why it was very good to
hear about the constitutional amendments.

As I said, we recognize that conflict continues
across Myanmar, and the loss of life and displaced
people that we have seen are also of great concern. I
think that it is beyond doubt that a nationwide peace
settlement that guarantees rights and security for all the
peoples of Myanmar is also a very high priority. I think
we should be clear about two particular things. It is the
Burmese military that is the root cause of these long-
standing problems. In our pronouncements, I think that
it is very important that the Council make very clear
that we, united, are on the side of all those in Myanmar
who want peace and democratic change and that we
will help them in that.

But I should like to concentrate on the Rohingya for
the reasons I have outlined. We are very disappointed
that more has not been possible and that there has not
been more progress on getting the refugees back. That
obviously includes creating the conditions in which the
refugees feel able to go back, which is why the proposal
concerning the Advisory Commission on Rakhine State
became so important. I want to be clear that the United
Kingdom is not ideological about the refugees returning
home. They need to return home, but they can do so
only on the basis of the principles, established by the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR), that returns are safe, voluntary,
dignified and secure. We really want those principles
to be upheld.

We know that the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN) has taken a very strong interest in
returns, and that is welcome. Possibly the Indonesian
Ambassador will be able to say more. We know that
the ASEAN Coordinating Centre for Humanitarian
Assistance has been involved. We know that the
Chinese Envoy has been making strenuous efforts. I
repeat that we do not mind; from our perspective, we
are not dogmatic about who helps the refugees to get
back, but we do want to see the UNHCR principles
adhered to because they are there for a reason. They are
to ensure the safety of ordinary people.

I also want to pay tribute in the presence of His
Excellency the Foreign Secretary of Bangladesh and
to the generous support that Bangladesh has given and
continues to give to the Rohingya in Cox's Bazar and
on its territory. Bangladesh has made enormous efforts
to help the Rohingya people, and we believe that the
international community should continue to support
Bangladesh in this.

To our mind, the recommendations of the Advisory
Commission on Rakhine State remain the best
blueprint for Rakhine. We will be very interested to
see the Myanmar Government take three initial steps.
We would like the United Nations coordinator's offer
to develop a transparent joint implementation plan to
be accepted. We would like UNHCR and the United

Nations Development Programme to have unconditional
and widespread access in Rakhine. They have had some,
but it is not enough to make the proper assessments of
conditions on the ground that could encourage refugee
return. We would also like to see freedom of movement
granted to those Rohingya who remain in Rakhine.
That would be a good start and enable the international
community to have a platform to offer support, and
there is a clear will within the international community
to do that, as I have said.

The Special Envoy touched also on accountability.
I think this really goes to the heart of everything. First,
it is essential for the refugees to have confidence that
they can go home and that they will be secure. It is also
essential because it is important to uphold the norms
of international justice. I know that this is a difficult
concept for some on the Council, but the scale of
what has been done to the Rohingya Muslims and the
allegations of crimes against humanity really mark this
out as one of the most terrible events of this century so
far. I think we need to keep that in mind.

I am very grateful to the Special Envoy for all
her efforts to encourage complementarity between
the different United Nations instruments and the
Independent Commission Of Inquiry. I think that the
more the Commission and Rosario Manalo can work
with the High Commissioner for Human Rights,
the better outcomes we will see there. I would like
to conclude by saying that we remain committed to
finding the way forward as the United Kingdom, and
we remain committed to working with our partners on
the Council, as well as with Myanmar, Bangladesh and
the Special Envoy.

