Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks Director John Ging for his briefing.
We have taken note of the latest report of the
Secretary-General (S/2018/777) on the cross-border
humanitarian assistance.

Currently, the Syrian humanitarian situation
continues to face challenges. Parties in Syria must
proceed while considering the future of the country
and its people's welfare, abide by the Council's
resolutions and resolve differences through dialogue
and consultations so as to immediately alleviate the
humanitarian situation. The United Nations and the
international community must step up communication
and cooperation with the Government and support all
regions in need of assistance within Syrian territory. At
the same time, humanitarian assistance in Syria must
be fully consistent with the principles of neutrality,
impartiality and non-politicization, while based on
respecting the sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity of Syria.

We have also taken note of the reported ongoing
returns of some Syrian refugees and displaced persons.
People can be hopeful and long-term peace and stability
in Syria can be fully guaranteed only when steady
progress has been made in rebuilding the country. The
international community must actively support Syrian
reconstruction, including stepping up efforts to clear
landmines, improvised explosive devices and other
explosive remnants of war, in order to pave the way for
the return of refugees and displaced persons.

Terrorist organizations continue to threaten the
security of Syrian people. We must bolster the progress
made in counter-terrorism and prevent the resurgence
of terrorist organizations. The international community
must consistently enhance its cooperation and resolutey
combat all terrorist organizations on the Security
Council's list so as to maintain regional stability
and security.

We must step up efforts to promote a political
settlement of the Syrian issue in order to fundamentally
address the humanitarian situation in Syria. The
international community must come together to support
both the United Nations as the primary mediator and
the efforts of Special Envoy De Mistura to advance the
political process based on the principle of a Syrian-
led and Syrian-owned process and resolution 2254
(2015). The Security Council must remain united on the
Syrian humanitarian issue and provide conditions for a
political settlement.

Ambassador Xie Xiaoyan, Special Envoy of the
Chinese Government on the Syrian issue, visited Syria
and countries of the region in late July. He held a
further exchange of views with the parties concerned
and played a constructive and active role in the political
settlement of the Syrian issue.

China takes the humanitarian situation in Syria
seriously and has been contributing to alleviating the
suffering of the Syrian people. In May, China hosted a
workshop on the development and rebuilding of Syria.
In July, at the opening session of the eighth Ministerial
Meeting of the China-Arab States Cooperation Forum,
President Xi Jinping announced that China would
provide another ¥600 million to Syria, Jordan, Lebanon
and other countries for humanitarian assistance and
reconstruction on the ground. China will continue to
do its utmost to assist Syria and its neighbours that have
been affected by the refugee issue.

