Mr. Kamara (Sierra Leone): My delegation is
delighted to see a representative of our sister
Commonwealth nation of Jamaica, which has strong
historical and cultural links with Sierra Leone, in the
presidential Chair of this body. I would like to join
others in extending our warmest congratulations to
you, Madam President, and to assure you of our
cooperation during your term of office.

I would also like to take this opportunity, Madam
President, to thank your predecessor, Ambassador
Levitte of France, for successfully directing the affairs
of the Council during the busy month of June.

Let me also commend other members of the
Council for their patience and cooperation in bringing
this phase of the Council's preoccupation with the
situation in Sierra Leone to a successful end.

In adopting this draft resolution today, the
Security Council will, for the first time, go to the root
of the conflict in Sierra Leone. We have always
maintained that the conflict in Sierra Leone is not
about ideology or tribal or regional differences. It has
nothing to do with the so-called problem of
marginalized youths. Nor is it, as some political
commentators have characterized it, an uprising by the
rural poor against the urban elite. The root of the
conflict is, and remains, diamonds, diamonds,
diamonds.

All along, we have been telling the international
community that ours is not a civil war, but a rebel war
based on brutality, supported by regional, subregional
and international surrogates and, more importantly,
financed by illicit trade in Sierra Leone's diamonds. At
last, the Security Council has come to realize that the
war in Sierra Leone is cast in gemstones.

The Security Council has also come to realize
that, in addition to encouraging the Government of
Sierra Leone to negotiate peace with the Revolutionary
United Front (RUF) rebels, it could have taken
effective action to deal with the role of diamonds in the
conflict. Now, it is no longer a secret that the first
objective of Mr. Foday Sankoh, the RUF and their
supporters at home, in the neighbourhood and abroad,
has always been to gain access to the nation's
diamonds. Their attempt to seize political power by
amputations, rape, arson, killings and other terrorist
acts is only a means to achieve the second, principal,
objective: the complete control over and occupation of
the diamond fields of Sierra Leone.

Now the Security Council and the international
community know why the rebels reneged on the Lome
Agreement, which they signed one year ago the day
after tomorrow - on 7 July 1999, to be precise - and
why they continue to illegally occupy the diamond
areas of the country in violation of that Agreement.

Last year, my delegation told the Security
Council that we supported the idea of naming names in
connection with the illegal trade in what have been
described as "conflict diamonds". We had already seen
the political and moral impact that naming names has
had on the situation concerning Angola; we wanted the
same for Sierra Leone. At this point in time, naming
names should be seen as an expression of serious
concern about the role played by the illicit trade in our
diamonds in fuelling the conflict. It is a peaceful means
of applying political and moral pressure on the
principal transit route of such trade to help facilitate an
early and peaceful end to the conflict. It is also a
reminder that an early end to the conflict is in the
interests not only of Sierra Leone but also of all the
citizens of the entire West African subregion.

We make no apology for requesting that the
Security Council name names. We did so in the name
and on behalf of the victims of rebel atrocities,
particularly the children whose hands and arms have
been deliberately amputated - children whose future
has been virtually destroyed by the illicit trade in
diamonds. Let me add that those who hold the view
that naming names could hurt the feelings of States
should also think about the feelings - the physical and
emotional pain - of the unfortunate and innocent
victims of this conflict over diamonds. We maintain
that the illicit export of Sierra Leonean diamonds not
only is the root and fuel of the conflict, but also
constitutes a major obstacle to a peaceful resolution of
the conflict.

My delegation is grateful to the Security Council
for the decision it is about to take. Although we wish it
had come earlier, we regard it as a major contribution
to the search for peace and stability in Sierra Leone.
We have already seen some positive signs of the impact
that this resolution could have on the trade in Sierra
Leonean diamonds; we are encouraged by this
emerging trend. Of course, much will depend on the
political will and cooperation of Member States and the
international diamond industry to ensure full
implementation of the resolution.

