Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me first to thank you, Madame President, for
your initiative in holding a briefing on peace and
security in Africa and the matter of piracy in the Gulf
of Guinea. I would also like to commend the important
contributions made by Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, whose presence here we appreciate; the
Commissioner for Political Affairs, Peace and Security
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), Mr. Mahamane Toure; and Her Excellency
Mrs. Florentina Adenike Ukonga, Deputy Executive
Secretary for Political Affairs of the Gulf of Guinea
Commission.

International statistics suggest that attacks and
armed robbery at sea off the coast of West Africa,
particularly in the Gulf of Guinea, have increased in
recent years, affecting the security of maritime
navigation in the subregion and having a harmful
impact on trade and other economic activities. This
obliges us to conduct a detailed analysis of the best
ways whereby the international community can help
the Gulf of Guinea coastal States exercise their
sovereign responsibility both to provide security to
maritime traffic in their territories and jurisdictional
waters, and to combat acts of piracy in the subregion,
where appropriate.

In addressing these problems, we must be able to
rely on precise, detailed and verifiable information on
the scope, modalities and specific areas in which the
incidents reported in the region occurred, as well as on
the deficiencies and needs of the national authorities
and subregional organizations in responding to these
illegal acts. A clear picture of the nature of the
phenomenon we are facing, and what dealing with it
requires, will enable the international community to
participate in developing initiatives tailored to each
case and in directing its assistance to the areas that the
countries of the region have designated priorities.
To those ends, the United Nations Charter and
international law are essential foundations for our
discussion, since they offer a legal and conceptual
framework on which to base our initiatives. The 1982
Convention on the Law of the Sea and the 1998
Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts
against the Safety of Maritime Navigation defined the
scope of application and the measures that the
international community can take in helping to develop
and implement strategies to combat armed robbery at
sea and piracy in the Gulf of Guinea.

It is crucial that we keep leadership and the lead
role in the hands of the States concerned in the fight
against these crimes, without shirking the international
community's duty to increase its cooperation and
technical assistance in improving national, regional and
global capacities to overcome legal and security
deficiencies relating to maritime navigation. The
United Nations, through its Department of Political
Affairs, its regional offices for West and Central
Africa, its Office for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the
Sea, and the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, together with the International Maritime
Organization and INTERPOL, should assist the
national authorities, ECOWAS, the Economic
Community of Central African States and the Gulf of
Guinea Commission in establishing and building their
capacity to respond to these multiple issues.

Finally, we believe that the international
community must support efforts to promote effective
capacity-building for preventing, combating and
eradicating these illegal acts. We should focus on
exchanging information and intelligence, disseminating
best practices, establishing technical assistance
programmes for improving national legislation and
developing action plans for the region, creating and
disseminating guidelines for timely and coordinated
responses, and considering the possibility of setting up
mechanisms to finance efforts to enhance national and
regional capacities and institutions. The United Nations
should make an urgent and permanent commitment to
providing the assistance and capacity needed to
develop a regional strategy that will ensure that this
criminal practice does not spread to other regions or
affect navigation in international waters.

