The President: I acknowledge with great pleasure the
presence among us of Mr. Peter Hain, Minister of State for
Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs of the United
Kingdom, and I welcome him.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Angola

Letter dated 10 March 2000 from the Chairman of
the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 864 (1993) concerning the
situation in Angola addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/2000/203)

The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Angola, Belarus, Belgium, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Morocco, Rwanda, South Africa, Togo and Zambia, in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I welcome Mr. Joao Bernardo de Miranda, Minster for
External Relations of Angola.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. De Miranda
(Angola) took a seat at the Council table; Mr. Sychov
(Belarus), Mr. Adam (Belgium), Mr. Sotirov
(Bulgaria), Mr. Tiendre'beogo (Burkina Faso),
Mr. Snoussi (Morocco), Mr. Mutaboba (Rwanda),
Mr. Kumalo (South Africa), Mr. Kpotsra (Togo) and
Mr. Kasanda (Zambia) took the seats reserved for
them at the side of the Council Chamber.


The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them a letter
dated 10 March 2000 from the Chairman of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 864
(1993) concerning the situation in Angola addressed to
the President of the Security Council, document
S/2000/203, transmitting the final report of the Panel of
Experts established by the Security Council pursuant to
resolution 1237 (1999) of 7 May 1999.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document S/2000/200, which contains the
text of a letter dated 8 March 2000 from Uganda.

I call on Mr. Robert Fowler, Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 864 (1993) concerning the situation in Angola.


