Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank you, Mr. President, for having
convened today's timely meeting. We also thank
Secretary-General Antonio Guterres and the
Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African
Union, Mr. Smail Chergui, for their detailed briefings.

We welcome the efforts of our African partners in
the resolution of conflicts on the continent. We note the
marked intensification of the African Union's activities
and that of subregional organizations in this area,
including through the establishment of a Peace and
Security Architecture for the continent. We must also
note the African Union's ambitious plan to put an end to
armed conflicts on the continent by 2020.

We are confident that, in order to effectively
overcome crisis situations in Africa, we need an
approach that, first and foremost, brings together
Africans, gives them the leading role in defining the
path to the settlement of conflicts on their continent
and ensures effective support for those efforts by the
international community. We support an approach
that seeks African solutions to African problems. We
advocate close cooperation among the United Nations,
African organizations and individual States with the
aim of developing a coordinated approach to dealing
with conflict situations in Africa on the basis of the
Charter of the United Nations, the relevant Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions and while
observing the basic principles of peacekeeping. At
the same time, Russia's principled position is that
any settlement should be carried out using political
methods, based on national dialogue and the settlement
of the root causes of conflicts.

We understand the concerns of our African
partners about the provision of adequate resources for
African peacekeeping operations. We must increase
the predictability, reliability and flexibility of the
financing for African operations and joint missions. In
principle, we do not object to considering the possibility
of expanding United Nations participation in such
missions, and we are ready to engage in constructive
dialogue in that regard. At the same time, we believe
that, regardless of the option we choose, it is extremely
important that we maintain the current United Nations
system of reviewing and approving the corresponding
budgetary requests, ensure transparency and
accountability in the allocation and use of funds, and
provide for the participation of United Nations personnel
in all stages of the planning and implementation of the
designated tasks.

We believe that one of the reasons for the growing
instability on the African continent is the attempts to
engage in political engineering in a number of States
in the Middle East and North Africa. We regret that the
accumulated experiences of the African Union in Libya
and cote d'Ivoire are simply being ignored. Inter-State
relations have been unequal and disrespectful,
based on ideological dogmas, and international law
has been ignored, which have resulted in clumsy
interference in the internal affairs of Africans and in
the deterioration of State structures, the formation of
new sources of instability, and the outbreak of terrorist
groups, including the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL). ISIL's positions in Libya have been
strengthened and militants have penetrated further to
the south in Mali, the Niger and Chad, thereby creating
a springboard for the creation of new terrorist threats
in the Sahelo-Saharan region. There has been a clear
trend of cooperation between ISIL and local terrorist
groups, such as Boko Haram and Al-Qaida in the
Islamic Maghreb.

The increasing cooperation of ISIL with Boko
Haram is of particular concern. In the border areas of
the Group of Five for the Sahel countries, we have seen
the Al Mourabitoun group increase its activity with a
view to bringing together all the Islamic structures in
Mali, the Niger and Mauritania. In Somalia, under the
banner of Al-Qaida, the activities of the terrorist group
Al-Shabaab have noticeably increased.

Terrorists obtain material support through the
criminal organizations they control, which traffic
in drugs and weapons, organize channels of illegal
immigration and take hostages. An essential source
of income for terrorists remains the illegal trade in oil
and oil products. We have also seen a strengthening in
the cross-border link between terrorists and criminals,
which is essentially a regional system of regeneration,
capacity-building, funding and ideological influence in

the sphere of international terrorism.

Russia has consistently advocated the pooling of
international efforts, which would allow us to develop
concerted approaches to countering the terrorist
threat on the African continent with an emphasis on
assisting countries in the region in strengthening
their anti-terrorist efforts. We support United Nations
initiatives aimed at creating more favourable conditions
for the provision of specialized technical assistance and
capacity-building for African countries. We are ready to
share with our African partners our counter-terrorism
experience and to implement projects to increase the
potential of African countries in their struggle against
terrorism and extremism.

With regard to the activities of terrorist
organizations in the region, Russian universities are
working to train African law enforcement personnel and
peacekeepers. Every year, the educational institutions
of the Russian Ministry of the Interior train up to 80
peacekeepers and approximately 150 African police
officers through higher education programmes, as well
as approximately 300 individuals through short-term
professional development courses.

We regret the most recent attempt of the delegation
of Ukraine to draw the Security Council's attention
away from the issue we are currently discussing.

