Mr. Dahlgren (Sweden): Let me first state that
Sweden associates itself fully with the statement made by
the United Kingdom on behalf of the European Union.

 

Sweden supports the draft resolution before the
Security Council today, which would extend the mandate of
the United Nations Observer Mission in Angola (MONUA)
for a further two months. We are grateful for the
comprehensive recommendations the Secretary-General has
already submitted to the Security Council on the future
United Nations presence in Angola, which we welcome. We
also look forward to any further recommendations he might
wish to make in his next report, in June.

We remain convinced that the United Nations presence
should continue to be adapted to developments on the
ground. We fully support the increase in the civilian police
component outlined in the report of the Secretary-General,
as well as his intention to strengthen the human rights
component of MONUA. These two elements of MONUA
play a vital role in helping strengthen the rule of law in
Angola and in promoting and protecting human rights. We
see the continued importance of these efforts.

We warmly welcome the recent progress in the
political process. We regret, however, that the positive
developments in the political sphere have not yet been
reflected in improvements in the security situation. We
condemn attacks by UNITA against the United Nations,
humanitarian actors and the Angolan authorities. We join
with our colleagues on the Council in urging MONUA to
investigate the attack last week in N' gove. Today's draft
resolution sends a clear message that such attacks are
unacceptable.

Sweden believes that the United Nations can continue
to make an important contribution in assisting Angola's
efforts to consolidate peace, democracy and development.
We believe that MONUA is making such a contribution,
together with the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, other elements of the United Nations system and
the efforts of the troika of observer countries. As we
continue our discussions on the United Nations presence in
Angola, we must ensure that a destabilizing vacuum is
avoided and that sufficient resources are assigned for the
remaining tasks.

Peace and development in Angola will ultimately
depend on the will and determination of the Angolans
themselves to make the definitive move from conflict to
lasting peace. Much has been done, but there are clearly
still challenges ahead. We hope for continued progress in
the political process. We also see the need for further action
to deal with the difficult social situation in Angola, an area
in which the Angolan authorities themselves have a
particular responsibility. For its part, Sweden is committed
to continuing its long-standing support for peace and
national reconciliation in Angola.

