Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): Let me
begin by again expressing to our American friends, as
President Macron did, our deepest sympathies on the
passing away of President George Herbert Walker Bush.

It is a great honour for all of us to host President
Alassane Ouattara today. On behalf of France, I would
like to warmly thank you, Mr. President, and through
you Cote d'Ivoire's presidency of the Security Council,

for having taken the welcome initiative of holding
this crucial meeting on the issue of post-conflict
reconstruction. The fact that this initiative originated
from C6te d'Ivoire lends it particular importance
and significance.

Cote d'Ivoire is in many ways a model of post-
conflict recovery and reconstruction, as well as a source
of inspiration for our work here at the United Nations.
This meeting also comes at a pivotal moment for the
United Nations, with the major reforms under way to
the peace and security pillar, which are helping to put
the sustainability of peace at the heart of our efforts.
In that regard, I would like to thank the Secretary-
General and the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission for their important briefings, engagement
and exemplary partnership.

I will address the three inseparable dimensions
of post-conflict reconstruction, namely, economic
reconstruction, the reconstruction of institutions and
the reconstruction of what I call living together.

My first point concerns the reconstruction of the
economic fabric. Repairing what the war destroyed is
the first urgent need following a conflict, that is, roads,
infrastructure and the means of production. It is about
allowing economic life to resume. Montesquieu said
that the natural effect of trade was to bring about peace.
History has repeatedly shown us that the resumption
of economic exchanges is often the best guarantee of
lasting peace. The remarkable resurgence of economic
activity that Cote d'Ivoire experienced after a decade of
civil war is emblematic in that regard. The courageous
decisions that you took, Mr. President, greatly
contributed to that.

No peace is secure if people do not feel concrete
effects in their daily lives. We must also see to it that
no one is left behind during the crucial phase of post-
conflict reconstruction, including ensuring that growth
is sufficiently inclusive so as not to sow the seeds of
tomorrow's conflicts. Post-conflict reconstruction
relies on the mobilization of all actors, including
international financial institutions and multilateral and
bilateral donors, but also the private sector. That is how
France is directing its efforts as part of its prevention,
resilience and sustainable peace strategy, adopted this
year, which aims to involve the private sector. It is
indeed one of the keys to economic recovery, which is
essential to lasting peace. Everyone sees that there can
be no lasting peace without sustainable development.
That is why post-conflict reconstruction must fully
integrate the objectives of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.

My second message is about rebuilding institutions.
We know that good governance, which of course is itself
one of the main goals, also allows societies and States
to be more crisis-resilient. Post-conflict reconstruction
therefore also means the rebuilding of institutions. It is
fundamentally about rebuilding the social contract, in a
spirit of Government accountability and the restoration
of the rule of law. All the examples demonstrate that
judicial institutions have a major role to play in this phase
of reconstruction: victims must be able to again turn to
the courts with the requisite trust. That is one of the
keys to success. The processes of security sector reform
and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration are
often also essential to rebuild an inclusive, law-abiding
army and to return to the State the monopoly on the
legitimate use of force. As President Ouattara recalled,
the United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire provided
valuable support to the Ivorian authorities in that area.

My third message is about what I referred to earlier
as rebuilding living together. After a conflict, especially
after a civil war, it is society itselfthat must be repaired
and rebuilt by working to reconcile yesterday's enemies.
That is why peace must be prepared for as early as
possible, ideally from the beginning of the conflict.
In that spirit, we fully support the Secretary-General's
reform of the peace and security pillar, which is aimed
at better calibrating the mandate of peacekeeping
operations and preparing the political solution from
the start of a crisis. I also commend the valuable work
of the Peacebuilding Commission, as a complement to
the work of the Security Council. To succeed, we must
also act at the community level in order to facilitate
reconciliation on the ground. What happens on the
ground is always the gauge of peace. The Peacebuilding
Fund is an extremely effective tool for carrying out
targeted actions in that regard. Although they are not
always visible, they nevertheless remain essential to
community reconciliation.

I also welcome the Secretary-General's
determination to focus more on young people and
women, the latter often being the first victims of
conflict. In that respect, I welcome your commitment,
Mr. President, to the equality of women and men
and the fight against gender-based violence.
Discrimination, which perpetuates violence, must
be combated without mercy in and of itself, but also
because it slows the reconstruction process. Women
play an irreplaceable role in re-establishing links and
working for reconciliation; but they can exercise that
role only if they are guaranteed a safe environment in
which their voice is heard. Similarly, involving young
people in the peace process means giving a voice to
future generations and creating the conditions for a
more lasting peace.

France is fully committed, at the bilateral and
multilateral levels, to working for conflict prevention
and peacebuilding, particularly in the crucial phase
of post-conflict reconstruction. For example, France
has set up a fund for peace and resilience to support
recovery from crisis and restore social cohesion in four
regions: the Sahel, the Lake Chad basin, the Iraq-Syria
zone and the Central African Republic. The fund, which
is partially financed by a tax on financial transactions,
is endowed with €100 million per year, an amount that
will increase to €200 million annually by 2020.

Before concluding my remarks, I would like to echo
your call, Mr. President, as well as that of Chairperson
Moussa Faki Mahamat, concerning African peace
operations. As President Macron reaffirmed in his
address to the General Assembly in September (see A/73/PV.6), France fully supports the initiative of the
African Union aimed at the adoption of an ambitious
draft resolution on African peace operations before
the end of the year. That essential initiative has been
carried forward by the African Union and the Security
Council for several years now. Significant progress has
been made since the most recent resolutions adopted
on the subject, whether in terms of contributions to the
African Union Peace Fund - up to $74 million - or the
achievement of human rights compliance frameworks.
Our common understanding of the added value
of African peace operations and their necessary
complementarity with United Nations peacekeeping
operations has been strengthened. Today they play
a major role on the African continent. It is therefore
time to recognize the important efforts undertaken by
the African Union and its member States, including
the commitment to finance 25 per cent of African
peace operations, and allow those operations to enjoy
predictable and sustainable financing from United
Nations mandatory contributions.

