Ms. Fatima (Bangladesh): We thank the Belgian presidency for having convened this open debate. I also wish to thank the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and the briefers for having shared their insightful perspectives. Post-conflict countries generally remain at a high risk of relapsing into new cycles of violence. Such violence can disrupt a peace process and undermine longer-term development and the rule of law. It is therefore critically important in post-conflict situations to address impunity, ensure accountability and break the cycles of the conflicts and atrocities of the past.As a major troop- and police-contributing country to United Nations peacekeeping operations, we have been supporting the efforts of the United Nations to enhance national accountability and transitional justice in countries emerging from conflict. We support the Secretary-General's reform agenda, with a focus on system-wide coordination and coherence among the United Nations peace and security pillars with the development and human rights pillars, especially at transitional stages of peace operations. We stress the prioritization and sequencing of the mandates of peacekeeping operations with the United Nations rule-of-law and transitional justice mechanisms. Transitional justice needs to also receive enhanced priority in the Peacebuilding Commission's efforts in the area of peacebuilding and sustaining peace with a view to preventing a sense of inequality, discrimination, exclusion and other root causes of violence and conflict. Special political missions should have transitional justice as a sub-mandate, and so should the new generation of United Nations country teams. It is important to have synergy among those various entities. Bangladesh remains committed to supporting the initiatives of the Security Council towards the implementation of both the women and peace and security, and the youth, peace and security agendas. We value women's enhanced contribution to transitional justice through their participation in mediation, peacekeeping, peacebuilding and sustaining peace. We remain committed to supporting the multipronged efforts of the United Nations to prevent and ensure accountability for violence against women and children during armed conflict. We must also continue our fight to bring to justice transnational organized groups and terrorist organizations for their heinous acts of trafficking, enslavement and torture of women and children. We appreciate the work of the relevant mandates working to promote women's participation in peace processes and the rehabilitation of children deployed in armed conflict. On our part, we remain committed to consistently underscoring these dimensions in implementing peacekeeping mandates. We believe that internationally recognized criminal justice mechanisms should be allowed to play their role to ensure justice for countries coming out of conflict situations and sustain peace there. For Bangladesh, hosting 1.2 million Rohingyas from Myanmar's Rakhine state is a case in point. We welcome the ground-breaking decision of the International Criminal Court to ensure accountability for the grave human rights violations and atrocity crimes committed by Myanmar against its Rohingya population. The Court's order of 23 January is also a momentous development in this regard. Ensuring justice and accountability for the Rohingya population is an important precondition for their safe, dignified and voluntary return to Rakhine state and eventual societal reconciliation.
