Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom abstained in the voting on the final mandate
renewal for the United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL) because we do not agree that the mandate
put forward for adoption represents the best approach
to closing the Mission or for continuing to operate in
Liberia over the next 15 months.

The United Kingdom is clear that there is a role
for a continued United Nations presence in Liberia,
with a focus on peace consolidation and paving the way
for an orderly, timely exit. Six months ago, we saw the
successful transfer of responsibility for security from
UNMIL to the Government of Liberia. That was an
important and successful step taken by the Government
of Liberia, and it was a step towards the departure of
the United Nations peacekeeping mission.

UNMIL has been a success, and a success for
United Nations peacekeeping. It demonstrates the
real difference that United Nations peacekeepers can
make to civilians on the ground. But we must use
our peacekeeping resources Wisely, where they are
really needed. The UNMIL success means that we
should not draw out its lifespan unnecessarily. There is
no active conflict in Liberia and we do not expect armed
groups to reform, so it is not appropriate to include the
protection of civilians by UNMIL in the mandate.

We welcome the inclusion of the human rights
promotion and protection mandate, with special
attention to continuing violations and abuses committed
against children and women. There is also more work
to be done to strengthen the Government of Liberia's
efforts to combat sexual and gender-based crimes, and
it is important that this work be handed over smoothly
to the United Nations country team as UNMIL
winds down.

The focus now needs to be on peace consolidation
and preparation for the departure of UNMIL. We call
on UNMIL to use all available resources in its final
15 months to ensure a smooth and orderly close down.
In that regard, we are disappointed that $81.6 million
of assessed contributions in the special account for
UNMIL remain unpaid. That must be addressed in the
month ahead.

