Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Thanks to almost half a century's effort, the
International Criminal Court (ICC) will commence
operation as a relevant institution of international
justice. It is the hope of the world's peoples that this
institution will ensure that perpetrators of serious
international crimes are brought to justice, and will
deter future crimes. If the ICC attains those goals, then
it will boost people's confidence in international justice
and ultimately will aid in maintaining world peace and
security. Although China is not yet a State party to the
Statute of the ICC, China supports the establishment of
an independent, impartial, competent international
criminal court that enjoys universality. The Chinese
Government actively participated in the process of
establishing the ICC and will closely follow its
operation.

With the 1 July 2002 entry into force of the Rome
Statute, the exclusive jurisdiction of countries
contributing peacekeepers over crimes committed by
their personnel has become a major question that
commands the attention of all parties. We believe the
ultimate goal of the ICC is to solve the problem of
impunity for the perpetrators of serious international
crimes and, most important, to bring them to justice. A
very important principle of the ICC is
complementarity, that is that the jurisdiction of the ICC
complements a country's national jurisdiction.
Therefore, if a country has brought a person to justice
through its national justice system, then ICC has no
jurisdiction.

The item under discussion today is the situation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. However, the content of
our discussion is far beyond the renewal of the mandate
of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH) per se. China hopes for a
successful and smooth renewal of the mandate of
UNMIBH and for the completion of United Nations
peacekeeping operations in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and elsewhere. We also believe that the most urgent
current task is to find a practical solution.

Such a solution must respect the letter and spirit
of the ICC Statute and accommodate the views and
wishes of ICC States Parties. At the same time, without
violating the principles of the ICC, it should fully
address the concerns and requests of countries sending
peacekeepers regarding jurisdiction over crimes
committed by such peacekeepers. Thanks to recent
efforts, the Security Council is not far from such a
solution. We hope that the parties concerned can
demonstrate greater flexibility and promptly solve
these problems. China definitely does not wish to see
United Nations peacekeeping operations affected in
any negative way.

