Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): First of all, I would like to thank you, Sir,
for convening today's high-level briefing in support
of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT). Indeed, today's meeting, one year
before the Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty and on the fiftieth anniversary of its entry into
force, is an opportunity to reiterate, within the Security
Council, our steadfast support for this keystone of the
collective security system. I would also like to thank
Mrs. Nakamitsu and Mr. Amano for their contributions.

Belgium is concerned about the erosion of the
multilateral system based on international law, which is
particularly visible in the context of non-proliferation and
disarmament. I will focus only on the threats that affect
the implementation of the Intermediate-Range Nuclear
Forces (INF) Treaty and the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action, as well as the uncertainties that surround
the future of the New Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty
(New START) and the North Korean issue.

Recent developments regarding those issues reflect
the increased polarization within the non-proliferation
community, where trust and cooperation among States
have registered a sharp decline. That climate challenges
the global non-proliferation and disarmament
architecture, making it even more difficult to achieve
the progress that is nonetheless essential now that the
risks of proliferation are increasing.

That is why Belgium reaffirms its strong support
for the three pillars of the NPT and continues to call
for the full and balanced implementation of the 2010
Action Plan of the Review Conference of the Parties
to the Treaty. Its mutually reinforcing practical
measures for nuclear disarmament, non-proliferation
and the peaceful use of nuclear energy remain relevant
and provide a basis that is acceptable to everyone for
progress towards the ultimate goal of a world without
nuclear weapons.

Curbing nuclear proliferation is one of the major
successes of the NPT. It is an undeniable achievement
for our collective security and requires constant
consolidation and strengthening. At the same time, it is
vital to continue to promote the peaceful uses of nuclear
energy, facilitate the sharing of nuclear technologies
for peaceful purposes and encourage cooperation with
developing countries.

Belgium remains committed to the pursuit of
nuclear disarmament, in accordance with article VI
of the Treaty. A world free of nuclear weapons is both
a common goal and a shared responsibility. In that
context, Belgium would like to underline the primary
responsibility of the five permanent members of the
Security Council, which possess nuclear weapons.

No other weapon has the destructive power of a
nuclear bomb. That fact underlines not only the need
for urgent disarmament but also the need for a proactive
approach to non-proliferation. On that difficult road,
it is essential to establish a legally binding instrument
banning nuclear tests.

With regard to the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-
Ban Treaty, as coordinator of the article XIV process,
together with Iraq, Belgium calls on States that are not
yet parties, in particular the annex 2 States, to accede to
the Treaty so that it can finally enter into force. A world
without nuclear weapons requires a world without
nuclear tests. For my country, that principle also applies
to North Korea, and therefore makes the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty a relevant instrument for any
negotiated solution aimed at ensuring verifiable and
definitive denuclearization.

The future of the INF Treaty affects the security
of Europe. We reiterate our call to Russia to return
to full and verifiable compliance with the Treaty in
order to safeguard its existence. The erosion of the
Treaty occurs in parallel with rapid changes in missile
technology, such as the emergence of hypersonic
missiles, with potential consequences for doctrine and
nuclear deterrence. That development demonstrates the
need to give the proper attention to the issue of missiles
in international debates. I also reiterate my country's
wish to see the New START Treaty extended, as it is the
only instrument regulating the deployment of strategic
nuclear missiles between the United States and Russia.
Belgium therefore strongly reaffirms its support
for the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, which must be wholly preserved. The NPT is
the cornerstone of the global nuclear non-proliferation
regime, the essential foundation of the quest for
nuclear disarmament and an important element of
prevention and confidence-building for the purposes of
maintaining international peace and security.

