Mr. Sumi (Japan): At the outset, I would like to
extend a warm welcome to the Chairman of the
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina, His Excellency
Mr. Nebojsa Radmanovie. I would also like to thank
High Representative Valentin Inzko for his
comprehensive briefing. I commend the devoted efforts
that he and his staff have exerted with sincerity and
great dedication to address the very complex and
sensitive issues on the ground in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

I welcome the fact that the general elections held
in early October were conducted peacefully and
successfully overall. In the light of the large number of
issues that the country must address, we look forward
to the expeditious establishment of the Council of
Ministers and the early stabilization of the political
situation. In the post-election context, there are at least
two aspects that we find to be positive. The first is that
the Bosniaks are motivated to reconcile with Serbia, as
demonstrated by the apologies expressed by
Mr. Izetbegovie, a Bosniak member of the Presidency.
This development is quite significant for the peace and
stability of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the entire
West Balkan region.

The second point is that there is strong
momentum for cooperation among the members of the
Presidency. Their constructive collaboration will show
other institutions in the country that the accumulation
of cooperation can actually produce improvements in
the country as a whole. We cannot be overly optimistic,
however, as there remain large gaps among the
positions of the various parties and ethnic groups.
We are particularly concerned about some acts
that have the potential to destabilize the political
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as indicated in
the report of the High Representative (see S/2010/575, annex). The State property law adopted by the
Republika Srpska is a flagrant challenge to the
authority of the Office of the High Representative. We
note with regret that this law makes the possible
achievement of the 5+2 agenda difficult.

Japan has consistently supported the policy of
Bosnia and Herzegovina regarding Euro-Atlantic
integration. In that connection, we welcome the
decision by the European Union (EU) Justice and
Home Affairs Council to grant the people of Bosnia
and Herzegovina a visa exemption to European Union
countries. This could increase the incentive and
momentum among the Bosnian people towards
realizing European integration. We also hope that the
achievement of the 5+2 objectives will enable the
transition from the Office of the High Representative
to the EU Special Representative at the earliest
possible date.

The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina will
continue to require an active role on the part of the
High Representative until the transition to the EU
Special Representative takes place. Japan highly values
the activities of Mr. Inzko in bringing calm and
reassurance to the situation, and continues to support
him fully. We would like once again to reiterate that
the High Representative must maintain full authority to
fulfil his mission until his mandate comes to an end.

Finally, I would like to express Japan's
appreciation for the role that the European Union Force
in Bosnia and Herzegovina is playing in that region,
and we support the renewal of its mandate now under
discussion in the Security Council.

