Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): Please allow me to
begin by thanking Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, Special
Representative of the Secretary- General for Afghanistan
and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA), and Ms. Sima Samar,
Chairperson of the Afghan Independent Human Rights
Commission, for their briefings. We also acknowledge
the presence of the Permanent Representative
of Afghanistan.

South Africa expresses its full support for
Mr. Yamamoto and commends the efforts of the
men and women of UNAMA, who have been vital in
supporting efforts for achieving peace and security
in Afghanistan, particularly by strengthening the
capabilities, capacities and professionalism of
Afghanistan's electoral and monitoring bodies. In that
regard, my delegation welcomes the recent inauguration
of the new Afghan Parliament.

During this meeting, I would like to address three
issues - first, the election process; secondly, national
and international initiatives; and, lastly, the increased
violence in Afghanistan.

We look forward to the presidential elections that
will take place in September and encourage all parties
to work together to ensure that the elections commence
as planned and mandated by the Afghan Constitution.
South Africa reiterates its support for the electoral
reform process in Afghanistan, as that will ensure that
the upcoming elections are credible, timely, inclusive,
fair and free, and safe and transparent for all the people
of Afghanistan. The elections are an essential step
towards renewing the trust of the Afghan people and
towards a stable, peaceful and prosperous Afghanistan.

With regard to national and international initiatives,
my delegation welcomes the recent efforts towards
reconciliation and dialogue. The loya jirga, which
brought together politicians, tribal elders and other
prominent people with the unified goal of finding a path
towards peace talks with the Taliban, was encouraging.
We hope that the 23-point plan will deliver on the
aspirations of the people of Afghanistan.

The participation of civil society and women's
groups is particularly useful in ensuring that all
sectors of Afghan society have a voice in an inclusive
peace process. We wish to reiterate that only with full
and inclusive participation can there be long-term
sustainable peace in Afghanistan and the region as a
whole. We hope that all-inclusive talks among all the
relevant national stakeholders will continue.

The third point I would like to raise is our concern
about the high level of violence and terrorist attacks in
parts of Afghanistan, in particular the indiscriminate
attacks against civilians, including the use ofimprovised
explosive devices, suicide attacks and assassinations.
Lingering violence could undermine the progress
already made in the security and political spheres,
especially following the loyajirga and in the run-up to
the presidential elections. The violence also aggravates
the already fragile humanitarian situation.

Restrictions to humanitarian access and attacks
against health and educational facilities are of
particular concern. That particularly affects the most
vulnerable in Afghan society - women, children and
people living with disabilities. In that regard, South
Africa also calls on all parties to ensure the protection
of women and children, particularly from sexual and
gender-based violence. My delegation continues to
condemn the unlawful recruitment and use of children
in armed forces and groups, and calls for their release
and reintegration into Afghan society. All parties
to the conflict must respect their obligations under
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law.

In conclusion, South Africa welcomes all
international engagement in support of a long-lasting,
durable peace in Afghanistan. However, we believe that
all efforts in that regard should be well-coordinated
and complementary to the current Afghan processes in
order to find a lasting solution. We remain convinced
that the only long-term solution for the situation is a
comprehensive and inclusive Afghan-led and -owned
political process towards the peaceful resolution of the
conflict and an inclusive political settlement.

