Mrs. Malenga (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): At the outset, Mr. President,
allow me to express how pleased I am to see you
preside over the Security Council this month. I am
overjoyed that the Security Council has decided under
your presidency to consider the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2012/65) on the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). I must also
commend the excellent work of your predecessor, the
Permanent Representative of South Africa, in the
presidency of the Security Council last month. Allow
me also to highlight the extreme importance of the
Secretary-General's report, dated 26 January 2012. The
briefing just given by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Meece - whose presence here
today I welcome - emphasized that importance.

The report before the Council today is significant
in that it contains factual information on the events that
have taken place in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo since the previous report of the Secretary-
General dated 24 October 2011 (S/2011/656). It covers
a crucial period in the history of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo - a period during which the
Congolese people, for the second time in five years,
went to the polls as scheduled and in a generally
peaceful atmosphere.

We welcome the recommendations contained in
the report, particularly since they generally reflect the
concerns already expressed by the Government, which
it is seeking to address with the help of its traditional
partners and MONUSCO. These relate in particular to
the joint efforts of the Forces armees de la Republique
democratique du Congo (FARDC) and MONUSCO in
the context of the process of disarmament,
demobilization, repatriation, resettlement and

reintegration, as set out in paragraph 73 of the report;
the progress achieved by the Congolese judicial
authorities in the prosecution and punishment of crimes
of sexual violence, as noted in paragraph 76 of the
report; and the renewed commitment of the
Government to bolster stabilization efforts in the
eastern provinces of the country, as well as the
progress made in the implementation in areas emerging
from armed conflict of the Stabilization and
Reconstruction Plan for Eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo, as noted in paragraph 79 of the report.

But notwithstanding our overall satisfaction with
the report, we should like to make a number of
comments on four issues: elections and the security
situation; human rights and sexual violence; reform of
the Congolese judicial system; and armed groups and
peacebuilding.

I should like first to address the issue of the
elections and the security situation. On behalf of the
Government and the people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, I should like to thank the
Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon,
for the support he has provided to the stabilization
efforts in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and to
the elections of 28 November 2011. The work of his
Special Representative for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Mr. Roger Meece, as well as the logistical
and material support provided by MONUSCO to the
Independent National Electoral Commission, also
deserves mention.

In terms of the Violence related to the electoral
process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
paragraph 5 of the report contains information on
election-related incidents. While their negative
consequences for the security of individuals and their
property are regrettable, it should be noted that at the
time of their occurrence, the Government, through the
Minister of Justice and Human Rights, denounced a
number of violations and appealed to the Prosecutor
General of the Republic, the Prosecutors General in the
Appeals Court and the Auditor-General of the FARDC
to open investigations into those incidents.

In that respect, allow me to quote from the
Minister of Justice and Human Rights, who stated on
28 November 2011:
12-22477
"Serious acts have been committed: the
lynching of a number of individuals, both
politicians and police officers; the destruction of
electoral equipment and of State and private
property; the burning down of police stations; and
death threats by certain persons. Despite all of
those calls for reason, restraint and legality, we
witnessed in recent days another serious form of
intolerance that violates the right to life and
physical safety and to property."

But looking beyond the unrest that prevailed
before and after the elections, it would be no
exaggeration to conclude that the country is resolutely
determined to follow a process of returning to
normality and that the Congolese people want only one
thing: peace.

Today, when we look back at what really took
place and when we look to the future, we can say with
certainty that the second round of democratic elections
represent a definitive end in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo of an era during which the transfer of
power was not based on democratic norms and the
funding of the electoral process was provided mainly
by the international community.

That reality was acknowledged by the head of
State, His Excellency Joseph Kabila Kabange, in his
speech of 20 December 2012:

"For the first time in our history, a
presidential term of office has ended without an
institutional crisis, with 95 per cent of electoral
costs funded by the Republic's own resources."

Despite the repeated calls to violence made by
certain political leaders during the electoral campaign
and following the elections, we were able to avoid a
serious deterioration in terms of peace and security in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo thanks to the
capacity of the Congolese National Police to avert and
respond to violence without resort to the excessive use
of force.

I should like here to pay heartfelt tribute to the
police and security forces, which, in particularly
difficult conditions, showed great professionalism
whenever they were called upon to ensure law and
order, which are prerequisites for an effective electoral
process. I wish also to take this opportunity to thank all
of our partners, including MONUSCO and the
European Union mission to provide advice and
assistance for security sector reform in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, for their partnership with the
FARDC.

I should also like to highlight the support
provided by the European Union with a view to
ensuring security during the electoral process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo through its
delegation in Kinshasa, its member States and the
European Union Police Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We are also grateful for the
technical, financial and logistical contributions made
by a number of friendly countries, as well as foreign
partners including the Republic of South Africa, the
Republic of Angola, the Republic of the Congo and
MONUSCO.

Some setbacks were noted that in certain cases
led to the death of individuals; we deem those
regrettable, but we can draw lessons from them for the
future, particularly with respect to the provincial,
senatorial and local elections.

But in general terms, the reforms launched last
year in the security sector will be continued this year in
order to train a police force and an army that are fully
capable of ensuring security throughout the national
territory and to enhance conditions - which are
already favourable - for a return to economic and
social development.

In terms of human rights and sexual violence, I
would like to reaffirm my country's commitment to the
purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations and in international law, which are the
basic foundations of a world that is more peaceful,
prosperous and just. In that regard, the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo is determined to
ensure strict respect for the fundamental principles of
human rights and international humanitarian law, and
to ensure a just and lasting peace throughout the
country.

In paragraphs 46 to 54 of the report, the
Secretary-General makes reference to the human rights
violations that took place during the electoral process
and to many other such acts committed in the eastern
part of the country by armed groups. Reference is also
made to acts of sexual violence and mass rapes
committed in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
between 2010 and 2011.
7

With regard to human rights violations in general,
paragraph 72 of the report recommends that measures
be taken to ensure that the guilty are identified and
brought to justice. As I said earlier, that need for
justice is of the greatest concern to the Government, as
well to the authorities of the Independent National
Electoral Commission, who have spared no effort in
bringing before the courts cases involving electoral
workers who engaged in misconduct in the local results
compilation centres.

With regard to sexual violence, I should like to
remind the Council that the war that overshadowed the
Democratic Republic of the Congo for many years
generated many types of violence, including a new
type, the main victims of which are women and young
girls. In the eastern part of the country, which was most
affected by that violence, women are now targeted by
men in uniform and by criminals.

In response, all institutions in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, including the executive power,
the courts and Parliament, have mobilized to
counteract the scourge, against which the Government
has adopted a zero-tolerance policy. Even the highest-
ranking military officers of the Congolese Army have
been brought to justice. In legislative terms, we note
the law of 20 July 2006, which was revolutionary
compared with the criminal code previously in force.
The most significant innovations include an increase in
the age of sexual consent for girls from 14 to 18 years
of age. In other words, a girl aged 18 is today
considered to be a legal minor, and anyone having
sexual relations with a girl of that age, with or without
her consent, is deemed to have broken the law.

Another important measure introduced in that law
is the irrelevance of the official status of the
perpetrator; in other words, no one in a position of
authority who commits a sexually violent act can claim
immunity before the law.

For their part, the courts and tribunals have
adopted new measures. For example, in the remote
areas of the eastern provinces, special courts have been
established to conduct investigations. Those courts are
mobile and able to operate in areas closer to the scenes
of crimes, thereby enabling women who have been
raped to see justice done. They convene outside, under
the trees, so as to enable members of the community to
participate. In addition, the Government is supporting
the establishment of five prosecution support cells,

which MONUSCO is launching to assist the victims of
sexual violence in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

In addressing the issue of Congolese judicial
reform, I am pleased to recall that, in its resolve to
once and for all end impunity for serious crimes
committed in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
and in implementation of the relevant
recommendations of the United Nations mapping
report of October 2010, the Government has taken the
initiative to set up special mixed chambers within the
Congolese legal system. These courts will be set up
within some provincial appellate courts and will be
responsible for handling cases involving grave human
rights violations in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

To that end, the Government has introduced a bill
in Parliament to establish special mixed courts to
prosecute such crimes. The special mixed courts will
have the potential to help not only to end impunity, but
also to improve victims' access to justice and enhance
the overall capacities and will of the Congolese
national judicial system to effectively prosecute the
most serious international crimes.

Although established by the legislative branch on
the basis of a national law, the specialized mixed courts
would be more effective and credible if they were to
enjoy the strong support of the Security Council. Such
support would entail a Council decision under Chapter
VII of the Charter requiring Member States to
cooperate with the special mixed courts, particularly in
the arrest and rendition of suspects. A lack of
cooperation and the denial of justice could pose a real
threat to international peace and security.

Peacebuilding and the fight against armed groups
are the top priorities for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. The threat of the Lord's Resistance Army
must be addressed with the assistance of the countries
of the region. Initiatives must be urgently accelerated
to protect civilians from the atrocities committed by
the Ugandan rebel movement of Joseph Kony and his
henchmen. We believe that sufficient elements are now
in place to substantially reduce or entirely eliminate
the destructive capacity of that armed group, whose
reach spans the Central African Republic, Chad, the
Sudan, Uganda and my own country. It is possible to
do so and it must be done in order to make peace a
reality.
In general terms, we reiterate that, in terms of
fighting armed groups, including Congolese outlaws,
substantial progress has undeniably been made in
reducing threats to the security of the people and in
improving the conditions in which the Government is
able to guarantee security. The normalization of
relations with neighbouring States is continuing.
Measures are being taken to distance destabilizing
elements from the border regions, but we would remind
the Council that, since February 2001, our consistent
position has been that all armed foreigners, regardless
of origin, must return to their home country.

It is now time to begin a new phase of economic
resurgence after many years of war. In that area as in
all others, as the Minister for International and
Regional Cooperation eloquently said in his statement
to the Council on 18 May 2011:

"However, essential it may be, all future
assistance from the United Nations, and
MONUSCO in particular, be conceived and
organized in a way that makes full use of the
investments made by the international
community. In this way, we can end the crisis of
legitimacy, relaunch the economy and rebuild a
State in the Democratic Republic of the Congo -
in other words, capitalize and build on the
remarkable if still precarious results that we have
achieved in this area by working together in the
past few years." (S/PV.6539, p. 6)

The Democratic Republic of the Congo already
has the Stabilization and Reconstruction Plan for
Eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as
12-22477

the International Security and Stabilization Support
Strategy, which target North Kivu and extend to Haut
Uele and Bas Uele districts in Orientale province,
Maniema province, the North Tanganyika district in
Katanga province, and the South Ubangi and Equateur
districts in Equateur province. In our humble opinion,
the economic recovery, social rehabilitation and
reintegration components of these stabilization and
reconstruction programmes should be revisited and
redesigned. I refer in particular to STAREC and the
programme designed by the United Nations country
team, the objective of which is to consolidate and
develop the northern and western regions. Although
they are not experiencing conflict, those regions are
nonetheless facing the consequences of instability in
the north and the east of the country.

We call on the international community and
friendly countries that wish to do so to come to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, to invest heavily in
our country and to participate in its development and
economic growth. The potential of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the energy of its people
enable us to envisage a win-win type of cooperation.
Some countries have already understood that, and we
invite others to follow suit and to support us as we
move along that path.

