Mr. Seenz Biolley (Costa Rica) (interpretation from Spanish): Costa Rica believes that in countries that have
suffered internal conflict there can be no peace without
justice and no reconciliation without the truth coming to
light, and that a free and democratic society cannot be
constructed while criminals who have committed the most
horrible atrocities go unpunished. Impunity is a threat to
peace, as it provokes victims to seek revenge and
reinforces the arrogance of the aggressors.

In this context, the existence of the Tribunal for
Rwanda is an indispensable element for reconciliation in
the Great Lakes region. That is why my delegation is
pleased to co-sponsor and to vote in favour of this draft
resolution to increase the number of judges of the
International Tribunal for Rwanda.

Costa Rica can only respond favourably to the
request of the Tribunal addressed to the Security Council
through the President of the Tribunal, Judge Kama, to
establish a third Trial Chamber with a view to trying
without delay all those who have been detained and
charged and who are already in the custody of the

 

Tribunal. We are convinced that one of the basic
requirements for the proper administration of justice is that
it be swift. In this regard, the decision that the Security
Council will take today is, to put it simply, a way of
ensuring that the fundamental rights of the accused are fully
respected.

On the other hand, we acknowledge the efforts that the
Tribunal has been making to improve its efficiency.
However, we believe that there are still areas where further
improvements can be made, particularly with regard to
procedures and methods of work, as well as in coordinating
its activities with the office of the Prosecutor.

Furthermore, the Tribunal cannot be truly effective if
it does not have the full and impartial cooperation of all
States, in particular the countries of the Great Lakes region,
or if it does not have the necessary financial and human
resources. All of us must make greater efforts in this area.
My delegation cannot fail to take this opportunity to
mention its concern about the execution by the Rwandan
authorities of various individuals accused of committing
acts of genocide. Costa Rica opposes the death penalty in
all circumstances. The administration of justice must not
violate the fundamental right to life of all human beings.
For that reason we call upon those authorities to impose
sentences that are in keeping with the highest standards of
respect for human rights.

We are also compelled to express our deep concern
about the large number of detainees in the prisons of that
nation and the poor conditions under which they are being
held. More must be done to ensure proper conditions for
those prisoners. Above all, their legal rights must be strictly
respected when they are tried.

I should like to take this opportunity to reaffirm that
Costa Rica believes that the work of the criminal tribunals
established by the Security Council must be restricted to
exceptional situations in which the States with jurisdiction
over the criminals are genuinely unable to bring them to
justice or are prejudiced to such an extent that justice
cannot be properly administered.

We believe that the establishment of such tribunals
must respond to a real need and must in no way eliminate
the primary responsibility of the States involved to
administer justice. In this connection, we should recall that
the International Tribunal for Rwanda cannot take the place
of the local courts of that nation, which is why the
international community must cooperate with them in their
work to shed light on the atrocities committed in that
nation and punish those responsible.

In this same context, we should like to reaffirm our
country's steadfast commitment to a permanent
independent, impartial and effective international criminal
court's being established by the diplomatic conference
that will take place in Rome in June and July this year.
Only by establishing such a court will the international
community definitively and genuinely reject and condemn
the most serious crimes, which shock the conscience of
the world. In contrast to that future court, the tribunals
established by the Security Council are no more than a
temporary and transitory palliative for emergencies when
there is a real threat to international peace and security.
Once that standing court is established, the Security
Council will never again have to establish ad hoc
tribunals.

In conclusion, allow me to thank the delegation of
Sweden for its leadership in preparing the draft resolution
before us.
