Ms. Morrison Gonzalez (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Mr. Martin Griffiths and
Mr. Mark Lowcock for their briefings.

We listened carefully to the information concerning
the implementation of the Stockholm Agreement and the
detailed briefing on the humanitarian situation. We take
note of the progress presented by Mr. Griffiths on the
political front towards advancing the implementation
of the Stockholm Agreement, while we also commend
all the efforts being made by countries of the region to
achieve a sustainable political solution to the conflict
in Yemen.

We also welcome the work being done by the United
Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement
under the current leadership of Lieutenant General
Abhijit Guha and the resumption of the joint working
sessions of the Redeployment Coordination Committee.
We are encouraged by the agreements reached, in
particular with respect to the mutual redeployment
of forces and the activation of the tripartite ceasefire
and the de-escalation mechanism. We encourage
the talks on the opening of humanitarian corridors
to take place as soon as possible so as to alleviate
human suffering, particularly that of children and
women, thereby ensuring timely, safe and unhindered
humanitarian access.

We are encouraged that the ceasefire in
Al-Hudaydah is still in place and that its violations have
decreased. However, we are concerned that the work to
mark the landmines in Al-Hudaydah has not yet been
completed. We urge further work on that regard, as it is
a critical step in ensuring effective humanitarian action
and openness to economic activities, especially in the
port of Al-Hudaydah.

We are concerned about the rapid rise in fuel prices
in Sana'a and other northern areas, which is affecting
the functioning ofhospitals and clinics and the operation

of key water and sanitation infrastructure. That is
particularly critical given that cases of cholera continue
to be reported, as Mr. Mark Lowcock mentioned this
morning. We note how the rise in fuel prices also
affect the cost of food for people by leading to greater
food insecurity.

The ongoing conflict has led to a severe economic
downturn and the collapse of essential services, which
has greatly affected the population and exacerbated
existing vulnerabilities. The expansion of the
conflict has also led to the large-scale displacement
of millions of people and high rates of malnutrition,
disproportionately affecting women and children. In
addition to the conflict, underdevelopment and poverty
have deprived millions of Yemeni children of their right
to education and of their hope for a better future. The
educational authorities must work together to find an
urgent solution to the issue of the payment of salaries to
all teachers and educational personnel, so that children
can return to school.

In view of the continued crisis affecting the people
of Yemen, the promised financial resources necessary
to meet the urgent needs there must be made available
speedily, predictably and with flexibility. In that regard,
we want to acknowledge the significant contribution
made by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the United
Arab Emirates and Kuwait to the Yemen humanitarian
response plan this year, which will no doubt help to
save millions of lives affected by this conflict.

Lastly, the Council remains united in the face
of the situation afflicting the Yemeni people. It is
only through political will that we will be able to
put an end to this scourge, and that is the hope of the
international community.

