Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation)(spoke in Russian):
We are pleased, Mr. Minister, that you are with us once
again directing the work of the Security Council. We are
also happy to welcome to this Chamber the President of
the International Committee of the Red Cross, Mr. Jakob
Kellenberger. We thank him for his contribution to the
work of the Council today.

Today, on the eve of the fifty-fifth anniversary of
the end of the Second World War, consideration by the
Security Council of issues related to the protection of
civilians in armed conflict is of particular significance.

The Russian Federation follows with great attention
the relevant activities of the United Nations, including
those of the Security Council and other bodies. The goal
of civilian protection, as well as the humanitarian aspects
of international peacekeeping missions, is becoming
increasingly important. We welcome the current debate
and express our gratitude to the Secretary-General for his
report, his recommendations and his statement made
today.

Russia's position on this item is based on the need
for an effective, adequate international response to all
crises, including those of a humanitarian nature. This
response should be in strict compliance with the norms of
international law and the provisions of the United Nations
Charter. It also entails the primary responsibility of the
Security Council for the maintenance of international
peace and security, the strict observance of international
rules of conduct by all States and the implementation of
norms and principles of international law, including
international humanitarian law, by all parties to an armed
conflict.

The problem of protecting civilians in armed conflict
is multifaceted and requires a comprehensive approach.
Hence, it is fundamental to eradicate war from human
society, to prevent and put an end to conflicts. This,

 

inter alia, is the thrust of Russian initiatives designed to
elaborate a concept of the world in the twenty-first century
and to define the legal basis for the use of force in
international relations in our globalizing world.

Among our highest priorities in this regard is to step
up efforts for a more effective use of early warning
capabilities and preventive diplomacy, deployment and
disarmament, including combating illicit trafficking in small
arms. In the context of our discussion, we should
specifically highlight the principle of the peaceful
settlement of disputes between States and the role of the
General Assembly and Security Council in accordance with
Chapter VI of the Charter.

Russia, like many other States, is fully aware from its
own experience of the meaning of war and of the suffering
it brings to peoples. Despite the efforts of the international
community, armed conflicts continue to cause death and
suffering for many thousands of people on our planet,
particularly innocent civilians. Many of them are children,
women, the elderly, refugees and displaced persons; in
other words, the most vulnerable groups of the population.
Political and humanitarian personnel of United Nations
missions, the International Committee of the Red Cross and
non-governmental organizations also fall victim to armed
conflict.

The primary responsibility for protecting civilians in
all circumstances is vested in the States and parties to an
armed conflict. However, international efforts undertaken,
including those undertaken by the Security Council, can
have a powerful, positive impact on the performance of this
task. We consider the resolution to be adopted after today's
discussion as a significant step in the right direction. It will
serve the purpose of enhancing protection of civilians as
well as international personnel and will be a serious
warning for those who violate international humanitarian
law in the course of armed conflicts.
Last year marked half a century since the adoption of
the Geneva Conventions on the protection of victims of
war. Unfortunately, despite the fact that the vast majority of
States have become parties to the Conventions, there is still
too wide a gap between the provisions contained therein
and their implementation during armed conflicts. The
problems in this sphere should continue to be addressed in
the United Nations General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council (ECOSOC), the International Committee of
the Red Cross (ICRC) and other bodies directly involved in
the protection of civilians in armed conflicts. We support
the strengthening of cooperation and coordination between
the Security Council and the above-mentioned organs on
the understanding that in civilian protection just as in
other issues there is a "division of labour" based on the
provisions of the United Nations Charter and other
international legal instruments.

Bearing this in mind, Russia is open to a broad
dialogue aimed at reaching agreement on specific ways to
mobilize the additional potential of international political
and legal means for the protection of civilians in armed
conflict.

