Mr. Khiari: There have been troubling
developments in recent months related to the nuclear-
weapon and ballistic-missile programmes of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea.

The first relates to resumed missile testing by the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea. The launch of
two missiles on 28 November marked the thirteenth time
this year that the country has launched ballistic missiles
or other projectiles. More recently, on 7 December, the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea announced
what it referred to as an "important test" at the Sohae
Satellite Launching Ground, located on its west coast,
that would help to change the "strategic position of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea once again in
the near future". Some experts believe that the word
"strategic" refers to the country's nuclear-weapon
capability. Analysts have reported signs that a rocket
engine test had been conducted at the site within the
past few days.

Through its State media, the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea has announced the testing of various
new missile systems this year, including systems it has
referred to as "multiple-launch rocket systems" and
a new land-based short-range ballistic missile and a
submarine-launched ballistic missile.

As is well known, Security Council resolutions,
most recently resolution 2397 (2017) of 22 December
2017, prohibit the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea from, inter alia, conducting any further launches
that use ballistic missile technology. Furthermore,
according to the information available to the United
Nations, the Democratic People's Republic of Korea did
not issue any airspace or maritime safety notifications.

The second development relates to the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea's ongoing suspension of
diplomatic engagements. The country has yet to resume
working-level talks with the United States, intra-Korean
contacts have stalled and the country is forgoing some
of its other international engagements.

The third development relates to the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea's warning of a new path.
The Democratic People's Republic of Korea has set a
new policy - that it will not discuss denuclearization
unless the so-called hostile policy of the United States
is removed. It has set a year-end deadline for the United
States to come up with a bold proposal agreeable to
Pyongyang and warned that it would otherwise take a
new path.

While it is unclear what the new path may entail, the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea stated, on 30 November, that we may
see what a "real ballistic missile is in the not distant
future". In terms of timing, the Central Committee of
the ruling Workers' Party of Korea will hold a plenary
meeting in the latter half of December to

"discuss and decide on crucial issues in line with the
needs of the development of the Korean revolution
and the changed situation at home and abroad".

Previous sessions of the Central Committee have seen
the ruling party prepare for major announcements.

The Secretary-General is very concerned by the
latest developments on the Korean peninsula. The
Democratic People's Republic of Korea's reference to
launching ballistic missiles and its threat of potentially
taking a so-called new path in the coming weeks are
deeply troubling. The Secretary-General is reiterating
his call on the leadership of the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea to comply fully with its international
obligations under relevant Security Council resolutions,
resume working-level talks with the United States and
work for peace and stability.

On 15 December 2017, the Secretary-General
described the situation on the Korean peninsula as "the
most tense and dangerous peace and security issue in
the world" (S/PV8137, p. 2). Significant progress was
made in 2018 towards building trust, reducing the
risk of war and opening channels of communication.
The summits involving the leaders of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, the Republic of Korea and
the United States, respectively, gave rise to the hope
that it is possible to build an atmosphere conducive
to advancing sustainable peace and complete and
verifiable denuclearization on the Korean peninsula.

Today, however, as I have already mentioned, talks
between the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
and the United States, as well as between the two
Koreas, have stalled. The Secretary-General calls on
the parties to continue what they have started. It will
require perseverance, political courage and painstaking
diplomacy. He urges the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea and the United States to resume talks.
Diplomacy can continue to reduce tensions that could
otherwise set events on an unpredictable trajectory.
The Secretary-General calls for the international
community to support the parties in their endeavours
and to ensure the full implementation of relevant
Security Council resolutions. The unity of the Security
Council remains essential for achieving the goal of
complete and verifiable denuclearization and creates
the space for diplomatic initiatives to that end.

I would like to close by noting that a breakdown
in diplomacy will not help the human rights or
humanitarian situations in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea. Meeting the population's basic
needs of food and access to essential health services,
clean water and adequate sanitation is a humanitarian
imperative but also a basic human right. While the
primary responsibility to meet these needs lies with
the Government of the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea - as is the case for any Government towards
its people - the Secretariat has consistently stressed
the humanitarian imperative to provide humanitarian
assistance when the basic needs of the population are
not being met.

International humanitarian operations in the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea remain critical
for over 10 million people, or approximately 40 per
cent of the population. The Secretariat recalls that the
measures imposed by the Security Council are not
intended to negatively affect or restrict food aid and
humanitarian assistance that are not prohibited by
relevant Security Council resolutions. The Secretariat
is encouraged by the adoption by the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718
(2006) of Implementation Assistance Notice No.7 in
August 2018, which provides guidelines for obtaining
the exemptions necessary to facilitate humanitarian
assistance in the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea, as well as improvements in the rates and
timeliness of exemption approvals.

Addressing the humanitarian needs in the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea requires an
integrated response - for example, by addressing
water, sanitation and hygiene to also improve health
and nutrition - in order to be effective, save lives
and prevent further suffering. I urge all Member
States to fund lifesaving humanitarian operations
in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. Some
$120 million are required to address the critical
humanitarian needs of the most vulnerable 3.8 million
people in 2019. A gap of $87 million remains.

