Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from Chinese): We voted against the draft resolution on sending
military observers to Guatemala when it was considered by
the Council on 10 January 1997. We made it clear then that
that was not a situation that we wanted to see. The causes
of the situation were clearly set out in the statement that I
made on that occasion, and I shall not repeat them here
today.

The Chinese Government has consistently supported
the peace process in Guatemala and the relevant resolutions
of the General Assembly. We welcome and are gratified by
the peace agreement reached by the two parties in
Guatemala. We are in favour of the peace process in
Guatemala, monitored by and under the auspices of the
United Nations, and sincerely hope that peace and stability
will prevail in the country. Therefore, we have always kept
the door wide open to an appropriate solution of the issue
and have hoped to find such a solution through
consultations.

It is in this spirit of sincerity that we have had many
rounds of fruitful consultations with Guatemala over the
past 10 days. The two sides, guided by the purposes and
principles of the United Nations Charter and through a
forward-looking, pragmatic approach, have finally found
a solution acceptable to both sides, thereby removing the
obstacles to China's support for the draft resolution before
us. We view Guatemala's constructive move positively.
Here we wish to express our appreciation to the
President and other members of the Council, the Group of
Friends of the Guatemalan Peace Process, the non-aligned
and all other countries concerned about the Guatemalan
peace process for their understanding and support.

We sincerely hope that the peace process in
Guatemala will ultimately succeed, allowing Guatemala to
enjoy true peace and stability, create an environment
conducive to its future economic reconstruction and
embark on the road of healthy development. We also
hope that the basis for cooperation between China and
Guatemala in the United Nations will thus be further
strengthened, thereby creating favourable conditions for
the future development of relations between our two
countries.

