Mr. Bessho (Japan): Japan welcomes the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2295 (2016). I would
like to thank France for taking the lead in preparing
this resolution. Japan is pleased to have cosponsored
the resolution. One year has passed since the signing
of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in
Mali. Japan commends all the Malian signatories, who
remain committed to implementing the agreement. We
must not lose momentum. In that regard, it is crucial for
all Malian parties to accelerate the implementation of
the agreement with renewed determination, so as not to
allow spoilers to jeopardize the peace process.

Together with international partners, the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) continues to support
Mali in that process. As a bilateral partner, Japan also
provides assistance to Mali to build the capacities of
its security sector and to spread the dividends of peace
throughout the entire population. Above all, allow
me to underscore the fact that the principal actors
in the implementation of the peace agreement are
the Malians themselves. Two weeks ago, the Prime
Minister of Mali, His Excellency Mr. Modibo Keita,
reaffirmed before the Council that his Government was
determined to expedite the successful implementation
of the agreement (see S/PV.7719). Japan looks forward
to the strong leadership of the Government of Mali.

Finally, Japan pays tribute to MINUSMA personnel,
who work every day in severe security conditions. Iwould
like to express my sincere condolences to those who
have lost their lives in the line of duty. Resolution 2295
(2016) increases the authorized number of MINUSMA
troops by 20 per cent and clarifies its mandate to ensure
the security of personnel. Japan strongly hopes that
these measures will bring tangible results in improving
the mission's security and its capacity to implement its
mandate on the ground. Japan reiterates its full support
for MINUSMA and for the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif.

