The President (spoke in Spanish): I will now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Bolivia.

My delegation thanks Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, and
Ms. Ursula Mueller, Assistant Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Deputy Emergency
Relief Coordinator.

We reiterate that the package of measures for the
implementation of the Minsk agreements continues
to be the basis on which the international community
is committed to pursuing a durable peace in eastern
Ukraine. In that regard, we call on all parties to comply
strictly with it. The provisions of these agreements,
along with the development of confidence-building
measures, are essential to consolidating the efforts that
the parties should make in seeking a political solution
to the crisis in Ukraine. In that regard, we call on the
parties to comply with the principles and purposes
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and to
respect international humanitarian law.

We call on all parties to refrain from attacks and
from activities that incite violence or an escalation
of hostilities, to abide by the ban on the use of heavy
artillery, respect the ceasefire, allow unconditional
humanitarian access and facilitate full and safe access
for the Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine of
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) so that it can carry out its functions
on the ground. In that regard, we call on the parties
to address the root causes of the conflict in order to
achieve a lasting solution that takes into account the
rights, interests and legitimate claims of all the parties,
including ethnic groups, so as to achieve a balance of
interests and a political solution to the issue.

With regard to the humanitarian situation,
successive violations of the ceasefire have had a
devastating effect on the lives of millions of civilians.
To that we have to add the attacks on urban areas
and civil infrastructure that affects 60 per cent of
the people living along the so-called line of contact,
which is one of the areas most contaminated by
anti-personnel mines. In that regard, we call on all
parties to adhere strictly to their obligations regarding
the protection of civilians, including resolution 2286
(2016), within a framework of respect for international
humanitarian law. We also firmly support the efforts of
the Special Monitoring Mission of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, which is carrying
out important work in difficult circumstances.
Lastly, we reiterate that there is no military solution
to this conflict. The international community and the
Council must unite in making every effort possible to
achieve a lasting peace that will benefit the region in
the long term.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.

