Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): Thank you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to brief the Security
Council on the situations in the Sudan and South
Sudan. Given the critical issues facing both countries
and the significance of the peacekeeping operations
there, I decided to conduct my first field visit to the
Sudan and South Sudan, from 30 October to
6November, in my capacity as Under-Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations. My visit gave
me an opportunity to meet with the most senior
officials from both Governments and President Mbeki,
who, as the Council is aware, is the Chair of the
African Union High-level Implementation Panel.

I will begin by discussing the situation in Abyei.
As Council members are aware, the North-South
migration has begun and, for the first time, will involve
crossing an international border. Specifically, the
annual migration of the Misseriya nomadic community
through Abyei has begun. Some members of the group,
herding approximately 2,000 head of cattle, have
2
reached the village of Goli, located 25 kilometres north
of Abyei town. The entire group, numbering several
thousand people, with hundreds of thousands of heads
of cattle, is expected to reach the Kiir/Bahr el-Arab
river by the end of December.

Given the ongoing presence of the Sudanese
Armed Forces in Abyei, there is a real risk of serious
violence during this year's migration if returning
internally displaced persons attempt to prevent the
migration. While President Salva Kiir assured me that
his Government would guarantee the peaceful
migration of unarmed nomads, there are signs that
other officials in the south do not want the migration to
take place, especially given the ongoing presence of
the Sudanese Armed Forces in Abyei.

I visited Abyei and was deeply concerned by the
extent of the destruction in the wake of the occupation
by the Sudanese Armed Forces in May. At the same
time, I was very impressed by the United Nations
Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) Force
Commander and his staff. UNISFA has been fully
deployed, with 2,894 military personnel, including the
full troop strength of the second battalion. The
deployment of the battalion's equipment and the
construction of its company operating bases in the
Northern Sector are progressing, while its personnel
are facing extensive demining and engineering work.

The Force's engineers have rebuilt the Banton
bridge, which I inaugurated on my way to Abyei. This
has restored a key crossing point between Agok and
Abyei town, which had been destroyed during the
fighting in May and which will facilitate the return of
displaced persons, humanitarian access and UNISFA
operations. I should report, however, that President
Al-Bashir has stated that the Sudanese Armed Forces
would withdraw only following the establishment of
the Abyei Area Administration.

(spoke in English)

With respect to the situations in Southern
Kordofan and Blue Nile, the Government of the Sudan
has accused South Sudan of fuelling the fighting and
providing direct support to the Sudan People's
Liberation Army (SPLA)-North, warning that
continued support would have grave consequences for
bilateral relations. President Kiir has denied support
for the SPLA-North and has accused the Government
of the Sudan of supporting insurgent groups in South
Sudan.
11-58922

During my visit, I of course strongly urged both
sides to address those issues through peaceful
negotiations and to make the compromises necessary to
resolve them. I expressed the deep concern of this
Council and of the Secretary-General over the recent
increase in North-South tensions, as well as the
continued lack of progress on Abyei and other post-
Comprehensive Peace Agreement issues. I stressed to
them, as was noted by Special Envoy Menkerios
yesterday, that the only course of action available is to
recommit to a peaceful negotiated settlement of
outstanding issues and to an immediate de-escalation
of the current tensions.

However, recent reports of bombings in the
border area between Upper Nile and Blue Nile states,
and of a cross-border attack today in Kwek, in Upper
Nile, have added to these tensions. On 9 November, the
United Nations Mission in the Republic of South
Sudan (UNMISS) was informed by Government of
South Sudan officials that up to nine bombs had been
dropped in the area of New Quffa and Yafta, in Maban
county, Upper Nile state, very near the border with
Blue Nile State. The areas are gathering points for tens
of thousands of refugees from the fighting in Blue Nile
state. Humanitarian partners report that approximately
55,000 people, including refugees, returnees and
internally displaced persons, are currently on the move
as a result of the bombing.

Yesterday, UNMISS confirmed that the Sudanese
Armed Forces dropped at least two bombs near the
Yida refugee camp in the vicinity of an SPLA camp
along the border between Unity and Southern Kordofan
states, with unknown casualties. There are reports -
still unconfirmed - of an additional two bombs
dropped in the area. The Yida camp shelters
approximately 10,000 people displaced from the
fighting in Southern Kordofan. UNMISS has relocated
at least 12 non-governmental organization and United
Nations agency staff members from the area, and
additional relocations are ongoing. The Mission is, of
course, also working to verify the locations of the
reported bombings.

Today, the SPLA reported to the media a cross-
border attack by the Sudanese Armed Forces in Kwek,
in the oil fields of Upper Nile state, causing up to
20 casualties. The Sudanese Armed Forces have since
denied any responsibility for that attack, and the
Mission is working to verify these reports and to
evaluate any additional humanitarian needs in the
11-58922
affected areas. As a matter of background, prior to
9 July, both the Yida and the Quffa areas were close to
SPLA Ninth and Tenth Division locations, which were
largely composed of combatants from the Nuba
Mountains and Blue Nile State.

As members of the Council are aware, yesterday
President Kiir delivered a press conference to the
diplomatic community in Juba. The conference was in
part a response to the Government of the Sudan's letter
of 4 November to the Council, and also covered the
reported bombings along the border. President Kiir
again denied support to the SPLA-North and reiterated
his commitment to resolving issues with the Sudan
through dialogue. He stated that the bombings were a
violation of the territorial sovereignty of South Sudan
and that the attacks were on civilian refugees from the
fighting in Blue Nile and Southern Kordofan states. He
reiterated his claim that the Government of the Sudan
was supporting insurgent groups in South Sudan and
warned of imminent attacks by militia forces in Maban
county, Upper Nile state. While noting that his
Government would not tolerate these activities,
President Kiir stated that South Sudan would not be
drawn into fighting with the North.

I believe that the situation in the Sudan and South
Sudan is at a difficult juncture, with very low trust
between the countries, heightened rhetoric, and mutual
accusations of support to insurgencies in the territory
of the other. In this environment, neither country is
making sufficient progress towards building a strong
and mutually beneficial relationship. Tensions along
the border may also flare up into serious violence
during the migration period, particularly in the Abyei
area, from which neither side has fully withdrawn.

Bombings by the SAF in the border areas
between Sudan and South Sudan are a major concern,
not only for the relationship between the two countries,
but also for the tens of thousands of civilians in the
affected areas. While neither side appears ready to
return to war, there is a concerning pattern of
escalation and destabilization that could lead to large-
scale confrontation and put more civilian lives at risk.
It is absolutely imperative that both Governments take
the necessary steps to de-escalate the situation, ensure
that civilian lives are protected, and resume peaceful
dialogue.

During my visit to the Sudan, I also spent a day
in El-Fasher and Shangil Tobaya camp, and discussed
3
the situation in Darfur with a wide range of
interlocutors. While the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) continues to
do its best in particularly difficulties circumstances, I
was struck by the differing perceptions of the situation
on the ground on the part of key stakeholders. In
reality, there has been progress, but at the same time
real challenges continue to cause deep concern. It is
true that the security situation has improved since the
height of the conflict, and that the Doha Document for
Peace in Darfur provides a framework and opportunity
for concrete progress. Indeed, some internally
displaced persons have been able to return to certain
areas.

At the same time, however, new displacements
have occurred in other areas, tens of thousands of
internally displaced persons continue to live in difficult
conditions in the camp, a number of armed movements
remain outside the peace process, widespread banditry
hampers civilian life, access remains limited in a
number of areas, and much more needs to be done to
address impunity. Moreover, with the end of the rainy
season, renewed hostilities remain a real threat.

On the security situation, as members of the
Council know, UNAMID was attacked twice in the past
month, losing four peacekeepers, including one this
past weekend. While the Government promised me its
full cooperation in the investigation of the first attack,
we remain deeply concerned about the need for further
cooperation in creating a secure environment and
bringing to justice those responsible for attacks on the
United Nations.

(spoke in French)

The preparation of the road map for peace in
Darfur, as requested by the Council, is an opportunity
to bring the international community together to speak
with one voice on Darfur. UNAMID and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations are working
closely with our partners, including the African Union
and the Special Envoys, in the preparation of the road
map. At the same time, we continue to work our United
Nations humanitarian partners and the African Union
on the review of UNAMID uniformed personnel,
which was also requested by the Council. In particular,
we must bear in mind the need to formulate a common
assessment of the situation on the ground and to
strengthen our coordination mechanisms. We trust that
these exercises will help us to establish a better
coordinated international approach in support of the
peace process, humanitarian assistance and early
recovery in Darfur.

