At the outset, I thank Mr. Zahir Tanin for his briefing on the report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) (S/2020/255). I would like to extend a warm welcome to His Excellency Mr. Ivica Daeic, First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and Mr. Glauk Konjufca. As we reiterate our appreciation for the role of the United Nations and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in Kosovo in protecting human rights, building institutions and creating a platform for a stable political system, we underscore the importance of continuing efforts to find a political settlement between Belgrade and Pristina. In that regard, Tunisia expresses its support for the dialogue, under the auspices of the European Union (EU), between the two parties. That dialogue serves as the most suitable path to resolve the outstanding issues between the two parties and to reach solutions that will lead to a comprehensive settlement. We welcome the designation of anew EU Special Representative in Kosovo to facilitate dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina, and we hope that it will give new momentum to the dialogue. We also welcome the initiative of France and Germany to organize a summit on Kosovo when conditions are established. Likewise, we call for the international community to continue its efforts to encourage Pristina and Belgrade to set aside their differences and focus on reaching consensus-based solutions within the framework of Security Council resolutions. In that context, Tunisia welcomes the tangible steps taken by Belgrade and Pristina, with support from the United States, to promote connectivity and regional cooperation by committing themselves to working towards direct air, rail and road connections. As we express the importance of the principles of sovereignty and territorial integrity, we urge the two parties to pursue formal talks and to reconsider all unilateral measures that are holding back meaningful dialogue. In conclusion, we commend the positive cross-border communication and collaboration in response to the coronavirus pandemic. We hope that it will lead to great solidarity that creates a conducive environment to dialogue. We also reiterate our full support for all United Nations personnel and UNMIK during these difficult and uncertain times due to the pandemic. We commend UNMIK's efforts to provide direct support to the most vulnerable communities in Kosovo.
