Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The appraisals of what happened in Baghdad
on 19 August were given by my President and my
Minister for Foreign Affairs in their messages to the
Secretary-General and in their public statements. In
those statements, the death of Sergio Vieira de Mello
and his colleagues was viewed as an irreparable loss to
the United Nations and the international community as
a whole. The statements stressed that what happened in
Baghdad shows us once again that where terrorists go,
terrorism will follow, that there is no justification for
harbouring terrorists and that they must be fought.

We express indignation at the United Nations
having become a target of terrorists. All its efforts in
Iraq were directed towards helping the Iraqi people to
overcome the consequences of the military conflict and
to re-establish a peaceful life. The Russian leadership
is convinced that, in spite of this barbarous terrorist
act, the international community must continue to
participate in finding a solution in Iraq. A necessary
condition for that is to ensure the broad, collective
involvement of the international community in the
reconstruction of Iraq.

Today's briefings by Ambassador Negroponte and
Ambassador Jones Parry, and the statements by other
members of the Security Council, clearly show that we
all desire a stronger and more active United Nations
role in Iraq. It is also clear that to that end, we need to
be able to guarantee the security of the staff of the
United Nations and of other international organizations
in Iraq. At the moment, responsibility for protection
lies with the members of the coalition. We are prepared
to support in the Security Council any further measures
to strengthen security for United Nations staff in Iraq.
It is also clear that this task is intricately linked to
overall security in Iraq. It is clear from the briefings
and the ensuing discussion that security is the area in
which the greatest problems exist. We are convinced
that the security problems can be solved only in
conjunction with consideration of other key aspects of
the situation in Iraq, such as the political process and a
clear timetable for restoring Iraq's sovereignty, the
strengthening of humanitarian assistance, cooperation
in solving social problems and assistance towards
economic recovery. Naturally, all those measures must
be accompanied by efforts to establish reliable
structures in Iraq for the maintenance of law and order.

I noted that in his statement, Ambassador Jones
Parry he invited the Security Council in coming days to
study within a multilateral framework the ways and
means to enhance United Nations action in Iraq,
including by speeding up the political process,
addressing social, economic and humanitarian issues
and enhancing security. We are prepared to take part in
such a discussion. We believe that Security Council
resolution 1500 (2003), together with the ideas that we
have heard today, is an excellent starting point for such
a discussion. We hope that during the course of the
proposed discussion, we will be able to study those
ideas and hear responses to the questions raised today,
in particular those raised by France. We also believe
that for such a discussion to be as fruitful as possible, it
would be useful to hear the recommendations of the
Secretary-General. Again, we are prepared to take part
in such a discussion, which would be timely and which,
we believe, should take place as soon as possible.

