Mr. Fowler (Canada) (spoke in French): The
Council's first thematic consideration of conflict
prevention in November 1999 was an important initial
step towards creating the culture of prevention called
for by the Secretary-General in his address to the
General Assembly last fall and repeated in his
Millennium Report. We welcome the initiative of the
Jamaican delegation and your personal presence today,
Mr. Minister, for it underlines the importance of
preventing armed conflicts and allows us to take stock
of progress made and the challenges that remain to
achieving this goal.

It is important to recognize that progress has been
made. In Canada's time on the Council its security
agenda has expanded gradually to include issues such
as war-affected children, protection of civilians,
terrorism, small arms, HIV/AIDS, refugees and an
increasing number of humanitarian concerns. While the
Council's engagement on these questions has been
largely thematic and theoretical, in some cases, talk has
led to action, for example by giving several
peacekeeping operations explicit mandates to protect
civilians. Also, the Council is beginning to recognize
the importance of the economic underpinnings of
conflict and, for example, has banned illicit diamonds
from Sierra Leone. By tackling these new sources of
conflict, the Council is contributing to the culture of
prevention.

The challenge now and in the future is to take
action on these new security priorities. Repeated
debates in New York are not enough.

In an age where conflicts are increasingly defined
by violations of human rights and humanitarian law,
and in particular by the deliberate targeting of people
and their communities, conflict-prevention strategies
must include efforts to end the culture of impunity.

The International Criminal Tribunals for Rwanda
and the former Yugoslavia act as an important deterrent
to those who commit war crimes and crimes against
humanity by showing them that they are accountable
for these crimes. The Council's efforts to address
responsibility for the egregious crimes committed in
Sierra Leone indicate that flagrant and systematic
violation of human rights will not go unpunished.

As Canada has stressed repeatedly, the
establishment of the International Criminal Court will
serve as an even more powerful deterrent to human
rights abuse by giving the international community a
standing capacity to prosecute the most serious crimes
ever known to humankind, rather than relying on an ad
hoc approach.

(spoke in English)

More effective sanctions and peace operations
can also contribute to conflict prevention. Preventive
peace deployments obviously have an even more direct
deterrent effect. As conflict is most likely to break out
where it has occurred before, peace operations require
the mandates and resources needed to prevent the
resurgence of conflict. This is an area where progress
has been slow. The events of May in Sierra Leone
brought home the pitfalls of under-resourcing peace
operations. In addition to fielding missions that are not
always equal to the demands on the ground, the
capacity to plan and deploy them rapidly is still
seriously lacking. Unfortunately, the Council's
decision-making on peacekeeping mandates continues
to be unduly driven by outside political and financial
considerations rather than realistic operational
imperatives. We are encouraged, therefore, that today's
Presidential Statement stresses the need to fully take
into account military requirements and factors on the
ground in the design phase of peacekeeping mandates.

In the same vein, Canada strongly welcomes the
Secretary-General's initiative to establish a high-level
panel to review all aspects of United Nations
peacekeeping operations. We look forward to what we
hope will be a candid report, addressing not only the
shortcomings of the United Nations Organization, but
also the role of Member States and the changes that are
needed to improve United Nations peacekeeping. We
hope and expect the report to focus on enhancing the
conflict prevention capacity of peace operations.

We are more encouraged by recent steps to
improve the instrument of sanctions. In Angola, the
Council has launched an unprecedented effort to make
the sanctions against UNITA work. I thank the
Secretary-General and Ambassador Greenstock for
their generous references to our efforts in this regard.
Our successes, however, are only those of the Council
and, in my view, demonstrate what can be achieved
when this body is unanimously committed to achieving
concrete results. The Council's work in such
circumstances can have a real impact.

Yesterday I returned from the World Diamond
Congress in Antwerp, where representatives of the
diamond manufacturers and the diamond bourses
adopted an important- indeed, I would say-
stunning resolution which, when fully implemented,
would prevent the bulk of conflict diamonds from
reaching legitimate diamond markets and would do so
without imposing collateral damage on the legitimate
diamond trade. The issue of conflict diamonds
dominated the World Diamond Congress, and I think it
is fair to say that it has captured the interest of the
international media. It is clear that, over the past few
months, the diamond industry has decided to take this
Council's invitation to collaborate with it in controlling
the estimated four per cent of world diamond
production that contributes to fuelling armed conflict.
This collaboration will deny revenue to those who
would pursue their nefarious objectives by force of
arms. It will, therefore, make a real contribution to our
collective efforts to prevent conflict.

The expert panel process devised for Angola is
now being contemplated in Sierra Leone and in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The establishment
of such panels to investigate the role of natural
resources in fuelling the conflicts in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is also a positive step, at least in
addressing the factors that motivate and sustain such
conflict. We believe that the creation of the Council's
first-ever informal working group to study the overall
effectiveness of sanctions, under the chairmanship of
Ambassador Chowdhury, is yet another positive
development. More effective sanctions will enhance
the Council's efforts at ending and preventing conflict.
I repeat Canada's call to make greater use of targeted
sanctions as a preventive measure, rather than only
imposing them once conflict has erupted.

There has also been some limited progress on
adapting the Council's working methods to the
requirements of conflict prevention. Last December,
the Council agreed to use more flexible and inclusive
meeting formats, which have been employed on a
number of occasions since then. This, we believe, has
had a positive impact in attracting a "buy-in" from the
broader United Nations membership. There is still too
much scope, however, for excluding pressing security
issues from our agenda and for ignoring voices that
should be heard. For example, the Council should be
more responsive to the early warning signals of conflict
provided by information on human rights abuse from
the Commission on Human Rights and other credible
sources. Regular briefings of the Council by human
rights rapporteurs would, we believe, be useful in this
regard.

Enhanced cooperation and coordination with
regional organizations is important. Interaction
between regional organizations and the United Nations
has been critical - but, let's face it - far from perfect,
in situations such as Sierra Leone, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the conflict between
Ethiopia and Eritrea. In these cases, regional and sub-
regional organizations have taken the lead in the
negotiation of peace agreements, and the United
Nations has followed in the implementation phase. For
such joint efforts to succeed, closer coordination-
effective coordination - through all stages of conflict
management remains vital, particularly if the United
Nations is to avoid facing unrealistic expectations.

There will continue to be occasions when our best
efforts at conflict prevention fail. In these
circumstances, the international community should take
decisive action to end and resolve conflicts,
specifically those marked by a humanitarian imperative
or gross violations of human rights. Such robust action,
including humanitarian intervention, can, we believe,
serve as a deterrent against future conflicts or
violations of international law. Canada supports the
Secretary-General's call in his Millennium Report for
further debate on humanitarian intervention, and we
will do our part to move this admittedly controversial
issue forward.

Our focus on conflict prevention in the Security
Council today is a welcome complement to discussions
last week among the foreign ministers of the Group of
Eight. Conflict prevention will also be discussed by G-
8 leaders at the Okinawa Summit this weekend. We
hope that this mutual reinforcement of common goals
will continue.

Momentum is clearly building in favour of a
culture of prevention. The where-with-all to make it
happen is, however, sorely lacking. The risks and the
costs, both human and financial, of taking action after
conflict has erupted ought to be the best incentives for
conflict prevention. Efforts by the international
community must, however, be matched by a
commitment by all concerned to assume ownership
over conflict prevention strategies. Attempts to import
solutions from the outside will not go far if the will to
pursue peace and avoid conflict is not shared within the
societies in question. Internal issues, ranging from
good governance and respect for human rights to how
scarce resources are allocated to protect human life, are
key to the prevention of conflict and must be addressed
forthrightly by all concerned. We are prepared to do
our part, and we call on those who are engaged in
conflict or are susceptible to it to do their part to
contribute to establishing a culture of prevention.

In conclusion, I fully agree with the Secretary-
General's comments this morning that we need to
decide on practical measures for prevention, and then
we need to act. Canada looks forward to the Secretary-
General's report in this regard next May, and we will
do all we can to encourage the Council to greater
specific action.

