The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to start by thanking Ambassador Sergey Lavrov for his
service as President of the Security Council for the
month of June 2003. I am sure I speak for all members
of the Council in expressing my deep appreciation to
Ambassador Lavrov for the great diplomatic skill with
which he conducted the Council's business last month.
I also express my thanks to his team.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998),
1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)

Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (8/2003/675)

The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Albania, Italy, Japan and Serbia
and Montenegro, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Sahovic'
(Serbia and Montenegro) took a seat at the
Council table; Mr. Nesho (Albania), Mr. Spatafora
(Italy) and Mr. Haragachi (Japan) took the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council
Chamber.


The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Michael Steiner, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Kosovo
and Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Steiner to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2003/675, which contains the report of the Secretary-
General on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Michael Steiner, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Kosovo and Head of the
United Nations Interim Administration in Kosovo.

As this is the last briefing of Mr. Steiner in his
capacity as Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Kosovo and Head of the United Nations
Interim Administration in Kosovo, I wish to take this
opportunity to convey to him, on behalf of the Council,
a few words of tribute and farewell. In particular, I
wish to convey the deep gratitude of the entire Security
Council - and mine in particular - for the continuous
and tireless efforts that he has made over the last year
at the head of one of the most ambitious and complex
missions deployed by the United Nations. Everyone
here knows that his work has not at all been easy.
However, he has accomplished substantial progress,
which we appreciate. Four years ago, few would have
imagined that he would accomplish such significant
results. Nonetheless, much remains to be done in this
enormous task, which must culminate in the full
integration of the entire region into Europe.

Without doubt, we will miss Mr. Steiner's
presence among us, with his dedication, his unflagging
interest and his hard work in implementing resolution
1244 (1999). I understand that Mr. Steiner will take up
the post of Permanent Representative of Germany to
the United Nations Office in Geneva, an assignment
that will allow him to remain a part of the United
Nations family. I therefore wish him great success in
his new endeavours, and I reiterate the profound
appreciation and thanks of the Security Council for his
service.

I now give the floor to Mr. Steiner, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Kosovo
and Head of the United Nations Interim Administration
in Kosovo.


