Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Jan Kubis for his briefing. I also wish to thank
Mr. Tanin, Permanent Representative of Afghanistan,
for his statement.

Currently, peacebuilding in Afghanistan is at a
crucial juncture. As decided by the international
Conference on Afghanistan held in Bonn in December
2011, Afghanistan will enter a transformation decade
starting in 2015. The continuous promotion of the
transitional process of peaceful reconstruction aimed at
laying down a sound basis for the transformation
decade is an important task that must be taken up by
the people and the Government of Afghanistan. China
welcomes the positive efforts made and the results
achieved in national reconstruction by the Afghan
Government.

We support Afghanistan's strengthening of its
efforts in the political, security, development and rule
of law fields, in promoting national reconciliation and
the Kabul process and in implementing the Afghan
Peace and Reintegration Programme. We support
Afghan national institutions in their efforts to
comprehensively assume responsibilities in various
fields, especially in gradually taking over the onerous
task of maintaining national security. We support
Afghanistan in actively committing itself to economic
development and national reconstruction and in
working to develop friendly and cooperative relations
with other countries, especially countries in the region.

Peacebuilding in Afghanistan cannot be
accomplished without the help and support of the
international community. We hope that the
international community will fully respect the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Afghanistan, adhere to the principles of Afghan
leadership and ownership, develop in-depth
partnerships with Afghanistan and provide constructive
help for national reconciliation and the reconstruction
of the country.

We hope that the parties involved in
implementing the plan for withdrawal from
Afghanistan will fully take into account the situation
on the ground and execute that implementation in an
appropriate and responsible manner while ensuring the
security and stability of Afghanistan and helping the
country to further strengthen capacity-building in the
security field.

We call upon the international community to
devote greater attention to the economic reconstruction
of Afghanistan, honour the relevant commitments in an
effective manner and increase assistance according to
the national priority programmes formulated by
Afghanistan so as to promote the country's sustainable
development with a view to addressing the root causes
of the turbulence in Afghanistan. We express our
concern at the recent incidents, such as the burning of
the Koran and the shooting of civilians, and hope that
the issues concerned can be resolved properly.

We would like to express our appreciation for the
active efforts made by the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) to maintain peace
and stability and promote national reconciliation in the
country. We support the recommendation of the
Secretary-General to extend the mandate of UNAMA
for another year and support the United Nations in
continuing to play a central role in coordinating
international assistance for the reconstruction of
Afghanistan.

As a friendly neighbour of Afghanistan, China
has played an active role in supporting, promoting and
participating in the reconstruction of Afghanistan. We
will continue to provide assistance to the best of our
ability and, together with the rest of the international
community, make our due contribution to the early
realization of lasting peace and sustainable
development in Afghanistan.

