Miss Durrant (Jamaica): One year ago, under the
presidency of the United States of America, the
Security Council took an unprecedented step by
recognizing the threat that the HIV/AIDS pandemic
poses to the peace and security of Africa, creating as it
does a serious development crisis that threatens the
future growth and prosperity of the affected countries,
and wiping out decades of hard-won social and
economic gains.

In July 2000, the Council went further, with the
adoption of a groundbreaking resolution. Resolution
1308 (2000) focused on the potentially damaging
impact of HIV/AIDS on the health of international
peacekeeping personnel, including support personnel,
and the steps needed to protect them. It also recognized
the importance of a coordinated international response
to the HIV/AIDS pandemic, and that the pandemic is
exacerbated by conditions of violence and instability,
which increase the risk of exposure to the disease as a
result of large movements of people, widespread
uncertainty over conditions and reduced access to
medical care. The resolution also expressed keen
interest in additional discussions among relevant
United Nations bodies, Member States, industry and
other relevant institutions in order to make progress,
inter alia, on the question of access to treatment and
care and on prevention.

It is against this background that the Jamaican
delegation expresses its appreciation to the Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr.
Jean-Marie Guehenno, and the Executive Director of
the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS
(UNAIDS), Dr. Peter Piot, for their comprehensive
reports on the action taken since last July. In their
remarks they demonstrated the partnership required to
make into agents of change the men and women who
serve the cause of peace across the globe in hostile and
conflict situations.

We know that in situations of conflict, HIV/AIDS
spreads indiscriminately to women, children,
humanitarian workers, peacekeepers, soldiers and
rebels alike. The cycle of the pandemic can be broken
only if the world community acts in unison.

Dr. Piot has reminded us that no region of the
world is immune to the impact of HIV/AIDS. As it
continues to take its deadly toll, AIDS has adverse
impacts on the social fabric of all societies. It destroys
the productive capacity of the people, significantly
reducing life expectancy. This in turn exacerbates
poverty and marginalizes and orphans children, further
adding to the pool of recruits, fuelling violence and
even armed conflict.

In this context, let me thank the Government of
Norway for the financial support announced in the
Council today by the Minister of International
Development for the comprehensive plan of action to
be drawn up by UNAIDS on how to address HIV/AIDS
in conflict situations.

In response to the potentially devastating effects
of the epidemic, Caribbean heads of Government have
taken several steps to develop appropriate mechanisms
to respond to the crisis. A number of regional meetings
have been held, and collaborative multisectoral efforts
have been made in cooperation with UNAIDS. I wish
to take this opportunity to express on behalf of the
heads of Government appreciation to Dr. Piot and
UNAIDS for the assistance we have received.

These efforts have been premised on the strongly
held View that the question of HIV/AIDS can
appropriately be addressed only in an integrated
framework and in a holistic and comprehensive
manner. It is in this sense that the efforts of the
Security Council must serve as a complement to the
activities of the Economic and Social Council and the
General Assembly, United Nations funds and
programmes, the specialized agencies and the Bretton
Woods institutions.

The evidence suggests that the international
community has intensified its efforts to curb the spread
of this pandemic. The attention given to HIV/AIDS by
the Security Council has, as Dr. Piot said, served to
increase the issue's profile on the international agenda
and can serve as a critical impetus for mobilizing
further the international community.

Resolution 1308 (2000) has set the stage for
developing clear mechanisms to address the issue of
HIV/AIDS in international peacekeeping. The
important role of troop-contributing countries in
implementing the provisions of the resolution will
determine in large part the success we achieve in
protecting not only those civilians who continue to face
armed conflict, but also those persons who serve in
peacekeeping operations.

A few days ago, under your presidency, Sir, this
Council discussed the importance of strengthening
cooperation with troop-contributing countries. There
can be no doubt that the issue of AIDS is one of the
critical areas in which cooperation with troop-
contributing countries is indispensable. Timely and
constructive initiatives at all levels - including at the
national and international levels and by the United
Nations - will constitute our most effective responses.

In this regard, we note the activities that have
already been undertaken by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, as outlined to us today by
the Under-Secretary-General, which are intended to
sensitize peacekeepers, including support personnel.
We welcome the efforts of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations to train peacekeepers in the
prevention of HIV/AIDS, and we note the importance
of enhancing the pre-deployment orientation exercises
undertaken with the collaboration of UNAIDS. We are
cognizant of the challenge that these tasks entail, and
we are encouraged by the expeditious manner in which
action has been taken. We must emphasize in this
connection the critical role of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations in ensuring the development
of adequate policy guidelines on acceptable behaviour
in relation to HIV/AIDS, and we note the important
contribution being made by interested States.

The results achieved through the collaborative
efforts of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and UNAIDS remind us of the importance of increased
cooperation among all relevant bodies and agencies.
There can be no substitute for strong partnerships and
for a global commitment to enhancing coordination and
the intensification of national and international efforts.

Both the Economic and Social Council and the
General Assembly have made important progress on
the question of AIDS. We recall that during the
Millennium Summit world leaders expressed their
commitment to halting and reversing the spread of
HIV/AIDS by the year 2015. The convening of the
special session of the General Assembly in June of this
year to address the problem of HIV/AIDS will allow
the international community to consider the issue in a
comprehensive manner, and must be seen as an
opportunity to set goals and objectives for the future.
We must consolidate the progress that has already been
made and devise new and innovative approaches and
long-term strategies. We encourage those in a position
to do so to continue their assistance to developing
countries in an effort to allow national Governments to
implement effective programmes to combat the spread
of the disease.

The International Partnership against HIV/AIDS
in Africa is a welcome initiative that should be
emulated in other parts of the world.

We also continue to insist that the world
community must build on the experiences of and
lessons learned from those countries that have
successfully reduced the spread of the disease. We
must remove the stigma of HIV/AIDS through public
education, providing information on how the disease is
transmitted and changing at-risk behaviour. We must
provide public health facilities for testing, particularly
for women of child-bearing age. We must aggressively
seek a cure and develop vaccines while at the same
time reducing the costs of medication and treatment
and making them widely available. We must provide
social and economic support, particularly for those
orphaned by AIDS. I hope that this is an issue that will
also be addressed during the special session of the
General Assembly on children, in September.

Today's debate demonstrates the global
partnership that is required if the world is not to lose
future generations to the scourge of HIV/AIDS.

Let me, in conclusion, Mr. President, join you and
the colleagues who have spoken before me in thanking
Ambassador Richard Holbrooke for the leadership he
has displayed and the tenacity with which he tackled
this and other issues on the Council's agenda as he
sought to improve relations between the United States
and the United Nations. My delegation wishes him well
in his future endeavours.

