Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
welcome you, Mr. President, to the Security Council
this morning. I would also like to thank the presidency
of Azerbaijan for organizing this timely briefing
on cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization ofIslamic Cooperation (OIC). I also thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and OIC Secretary-
General Ekmeleddin Ihsanoglu for their contributions.
I note that, last year, Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
became the first United Nations Secretary-General to
visit the OIC headquarters. His presence at the start
of today's debate was another reflection of his strong
commitment to ensuring that the United Nations and
the OIC cooperate closely.

The United Kingdom, too, is deeply committed to
further strengthening our relationship with the OIC.
In 2011, we were pleased to appoint our first special
representative to the OIC. We welcome the increased
dialogue between the United Kingdom and the OIC
under the tenure of Mr. Ihsanoglu, including our
constructive dialogue on promoting the freedom of
religion or belief and combating religious intolerance
throughout the world. We are committed to deepening
that relationshiop under the bilateral framework
agreement that was signed between the United Kingdom
and the OIC in 2012.

These meetings in which the Security Council
engages with regional and other outside organizations
are a vital part of our work. They enable the Council to
be outward-facing, to hear the important perspectives
of non-United Nations organizations and to identify
ways in which our efforts to enhance peace and security
throughout the world can mutually reinforce each other.
It is in that spirit that I welcome today's briefing.

The OIC, consisting of 57 member States across
four different continents, has a unique perspective to
offer us. Its Charter, which stresses the determination
of its member States to contribute to international
peace and security and to promote friendly relations
and good-neighbourliness, clearly chimes with the
purposes and objectives of the Security Council. The
OIC can play an important role in bringing the voices
of its membership to bear on issues that concern us all,
Muslims and non-Muslims alike. The adoption of the
OIC's 10-year programme of action in 2005 has given
a clear sense of direction for the organization. And we
commend the OIC's commitment to peacekeeping and
conflict resolution.

We also acknowledge the important stance that the
OIC has taken in relation to the challenges in respect
of international peace and security faced by many
Muslim majority countries. The suspension of Syria's
membership of the OIC in August 2012 sent a clear
message on behalf of the Islamic world that the actions
of Bashar Al-Assad's Government were unacceptable
and could not be tolerated. In the build-up to the
"Geneva 11" conference and at the start oftalks between
the Syrian opposition and the Syrian Government, we
welcome the OIC's support for a negotiated political
settlement. A solution to the Syrian conflict can be
achieved only through a political dialogue. For the sake
the millions suffering as a result of the conflict, the
international community must keep striving towards
that aim.

Resolving the Israeli-Palestinian conflict remains
crucial to long-term security in the Middle East. We
welcome the leadership shown by the United States
on the issue, and the parties' commitment to intensify
negotiations in the coming weeks. Difficult choices
lie ahead and bold leadership will be required on both
sides. The international community has a vital role to
play in supporting those efforts to achieve the lasting
peace that the people of the region need and deserve.

As his tenure comes to an end, we pay tribute to
the work of Mr. Ekmeleddin Ihsanoglu, Secretary-
General of the OIC. We look forward to working with
his successor, Mr. Iyad Madani, when he takes office in
2014. We are delighted that he has been able to join the
Council today for the briefing and are confident that
cooperation between the OIC and the Security Council
will continue to strengthen during his future term in
office.
Let me end by welcoming the presidential statement
(S/PRST/2013/l6) adopted by the Council today. That
statement invites the Secretary-General to include
in his regular reports on United Nations cooperation
with regional and other organizations ideas on how
cooperation between the United Nations and the OIC
can be intensified. We look forward to receiving those
suggestions.

