Ms. Rasheed (Palestine): At the outset, I wish to
congratulate Poland on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council and acknowledge its able leadership.
I also wish to thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs
for convening today's important debate on children
and armed conflict. This matter continues to be of the
highest priority and urgency for the State of Palestine.

We would also like to thank the Secretary-General
Guterres for his report (S/2019/509). We are grateful
to the Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict and the Executive Director ofUNICEF for their
important briefings to the Council and their tireless
advocacy for the protection and well-being of children.
Their efforts and those of all relevant international
civil servants and civil society to this end deserve our
full support.

The Secretary-General's annual report on children
and armed conflict reflects in painful detail how
children in situations of armed conflict continue to
be subjected to the most appalling violations of their
human rights. We regret the fact that 2018 was marked
by the highest recorded number of children killed or
maimed in armed conflict since the United Nations
began monitoring and reporting this grave violation.
The numbers are shocking and beyond unacceptable.

Collectively we must do more. As this month
marks ten years since resolution 1882 (2009) and as we
approach the thirtieth anniversary of the Convention on
the Rights of the Child, the international community
must mobilize to resolve the conflicts and remedy the
situations that continue to cause child casualties. We
must act in ways that are consistent with the principles
and commitments affirmed in this important resolution
and in line with our collective obligations under
international law.

Such action cannot exclude efforts to address the
continuing plight of Palestinian children. Denied their
inalienable rights, the Palestinian people in occupied
Palestine, including East Jerusalem, have endured over
a half-century of foreign occupation, with generations
of children suffering grave breaches and human rights
violations, as Israel, the occupying Power, persists
with absolute impunity in its systematic perpetration
of violations, including those considered among the
six grave violations against children in armed conflict.
This situation has been repeatedly attested to by United

Nations agencies and international human rights
organizations. Yet, despite constant appeals and calls
for protection, Palestinian children have been left
unprotected, defenceless and vulnerable.

In the reporting period, the United Nations verified
the highest number of Palestinian children killed by
Israeli occupying forces and settlers since the 2014 war
on the Gaza Strip. This number includes babies as young
as 18 months old. Moreover, over 2,700 Palestinian
children were injured in 2018, including many
permanently maimed and disabled, and the number of
casualties has continued to rise in 2019, including as
a result of intentional targeting of peaceful protesters
by the occupying forces. Settler violence and terror
also continues to severely impact Palestinian children,
including harassment and attacks on schoolchildren,
all under the watch of the Israeli occupying forces
and in grave breach of Israel's obligations as the
occupying Power.

Palestinian children, some as young as 12 years
old, also continue to be arrested, brutally interrogated,
detained and imprisoned by Israel, with several held
under administrative detention for months and some
for up to a year without charge. Since 2000, at least
10,000 Palestinian children have been arrested and
prosecuted in an Israeli military detention system
notorious for its systematic ill-treatment and torture of
Palestinian children. Reports document that three out
of four children experience physical violence during
arrest, transfer or interrogation, with physical and
psychological trauma that can only haunt them for the
rest of their lives. Perhaps that is exactly the point of
such policies by the occupying Power, as it attempts to
damage and impair one generation after another with its
unlawful, unethical and immoral policies and practices.

Israel's illegal and depraved colonization of the
Palestinian land and ethnic cleansing of the Palestinian
people also continue to gravely impact our children.
Its systematic and punitive demolition of homes has
rendered thousands homeless and forcibly displaced
hundreds of children and their families, among them
Palestine refugees living the trauma of dispossession
and displacement once again. Thousands more children
and their families remain at risk of losing their homes
and life belongings, deepening their fear, anxieties
and hopelessness.

Israeli raids and attacks on schools and closures
of Palestinian educational institutions also continue.
Moreover, humanitarian assistance to address protection
needs continues to be impeded as a result of access and
movement restrictions and other collective-punishment
measures imposed by the occupation, most severely via
its inhumane illegal blockade of the Gaza Strip, now in
its thirteenth year and the cause ofimmense deprivation,
suffering and isolation of Palestinian children.

The foregoing is just a snapshot of the massive
violations that continue to be perpetrated against
Palestinian children by this belligerent, illegal
occupation. There must be accountability for all
these crimes.

The State of Palestine reiterates that, according to
the established criteria and the thorough documentation
available to the Security Council, including as reflected
in its own consecutive reports, the perpetration of such
violations and crimes warrants that Israel, its army
and its settlers be put on the list of parties that commit
grave violations against children. The absence of such
inclusion continues to undermine the credibility of this
list, exposing it to the criticism of politicization, and
continues to be a missed opportunity to hold Israel
accountable and to save the lives of Palestinian children.
Moreover, we call on the Special Representative to
ensure that the report's section on Israel and the State of
Palestine be placed in the prevailing context of military
occupation, in order to ensure an accurate examination
of the situation of our children, including ensuring
that measures constituting collective punishment, in
particular the Israeli blockade of Gaza, are not omitted
in enumeration of the long list of violations against the
children of Palestine.

We will remain vigilant in calling upon the
international community to uphold its obligations in
that regard. We appeal to the Security Council and all
States to shore up the political will and courage to act
immediately and without selectivity to protect the lives
of Palestinian children under Israeli occupation. This
protection is essential for safeguarding their rights
and promoting their well-being until an end is brought
to this illegal occupation and the rights, freedoms,
security and dignity of the Palestinian people are
realized, beginning with our children.

