Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome the Deputy Prime Minister of
Malaysia, Mr. Ahmad Zahid Hamidi, as President of
the Security Council. We are grateful for his convening
of this meeting on the issue of non-proliferation and
Security Council resolution 1540 (2004).

We listened very carefully to today's briefings,
and we thank the Spanish chairmanship of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) for its active and focused leadership of that
subsidiary body of the Council.
The global non-proliferation architecture is
based on three components: the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the Chemical
Weapons Convention and, of course, the Biological and
Toxin Weapons Convention. The Russian Federation
participates very actively in all of them.

Resolution 1540 (2004) is yet another pedestal
of non-proliferation. It is a reliable bulwark against
weapons of mass destruction falling into the hands
of non-State actors. Achieving its full-fledged and
universal implementation is a pressing objective for
the international community. Our discussions here
today will serve as a significant contribution to the
current comprehensive review of the implementation of
the resolution.

We note the positive momentum in the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) during
the period covered. We understand that not all steps
have been taken and that a great deal of work lies
before us, but it is important to continue in this spirit
without artificial pressure, mindful of the capacities of
individual States. It is clear that there continues to be
broad scope for improvements within the framework of
the current mandate, which requires no radical changes.
The resolution enshrines the concept of cooperation,
not coercion. That notion should be safeguarded.

We understand the need to find new responses to
new challenges. We support the strengthening of the
counter-terrorism component of non-proliferation.
In the light of the continuing terrorist activity by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and other
terrorist groups in Iraq and Syria, the significance of
resolution 1540 (2004) only grows. Reports regarding
non-State actors gaining access to chemical weapons
require detailed investigation and a response by the
Security Council. It is unacceptable that non-State
actors should be provided assistance in accessing
weapons of mass destruction.

We concur with the view that there is a need to
more actively use national and regional components
in the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). Best
practices must be studied and educational seminars
for focal points must be organized. Their value added
is obvious. At the end of June, Russia organized just
such an event in Kaliningrad, under the aegis of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and the United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs.
The response of the participants was most positive.

The capacities of regional and international
organizations must be enlisted, and their plans of
work should be tailored to States' requests. We also
advocate the involvement of academia and the business
community. Of course, all such actions should be under
the leadership and control of State structures. Russia
is interested in strengthening the non-proliferation
regime and will spare no effort to that end.

We have repeatedly heard of the use by fighters of
ISIL and other groups of industrial chemicals and even
military toxins. There are reports regarding terrorist
access to the technologies and infrastructure necessary
for the manufacture of chemical weapons. The threat
of chemical and biological terrorism is growing and is
increasingly transcending borders. The pressing need
to bolster the fight against acts of terrorism is so high
that the toolkit of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004), despite its important role, is
simply insufficient.

That is precisely why Russia, at the Conference
on Disarmament, took the initiative of proposing the
elaboration of an international convention against
chemical and biological terrorist attacks. Such a new
convention could combine the elements agreed upon by
the international community during the past few years.
In particular, it should include provisions regarding
the criminalization of acts falling within its scope,
determine jurisdictions, define the appropriate level
of judicial response and implement the principle of
extradite-or-prosecute, and so on.

It is clear that the conventional concepts of arms
control, disarmament and non-proliferation are
gradually diluting. In essence, this field is taking on
a new shape and acquiring new dimensions, namely,
counter-terrorist ones. The emergence of ISIL's
industrial capacities for manufacturing chemical
weapons and the threat of their proliferation across
the whole of the Middle East attest to the timeliness of
Russia's initiative to elaborate just such an international
convention on combating acts of biological and
chemical terrorism.

