Mr. Sareer (Maldives): I wish to begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President, and your country,
Guatemala, on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. My delegation further thanks
the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, for his comprehensive briefing on
the situation in the Middle East, including the question
of Palestine.
In December 2010, the Middle East and North
Africa saw the onset of actions that would come to be
known as the Arab Spring. What began as a peaceful
movement has now become a display of overt violence
and bloodshed in Syria. The Maldives believes that this
issue is central to any discussion of the current political
situation in the Middle East.

Speaking at the open debate on this topic in July
(see S/PV.6816), the Maldives called for outright peace
in Syria. However, since then, with the increasing
hostility along the Turkish border, as well as daily
reports of increasing deaths in the area, it has become
clear that the Syrian issue threatens to engulf the
Middle East. The violence and unmitigated human
rights abuses prevailing in Syria today are a disgrace to
the community of nations. In a region plagued by one
crisis after another, we call for a renewed commitment
from all stakeholders to the development of peace and
stability.

Disarmament and the non-proliferation of weapons
in those areas affected by the Syrian conflict are an
important step forward in preserving peace in that
region. As a nation dedicated to non-aggression
and peaceful diplomacy, the Maldives wishes to see
international relations conducted in the same manner.

The Maldives applauds the recent presidential
elections in Egypt, and continues to support the
ongoing democratic developments in the region. As
a democratic Muslim nation with a wide political
spectrum, we understand the growing pains associated
with transitions in the Middle East and those relating
to the implementation of democratic norms. However,
we cannot relate to, nor can we condone, any political
transformation that is sought with Violence.

Along with the conflict in Syria, the Middle East
is immersed in the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. The
Maldives remains stoutly determined that Palestine
must be recognized as a legitimate State. The Maldives
believes that a two-State solution, with Israel and
Palestine coexisting side by side in peace, is the only
way to bring about peace in the Middle East. The
Maldives does not believe that such recognition would
hinder peace talks, but rather foresees it strengthening
and solidifying a tangible solution.

My delegation therefore believes that the Security
Council has an obligation to push the resolution
forward, bringing the world closer to ending that
lengthy conflict. As an institution that guarantees
peace and stability, the United Nations has a duty to
ensure the success of a two-State solution.
