Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs
Jeffrey Feltman for the presentation of the third
report (S/2017/515) of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015). I am also
grateful for the briefings provided by Ambassador
Cardi, Permanent Representative of Italy and Facilitator
of the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), and
by Mr. Vale de Almeida, Head of the Delegation of
the European Union. The information provided in the
briefings and the reports has some positive elements,
which deserve to be highlighted, as well as some
challenges and some elements of concern.

Uruguay is a country strongly committed to
non-proliferation and to strengthening the disarmament
regime. As Council members are aware, we do not have
nuclear weapons. We are members of the world's first
nuclear-weapon-free zone through the Treaty for the
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America,
which has just celebrated its fiftieth anniversary, and
the Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in
Latin America and the Caribbean. The latter covers the
33 States of the region that are signatories to the Treaty.
We are also party to the Treaty for the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons. For all of those reasons, Uruguay
welcomed, with satisfaction and optimism, the signing
of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, signed on
14 July 2015, in Vienna between Iran, the five permanent
members of the Council and Germany on the Iranian
nuclear programme. That agreement represented a key
achievement for non-proliferation and a significant
contribution to international peace, security and
stability. It eliminated one ofthe main sources oftension
in the troubled Middle East region. The steps taken by
the parties to the agreement show that, with political
will and through the path of diplomacy, positive results

can be achieved, even in cases where such results seem,
a priori, out of reach.
As we did a few days ago in Vienna at the Board of
Governors meeting of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA), Uruguay expresses its full satisfaction
at the progress made in the implementation of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action and at the way in which
the verification and monitoring activities of the IAEA
in Iran are being carried out and the confirmation
by the IAEA that Iran has complied with all of the
provisions of the agreement. It is important for all the
parties to continue complying with the provisions of the
agreement and resolution 2231 (2015).

We note with concern the allegations contained in
the report on the possible violations by Iran of some of
the provisions of annex B of resolution 2231 (2015). All
missile activity by Iran has the potential to heighten
tensions in the region. We therefore call on the Iranian
authorities to act with restraint and caution in the future.

With regard to the report of the Secretary-
General, six months ago we expressed our interest in
the following, namely, that in addition to the detailed
analysis of Iran's compliance with annex B ofresolution
2231 (2015), future editions of the report should also
include the degree of compliance with other aspects of
the resolution, including annex A. Annex A is nothing
more nor less than the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action itself and the obligations arising from it for all
parties to the agreement. It is therefore essential for
us as Council members to receive reports about its
implementation. We hope that such information will
appear in future reports.

Uruguay continues to call upon all the parties to the
agreement to adopt all necessary measures stipulated in
resolution 2231 (2015) and to comply with its provisions
in order not to jeopardize the historic agreement
reached, which is the fruit of more than two years of
intense negotiations. In that regard, we urge the parties
to act with moderation and caution and to refrain from
any action that might endanger the agreement. The
Security Council, as a guarantor of international peace
and security, must ensure full compliance ofthe JCPOA
and resolution 2231 (2015).

