Mrs. Morgan (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to express particular gratitude to Portugal
for having convened this open debate. Mr. President, as
your delegation stated during the debate on this same
issue held in April last year (see S/PV.6300), the
elected members of the Security Council have
historically been the ones who have pushed forward
reforms in the working methods. Perhaps the reason for
this is that only elected members can understand the
importance of transparency, particularly when their
two-year mandate expires and they themselves become
dependent once again on the information provided by
the new members.

I should like also to commend the efforts made
by Japan during its chairmanship of the Informal
Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions during 2009 and 2010, which
culminated with the update of presidential note 507
(S/2010/507) and its subsequent distribution.

We have to recognize that the Security Council
has improved its working methods in recent years.
Since the adoption of presidential note 507, more
public meetings and open debates have been held. The
content of and the consultations held prior to issuance
of the Security Council's annual report have seen an
improvement, and greater interaction with troop-
contributing countries and police-contributing
countries has been established.

Following along those lines, Mexico, during its
participation in the work of the Security Council as an
elected member in 2009 and 2010, resorted to
innovative and inclusive meeting formats, such as
Arria-formula meetings and interactive informal
dialogues, with the aim of hearing the views of the
Member States affected and civil society in cases that
concern them directly.

Despite that progress, we have to acknowledge
that the implementation of these improvements has
2
been uneven, depending, on many occasions, on the
Security Council presidency of the day.

In order to continue enhancing the transparency
and efficiency of the Security Council and its
interaction with the rest of the membership, we
propose the Informal Working Group on
Documentation consider making the following
improvements to the Council's working methods.

First, during open debates the order of the
speakers' list should be reversed, so that Council
members would deliver their statements at the end.
That would allow them to truly listen to the
membership and to include its contributions in the
outcomes of such meetings, particularly when a
presidential statement is adopted. We regret, Sir, that
your presidency was not allowed to take innovative
steps in this respect during today's debate, which
shows that much work remains to be done.

Second, informal consultations should be
convened only when it is strictly necessary. We do not
understand the relevance of holding informal
consultations to hear the presentation of reports and
written statements that could perfectly well be
delivered openly.

Third, we should maintain the practice of inviting
the Chairs of the country-specific configurations of the
Peacebuilding Commission to participate in debates
that involve issues that are on their agenda. This could
be extended to informal consultations as well.

Fourth, there is a need to continue to strengthen
cooperation between the Council and regional and
subregional organizations, in accordance with Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, in particular
by inviting the relevant organizations to participate in
public and private meetings of the Council.

Fifth, transparent mechanisms should be
established in connection with the designation of the
chairs of the Council's subsidiary organs. The opacity
that currently prevails is unacceptable.

Sixth, sanctions committees should be
encouraged to hear the views of Member States
affected by sanctions and to include such views in their
mandatory reports to the Council.

Seventh, it is necessary to promote stronger
interaction between the Security Council and other
11-61406
bodies, particularly the Fifth Committee, when
considering decisions that have financial implications.

Eighth, there is a need to strengthen transparency
and accountability in the establishment and renewal of
the mandates of special political missions and in their
financing.

The convening of this debate reflects the Security
Council's openness to considering improvements in its
working methods. We hope that the many ideas that
have been discussed here today will not fall on deaf
ears. The best way to avoid this would be for the
incoming presidency of the Informal Working Group
on Documentation to submit a report to the
membership on the progress made in the
implementation of the recommendations discussed
today.

Finally, we invite the incoming members of the
Security Council to adopt these recommendations.

