Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening today's meeting. We note that the delegation
of Venezuela is making an important contribution to the
work of the Security Council in the area of sanctions.
We listened closely to the statements delivered by the
representatives of Sweden and Chile.

By definition, the goal of improving the effectiveness
of the working methods of the Security Council is
important, in particular as it pertains to the Council's
responsibilities under the Charter of the United Nations
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
We are open to proposals to increase the transparency
of the activities of the subsidiary bodies, but relevant
steps should be carefully balanced so as not to create
the opposite effect, which would reduce their flexibility
in carrying out their functions.

Given the heavy workload of the sanctions
committees, in our view it will be difficult to increase
the intensiveness ofconsultations with interested parties
and the frequency of the briefings by chairs, while
ensuring the dissemination of relevant information in
international media. A heavier workload should not
create an obstacle for Committees in carrying out their
primary responsibilities, which are to support the work
of the sanctions mechanisms.

In light of the specific focus of the sanctions
committees, we are not sure that convening open
briefings would enhance their effectiveness. That
matter will have to be carefully addressed so as to
improve the effectiveness and efficiency of sanctions-
related activities. We also question the proposals
to publish reports and even verbatim records of the
Committees' meetings. That would essentially transfer
the Committees' work into an open format, which could
negatively impact the effectiveness of their work and
turn sanctions into a tool for bringing political pressure
to bear. We insist that the consequences of sanctions
regimes must be carefully analysed as they are being
drawn up. It is crucial that we do not ignore the fact that
sanctions cannot be a means in and of themselves; they
have their own objectives, which are to ensure lasting
political solutions.

We think that talk about broadening the
Ombudsperson's powers is dangerous. In our View, the
mandate of that Office, established by a unanimous
vote on resolution 2253 (2015), provides for an optimal
level of transparency and fairness, and that any
further measures would only end up watering down
the Security Council's counter-terrorism sanctions

regime. We are prepared to give careful consideration
to any constructive ideas for optimizing the activities
of the Council's subsidiary bodies, but we reiterate our
opposition to the creation of additional bureaucratic
layers, whether intergovernmental or at the level of the
Secretariat, not to mention the possibility of assigning
them the function of reviewing existing Security
Council committees. If that happens, it will result in a
great many administrative and bureaucratic obstacles
and very little effectiveness and efficiency.

Within the United Nations, as an intergovernmental
organization, the prerogative of making decisions must
rest exclusively with sovereign States. The business of
improving the working methods of its subsidiary organs
requires a professional approach. The parameters for the
functioning of each individual committee are unique
and specific to the issues it examines, and therefore we
should not attempt to universalize the principles of the
work of the sanctions committees. What is useful in
some areas could be counter-productive in others.

There can be no doubt that the Security Council
would benefit from a degree of democratization of
its work, which would produce a more equitable
distribution of duties for informal work on its
various dossiers through the so-called penholders.
Unfortunately, at the moment, some Council members
abuse that right, regarding various countries or even
regions as their property and themselves as mentors
on certain issues. We do not have to look very far to
find examples of that. The lines for yesterday's vote on
resolution 2265 (2016)), on the Sudan, were drawn up
by the United States last week, and led to disagreement
in the Council.

We are ready for constructive discussion of ways of
increasing the effectiveness of the Security Council's
subsidiary bodies. We think it would be helpful to turn
to the under-utilized and regrettably half-forgotten
mechanism of the Informal Working Group on General
Issues of Sanctions. There was a time when the
Working Group contributed significantly to increasing
the effectiveness ofthe Security Council's efforts in the
area of political and diplomatic settlements of crises
around the world, and especially in the maintenance of
global security.

