Mr. Al-Mahmoud (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this meeting to address the atrocities being committed
in the occupied Palestinian Gaza Strip. I would also
like to take this opportunity to wish you every success
in your presidency of the Council in these difficult
circumstances. Through you, Sir, I would also like to
extend my thanks to the Secretary-General for his
repeated calls to stop the ongoing violence in Gaza. I
should also like to express my gratitude to the
President of the General Assembly for his extensive
efforts and his fair-minded statement in that regard.

I will not cite the horrendous atrocities
committed since 27 December 2008 by the Israeli war
machine against the unarmed civilians of the afflicted
Palestinian territory, nor will I refer to the killing,
destruction, tragedy and violations of every human
right that the Security Council has heard of and
witnessed as a result of the recent Israeli aggression.
Schools, hospitals and places of worship have not been
spared the mass destruction resulting from that
aggression, which has taken place in blatant violation
of the rules of international humanitarian law.

The world has just seen how Israel assassinated
more than 40 civilians in cold blood, including women
and children, in a school of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East. I do not think there is a need to remind the
Council about what it has heard over the past few
months with regard to the serious consequences of the
Israeli siege imposed on the Gaza Strip and the grave
humanitarian situation that it has caused. As we
approached the new year celebrations, we were hopeful
that the world would enjoy a quiet season and that the
new year would bring new hopes for a better future.
But Israel's position is different from the international
community's.

I have come here with my brothers, the Arab
ministers, as part of the ministerial committee that the
Arab Council of Ministers decided to establish at its
extraordinary meeting last Wednesday and to send to
New York to urge the Security Council to end its foot-
on an issue that poses a direct, clear and serious threat
to international peace and security and has also
resulted in a dire humanitarian situation. Arab States
and other peace-loving countries of the world were
unanimous in expressing their solidarity with the
Palestinian people in connection with their suffering as
a result of Israel's brutal occupation and recent attack
on Gaza, and well as in standing by Palestinians in
their just struggle to achieve their legitimate and
inalienable rights, in particular their right to
independence, self-determination and statehood on
their own national soil, with Jerusalem as its capital.
We therefore demand that the Security Council
assume its responsibilities under the Charter of the
United Nations and not settle for making press
statements, but rather immediately adopt a resolution

that compels Israel, the occupying Power, to stop its
land, sea and air military aggression on the Gaza Strip;
immediately withdraw its forces; lift the siege on Gaza;
open the crossings; end the policy of collective
punishment; and provide protection for the Palestinian
people, including the protection of health and
educational institutions that are safe havens, as attacks
on such safe havens are illegal.

The reluctance to adopt a resolution in this regard
gives a green light to Israel to continue its war crimes,
in flagrant violation of the relevant conventions, laws
and international norms. Such stalling is incongruent
with the mandate of this Council and proves that this
important organ is in need of reform.

The international community is not witnessing an
ordinary war but a new Israeli aggression, similar to
the summer of 2006 aggression on Lebanon, with the
most advanced and lethal weapons being used against
Palestinian people, in violation of international peace
and security. This tragedy strikes at the core of the
mandate of this Council, the credibility of which is
now being called into question. We have already
repeatedly urged the Council and the Quartet to work
sincerely towards the implementation of the Council's
decisions on peace in the Middle East.

On the other hand, General Assembly resolution
60/1 on the outcome of the 2005 World Summit, and
specifically its provisions regarding human security,
the responsibility to protect and the culture of peace,
requires the United Nations to carry out its duty with
respect to protecting the Palestinian people from Israeli
aggression. Resolution 1674 (2006) on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict requires the United
Nations to come to the rescue of the Palestinians and to
criminalize the Israeli acts of aggression.

The State of Qatar is eager to do its duty as an
active member of the United Nations. His Highness the
Emir of the State of Qatar, in his speech on 4 January
2009, which has been issued as a document of the
United Nations, called upon the international
community to protect and give relief to the Palestinians
and emphasized that the killing of innocent civilians
and the Israeli military aggression will not bring
security neither to Israel nor to us as Arabs, but will
instead result in disastrous consequences. Did the
people who prepared for this war think of the anger of
generations of Arabs and Palestinians, which will only
grow as they witness such scenes? How can Israeli
military aggression contribute to the achievement of a
lasting and comprehensive peace in the region?

The division, by some, of Palestine into Hamas
and Fatah is unacceptable, since the occupation does
not distinguish between parties, but is all-
encompassing. Therefore, we should not accept any
Palestinian national differences as an excuse for Israel
to continue its occupation and aggression against a
defenceless people, or allow it to use such differences
as an excuse to divide the Palestinian people and
Palestinian land. We must not punish the Palestinian
people for having exercised their right to vote, in
accordance with the principles of democracy that we
all call for. At this time, we urge the Palestinians to
achieve unity and consensus in their plight.

The excuses proffered by Israel concerning
Palestinian rocket attacks cannot deceive wise people,
although some may think of them as the factor that
sparked the current crisis. It must be recalled that the
occupation of the Palestinian territory is the cause of
the rocket attacks. Consequently, the occupation must
end if calm is to be restored. Even if we acknowledge
that excluding Hamas is in Israel's best security
interests, can we consider as self-defence an all-out
military aggression against a densely populated city in
which - as the aggressor is aware - the casualties
will be civilians?

Israel uses self-defence as a pretext under the
United Nations Charter, but the latter gives peoples the
right to self-determination and to an end to occupation.
34

Therefore, what Israel is committing is genocide and
ethnic cleansing carried out by an entity that claims to
be representing democracy and freedom.

In conclusion, we are facing an extremely
difficult humanitarian situation in the occupied
Palestinian territory. While we thank all peace-loving
nations for standing with the Palestinian people in their
plight, we call on all donors to contribute urgently, to
provide more humanitarian assistance and to support
relief organizations operating in the Gaza Strip. Allow
me to take this opportunity to pay tribute to the efforts
of those institutions, especially the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East, in carrying out their humanitarian duty in a
dangerous work environment.

The State of Qatar has been among the leading
supporters of the Palestinian people at the bilateral
level, through the decisions of the Council of the
League of Arab States and through the United Nations.
We have recently sent aid to the Palestinians by sea and
air. We strongly support their just cause, as we will not
allow the brotherly Palestinian people to be brought to
its knees.

