Mr. Zhang Dianbin (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Keita
for her briefing. In recent weeks the Government of
South Sudan has shown its commitment to maintaining
national stability and promoting socioeconomic
development, which China commends. However, the
situation on the political, security and humanitarian
fronts remains challenging. The international
community should make moving South Sudan's
political process forward an urgent priority.

The Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) has recently been actively preparing for its
high-level revitalization forum by conducting broad
consultations with stakeholders in South Sudan and
with other countries in the region. Much has been
done to improve mutual understanding among the
parties and make the political dialogue more inclusive.
China welcomes the efforts of IGAD and Ethiopia
in that regard.The parties in South Sudan have
demonstrated to varying degrees their readiness to
engage in dialogue.

We hope that IGAD will continue to promote
communication and coordination between the South
Sudanese Government and various stakeholders in
the interest of smooth preparations for the high-level
revitalization forum. We also call on the international
community to continue to provide support for IGAD and
other regional and subregional organizations, respect
their leadership in the mediation process as they work
in close coordination with each other, and speak with
one voice to send out a consistent message to all parties
in South Sudan, thereby forming a synergy that favours
a political settlement. In addition, the international
community should respect the Government of South
Sudan in exercising its ownership and leadership
vis-a-vis the political process so as to motivate it to
that end.

In addition to the revitalization forum-related
efforts led by IGAD, we should actively encourage all
parties to participate in national dialogue and other
domestic reconciliation processes. At the same time,
necessary humanitarian and economic assistance
should continue to be provided with a View to helping
the country rebuild.

The United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) has been playing an important role in
safeguarding South Sudan's peace and stability and
moving the political process forward. China commends
the efforts of UNMISS and will continue to support
the Mission in fulfilling its mandate. We hope that the
Secretariat and UNMISS will step up their engagement
with the Government of South Sudan and the troop-
contributing countries concerned so as to properly
settle any issues that may arise in the course of the
deployment of the Regional Protection Force, as well as
to further boost the Mission's capacity and effectiveness
in implementing its mandate.

As the main troop-contributing country in
UNMISS and an important partner of South Sudan,
China has been a consistent supporter of South Sudan's
peace process. We have been committed to peace and
development in South Sudan through bilateral and
multilateral channels. China is ready to continue its
constructive role in South Sudan's quest for lasting
peace and stability and sustainable development.

