Mr. Auvaart (Estonia): As this is the first time Estonia is taking the floor in the Chamber as an elected member of the Security Council, allow me to congratulate Viet Nam on assuming the presidency of the Council for the month of January and thank the United States for its presidency in December. Allow me to express Estonia’s support for Special Representative Chambas and for all of the activities of the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) over the most recent reporting period. The work on mediation and good offices in West Africa and the Sahel play an important role in supporting overall United Nations efforts in the region. The report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/1005) draws attention to the worrisome trends in the security situation in the wider West Africa and Sahel region. Estonia remains concerned about the negative developments in the region, such as the spread of violent extremism and organized crime. The most recent terrorist attack, which took place just this past Saturday in Burkina Faso on a bus carrying students, leaving 14 people dead, must be condemned in the strongest terms. Each one of these terrorist attacks is simply unacceptable. Considering the transnational nature of the threats, cross-regional collaboration is of key importance. We highly commend the cooperation efforts of the Economic Community of West African States and the Economic Community of Central African States and encourage the exchange of good practices between UNOWAS and the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa. We hope to see this collaboration strengthened and coordination enhanced. We note positively that the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel — together with the French-led Operation Barkhane, to which Estonia also contributes — has been conducting successful counter- terrorist operations. However, considering the growing number of violent attacks, including against civilians, we need to further stress the role played by the States of the region. Full political ownership and effective State presence, including an adequately trained military presence, are of key importance here. All perpetrators of violence need to be held accountable. Addressing the root causes and_ long-term drivers of conflict and violence are at the core of the peacebuilding activities of UNOWAS and of preventative diplomacy. We commend the engagement of UNOWAS in promoting the meaningful participation of women and youth in the political process, but it is clear that greater efforts from all relevant parties are needed. In this regard, we would like to stress the need for an integrated gender perspective in the design and implementation of comprehensive strategies to address the root causes of the crisis. Finally, the effects of climate change on people’s livelihoods throughout West Africa and the Sahel, which are especially severe in the Lake Chad Basin, need to be taken into account. It is important to track the roots and impacts of climate-related tensions and support key stakeholders in finding alternatives for those most affected.
