Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I should
like to thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe for his briefing on the
situation in the Middle East, as well as the Permanent
Representative of Israel and the Permanent Observer of
Palestine for their statements. France associates itself
with the statement to be made by the head of the
European Union delegation.

With respect to the peace process, the reports are
disappointing. The current stalemate in the process
daily jeopardizes the two-State solution, while
supported by the international community, owing to the
accelerated pace of Israeli settlements, which threatens
the viability of a Palestinian State. Morally and
politically unacceptable and rooted in plunder and
Violence, settlement is a basic violation of international
law. In that context, we condemned the provocations
represented by the issue of new calls for offers for the
construction of more than 1,100 homes by the Israeli
authorities. Moreover, the settlers, perpetrators of
unacceptable violence against the Palestinian people,
should be held accountable for their acts before the
law, which happens only too rarely.

It is therefore deplorable that the Council has not
condemned such actions and that it simply states the
law and recalls the principles that underpin the two-
State solution when that finds itself threatened. That is
the case today, which concerns an increasing number of
Palestinians and Israelis.

Doing nothing also risks an outburst of regional
violence, which further fuels tension. These past three
months, Israel has been the target of a great number of
rocket attacks. We condemn them unreservedly. In
Gaza, a radical political change on the part of Israel is
needed in order to lift the blockade, in accordance with
resolution 1860 (2009), without compromising Israel's
security interests, and to put an end to Hamas' control
of the population of Gaza.
France truly believes that the meeting of a
Palestinian delegation with the Israeli Prime Minister
is a step in the right direction. We hope that that
exchange will facilitate a renewal of dialogue between
Israelis and Palestinians. The aim remains the
relaunching of effective negotiations on the basis of
clear and balanced parameters.

However, we cannot avoid in-depth reflection on
how the international community can support the peace
process, which is not satisfactory today. Only a follow-
up mechanism that includes all actors involved, in
particular the regional players, on the basis of agreed
parameters and a realistic time frame, to which the
parties are accountable for their acts, will enable the
parties to return to the path of credible negotiations.
Such an observation does not release the parties from
their responsibilities, but is to draw lessons from their
inability to themselves undertake the path of painful
compromise, which will be difficult for both parties, as
well as to encourage the only realistic path towards a
vanishing solution.

Substantive confidence-building measures must
be introduced in order to restore the necessary trust
between the two parties. Actors critical to the peace,
namely, the Palestinian Authority and its President,
Mr. Abbas, must be supported.

The recent meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee reaffirmed that the Palestinians are ready to
establish their State and to administer it credibly. It
also underscored the untenable financial position of the
Palestinian Authority, which may no longer be able to
pay its civil servants' salaries if donors do not
mobilize. Moreover, Israel must implement the summer
2011 technical agreement in order to improve the
collection of duties and taxes due to the Palestinian
Authority, which is the best way to raise Palestinian
revenue. Israel must remove constraints imposed on
Palestinian economic development, in particular in
Area C and Gaza, which help to maintain the
dependant Palestinian economy.

Supporting President Abbas in his undertaking for
Palestinian reconciliation is also crucial as there can be
no lasting solution while the Palestinian territories
remain divided. We are ready to work with any
Palestinian Government that commits to non-violence
and a two-State solution and that accepts the
agreements and obligations reached under the Palestine
Liberation Organization, including Israel's right to
exist.

Allow me to touch on the position in Syria. The
situation on the ground continues to give rise to the
greatest concern. As last Thursday's letter of the
Secretary-General to the Council (S/2012/238) spells
out, Damascus has once again failed to meet its
commitments. The areas of Homs and Idlib, still
subject to bombings and attacks since last week, are
still paying a heavy price for the ongoing repression.
The Syrian authorities have not implemented the
immediate measures to which they committed with the
Joint Special Envoy of the United Nations and the
League of Arab States on the Syrian Crisis. The Syrian
army has only misled us in terms of its withdrawal.
The heavy-weapons fire and the bombings continue.

In adopting resolutions 2042 (2012) and 2043
(2012), the Council demanded Damascus immediately
and verifiably implement such measures to end the
Violence. Damascus can no longer defy a decision of
the international community.

The Council has shouldered its responsibilities by
accepting the Secretary-General's request to deploy an
observer mission of 300 persons to monitor the end to
all violence by all parties and the full implementation
of the six-point proposal of the Joint Special Envoy.
Such deployment is not without risk. No obstruction of
the observers' work and no threat to their security will
be tolerated by the Council, which, if necessary, should
consider coercive measures if called for.

The Council's power to help resolve crises is also
a condition of the credibility of its action to maintain
regional stability. The Council therefore cannot accept
violations of the sovereignty of Syria's neighbouring
countries, namely, Turkey and Lebanon. France would
like to express its appreciation of the welcome
provided by those two States to Syrian citizens seeking
refuge far from the violence, in accordance with the
relevant international law on refugees and displaced
persons. In such a fragile regional context, we welcome
the commitment of the Lebanese authorities to working
with all parts of society to preserve Lebanon's stability.
We commend their commitment to meeting all their
international obligations, including with respect to the
Special Tribunal for Lebanon.

The Council must stand ready to respond
resolutely if the requirements of resolutions 2042
(2012) and 2043 (2012) are not met by the Damascus
authorities. However, the urgency of acting in Syria
should not allow the international community to
overlook the need to preserve the two-State solution of
Israel and Palestine living side by side in peace. The

Middle East will achieve long-term stability only if the
international community can meet the legitimate
aspirations voiced in Palestine for a State and in Israel
for its security. It is a matter of the Council's
credibility in helping the emergence of a credible
framework for negotiations in that regard.

