Mr. Krokhmal (Ukraine): My delegation
believes that the Brahimi Report is a milestone in our
common efforts to set United Nations peacekeeping
right and to make it more effective in the context of a
general reform of the United Nations. We pay tribute to
all members of the Panel on United Nations Peace
Operations and, personally, to Ambassador Brahimi.

The report is a comprehensive document that
addresses most of the aspects of United Nations
peacekeeping activities. It contains a valuable analysis
of United Nations experience of past, as well as
current, peacekeeping capabilities of the United
Nations. Indeed, my delegation feels that most
recommendations contained in the report are specific,
realistic and practical ones. In this context, we
appreciate the submission by the Secretary-General of
the two follow-up reports, on the implementation of the
Brahimi Report and on the resource requirements; we
also found them quite helpful.

It is worth mentioning that a few months ago the
United Nations, at its Millennium Summit and Security
Council Summit, adopted two historic documents: the
Millennium Declaration and Security Council
resolution 1318 (2000). The Council may recall that, in
its Millennium Declaration, the heads of State and
Government expressed their resolve to make the United
Nations more effective in maintaining peace and
security by giving it the necessary resources to conduct
its activities.

To underscore the fact that the history of United
Nations peacekeeping has reached its turning point, we
strongly believe that now it is important to have the
recommendations and the conclusions outlined in the
above documents properly implemented. It is in this
light that we look at the resolution that we have just
adopted and its annex. My delegation took part in
working out the draft resolution and its annex, and we
realize how difficult the task that the Council's
Working Group had to deal with was. I would like to
express appreciation to the members of the Council's
Working Group and its Chairman, Ambassador Ward of
Jamaica, for their job well done.
Allow me now to make a few comments on the
clusters and paragraphs of the annex. Regarding
clusters I and II, we fully support the provisions related
to the Panel's recommendations to issue clearly
defined, credible and achievable mandates for
peacekeeping operations. This will certainly help
peacekeepers to be able to carry out their tasks
successfully and also to defend them and other mission
components. Such mandates will make for a basis of
clear rules of engagement for United Nations
peacekeeping forces.

My delegation believes that the recognition of the
need to have an improved system of consultation
between the Security Council and the Secretariat and
troop contributors is a particularly important element
of the resolution. We feel sure that such consultations
will be of great use for all partners to have a better
understanding of a situation on the ground and an
operations mandate and also to strengthen coordination
between them in fulfilling peacekeeping tasks.

My delegation upholds the position that the
Council should consult with troop contributors and the
Secretariat throughout all stages of peacekeeping
operations, particularly if the security situation is
deteriorating on the ground and might pose a threat for
peacekeepers. We believe that such consultations
should be convened at the request of troop contributors
without prejudice to the provisional rules of procedure
of the Security Council. Against this background, we
find it useful that consultations between the Security
Council and troop contributors, through the use of
private meetings, were held during the recent crisis in
Sierra Leone. My delegation will be a strong supporter
of any further steps to be made to ensure a more
effective consultation mechanism and greater
transparency in the Security Council decision-making
process with regard to the conduct of peacekeeping
operations.

As regards cluster IV, we welcome the further
improvement of the rapid deployment capacity of the
United Nations, through the standby arrangement
system, as is provided for in the sixth paragraph of that
cluster. Ukraine has been part of the system since 1997.

We also strongly support the provisions of
clusters V and VI, on conflict prevention and peace-
building, since they are very much in line with the
proposal put forth by the President of Ukraine at the
millennium Summit of the Security Council - that is,
to develop a comprehensive United Nations strategy
regarding conflict prevention on the basis of the large-
scale use of preventive diplomacy and peace-building.

Bearing all this in mind, my delegation voted in
favour of resolution 1327 (2000).

In conclusion, I would like to mention that
peacekeeping is at the heart of Ukraine's contribution
to the United Nations. Since we have been involved in
United Nations peacekeeping efforts for more than
eight years, it is from our own experience that we feel
sure that the genuine reform of the United Nations
peacekeeping mechanism is long overdue. We regard
the adoption of today's resolution, aimed at the
implementation of the recommendations of the Brahimi
Report, as an important step towards achieving this
goal. My delegation will continue contributing to this
important work.

