Mr. Al-Shamsi (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me, on behalf of the delegation of the
United Arab Emirates, to thank you wholeheartedly,
Mr. President, for having responded so quickly to the
request to convene this urgent meeting. We hope that
the outcome of this meeting will meet the challenge
posed by the worsening situation and the exceptional
events taking place inside the occupied Palestinian
territories.

This is the eighth meeting that has been convened
by the Security Council on an emergency basis in less
than two weeks. The Council has been meeting to
consider the grave, deteriorating situation in the
occupied Palestinian territories. War crimes, massacres,
genocide, arbitrary detention and wanton destruction
are continuing at the hands of the Israeli army, whose
forces are armed with the most dangerous weapons,
including some that are internationally banned -
weapons that are being used against the defenceless
Palestinian population.

The Security Council has adopted resolutions
1397 (2002), 1402 (2002) and 1403 (2002), all of
which call upon Israel to put an end to its acts of
aggression against the Palestinians and to withdraw
without delay from their territories, which it has
recently reoccupied by force. Regrettably, however, the
Israeli Government, in keeping with its position in
recent decades, has blatantly ignored its legal
commitments, including those set out in international
instruments. It has also ignored other international
appeals for it to put an end to its gross violations of the
human rights of the Palestinian people - violations
that run counter to all the principles of international
humanitarian law, including those of the Fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949 on the protection of civilians and
their property in time of war.

Television channels and international news
agencies yesterday carried a statement by the Israeli
Prime Minister, Ariel Sharon, in which he publicly
declared his determination to continue his bloody and
infamous invasion of Palestinian lands and cities,
justifying his actions by saying that the objectives of
the invasion have not yet been met.

Once again, as with similar provocative and
dangerous statements, the Israeli leader, who is known
for his extreme, racist fanaticism against Palestinians
and Arabs, has revealed the true intentions of Israel,
not only to erode the Oslo Accords to a point of no
return, thus preventing further negotiations aimed at
achieving peace, but to attempt to impose another fait
accompli through its illegal occupation of Palestinian
territories. This is being done in what is called the
security buffer zone deep inside the Palestinian
territories, along the Green Line. Israel is continuing to
kill or force out a large number of Palestinians in an
attempt to achieve its ideological, expansionist and
historical ambitions at the expense of the inalienable
national rights of the Palestinians, which include the
establishment of the State of Palestine, as supported by
General Assembly resolution 181 (II) and Security
Council resolution 1397 (2002).

The lax approach of the Security Council and its
failure to speedily address the grave developments in
the occupied Palestinian territories since the
desecration by Sharon of the Al-Aqsa Mosque in 2000,
or to heed the calls to dispatch an international force to
protect Palestinian civilians have encouraged Israel to
humiliate and isolate the Palestinian President, Yasser
Arafat, after having completely destroyed his
headquarters.

Israel has persisted in its acts of aggression -
acts that have metastasized, with the irresponsible and
arbitrary ravaging of Palestinian cities and camps. It
has committed the most heinous crimes - crimes of
rape, murder and mass detention - particularly in the
refugee camps of Jenin and Nablus. The bodies of
hundreds of dead civilians are still strewn in the roads
because people have been unable to bury them.

We therefore call upon the Security Council, as
the body responsible for the maintenance of
international peace and security, to take the necessary
measures under Chapter VII of the Charter. Such
measures should guarantee compliance by the Israeli
Government with resolutions 1402 (2002) and 1403
(2002), as well as the speedy and unconditional
implementation of all its legal, moral and political
commitments to the Palestinian people, as agreed upon
in the peace agreements.
In this respect, we also call upon the Security
Council, in particular some of the most powerful
members of the Council, to abandon their policy of
double standards. That policy has led Israel to believe
that it is above international law and internationally
binding resolutions. That policy has encouraged Israel
to persist in its hostile actions against the Palestinians
and to directly threaten the peace and security of all the
peoples and countries of the region.

The United Arab Emirates welcomed the
statements made recently by the President of the
United States, George Bush. President Bush called
upon Israel to withdraw from all the Palestinian
territories it had reoccupied. He also called upon Israel
to put an end to the settlements and the siege imposed
on the territories. The United Arab Emirates considers
those statements to be a positive step towards peace.
We therefore urge the United States to carry those
constructive steps further by bringing more actual
pressure to bear on the Israeli Government through the
Secretary of State, who is currently visiting the region.

Israel must be pressured to end its brutal war
crimes and torture of the Palestinians. We must work
for the immediate and unconditional withdrawal of
Israel from all the Palestinian territories that were
reoccupied. Israel must also lift the humiliating and
unjust siege imposed on President Arafat and the
towns, villages and camps that it invaded, using tanks,
armoured vehicles and jet fighters.

We also call for the urgent dispatch of an
international observer force to the Palestinian
territories to protect the lives of Palestinians while
guaranteeing safe access to those who provide relief
supplies and to humanitarian and medical aid workers
who need to reach the thousands of victims of the
Israeli crimes.

In conclusion, we once again call upon the
international community not to fall into the trap set by
the Israeli Government's repeated attempts to compare
what it is currently doing to the Palestinian people and
cities with the actions of the United States in fighting
international terrorism in the aftermath of the events of
11 September. We therefore affirm the need for the
Council to distinguish between the terrorism pursued
by the Israeli Government and the legitimate right of
the Palestinian people to self-defence and to resist
occupation until their territories have been liberated
and an independent State has been established in
independent Palestine, with Jerusalem as its capital, on
the basis of the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations, the principles of international law and the
relevant decisions of international legitimacy. Only
then will we be able to uphold our credibility in
working together at the international level to fight
terrorism.

