Mr. Owada (Japan): The Government of Japan
heartily welcomes the establishment of the Government of
Unity and National Reconciliation in Angola. Signifying
as it does the introduction of a multi-party democracy, the
establishment of the Government of Unity and National
Reconciliation demonstrates that Angola is falling into
step with the ongoing democratization process that we
have been witnessing in many parts of Africa, and that
achievement is thus all the more welcome.

It is hoped that the parties concerned duly appreciate
the unflagging commitment and close involvement of the
international community in the peace process, especially
in its deployment of three United Nations Missions,
starting with the United Nations Angola Verification
Mission (UNAVEM) and continuing up to the present
with UNAVEM. III. The parties thus owe it to the
international community, as well as to the people of
Angola, to strive in good faith to solidify the progress that
has been made so far and to reaffirm their commitment to
nation-building. If they are to be able to carry out the
difficult tasks that lie ahead, including the normalization
of the State administration throughout the national
territory and the integration of UNITA forces into the
Angolan Armed Forces and the National Police, they will
need to develop relations of mutual trust. As a first step
in that process, my delegation earnestly hopes that
President Dos Santos and Mr. Savimbi will find it
possible to meet in Angola in the near future to
consolidate the basis for genuine national reconciliation.
Under these circumstances, I wish to state that my

 

delegation is in favour of the extension of the mandate of
UNAVEM. III until 30 June 1997, as prescribed in the draft
resolution before us.

There is general support for a continued United
Nations presence after UNAVEM. III has completed its
tasks. In its intervention on 27 February, my delegation
confirmed the readiness of the Government of Japan to
contribute to the follow-on Mission, the United Nations
Observer Mission in Angola, once the details regarding its
mandate, modalities, and time-frame are worked out. Now
that the impasse in the political situation has been
overcome, Japan is ready to consider how it might best
contribute to that effort on the basis of the further
recommendations of the Secretary-General and in
accordance with actions taken by the Security Council.

Moreover, my Government is ready to assist Angola
in its endeavour to reach true peace and national
reconciliation. The consolidated appeal that was issued on
24 March contains humanitarian projects, as well as those
aimed at consolidating the peace, and Japan is studying the
appeal closely in order to determine how it might most
appropriately contribute to it.

When the peace process is firmly on track and it is
time to convene an international conference to consider the
most effective ways and means of assisting Angola in
developing its great potential in terms of both natural
resources and human resources and in rebuilding its
economy, Japan will be ready to participate actively in that
conference.

In closing, I should like to express my sincere
appreciation to the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative, Maitre Alioune Blondin Beye, for their
tireless efforts in support of the peace process in Angola. In
order to ensure that those efforts are as fruitful as possible,
we hope that all concerned will cooperate towards the
consolidation of reconciliation throughout the country so
that the process of nation-building can get under way. The
people of Angola will then have reason to believe that a
truly peaceful and prosperous future awaits them.

