Mr. Marzuki (Malaysia): Mr. President, my
delegation is pleased to participate under your able
chairmanship in this formal meeting of the Council to
consider extending the mandate of the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina, including the
International Police Task Force (IPTF). Malaysia recognizes
the important role played by the IPTF in promoting civil
security by working closely with the parties to achieve the
fundamental reforms in law enforcement institutions in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We therefore welcome the
extension of its mandate by this Council. Malaysia is
privileged and honoured to be part of the IPTF in
implementing its important tasks as outlined in annex II of
the Dayton Peace Agreement. We call on the international
community to provide the IPTF with the necessary financial
and material assistance so as to enable it to carry out the
additional tasks assigned to it by the London and Bonn
Conferences of the Peace Implementation Council.

My delegation wishes to take this opportunity to
express our sincere appreciation to the men and women
from various countries serving under the Stabilization Force
(SFOR) and the IPTF and other international organizations
who have contributed so significantly to the current peace
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and to offer our condolences to
the families of the 12 dedicated officers who lost their lives
in a tragic helicopter crash last September.

Thanks to the presence of the multinational force, a
relatively safe and secure environment has now prevailed.
Important efforts towards building a unified Bosnia and
Herzegovina have begun to take root. The common State
institutions have been formed and are functioning, albeit
inefficiently. Increasing numbers of the displaced Bosnians
are beginning to feel confident enough to return to their
homes. At the same time, the international community has
made a significant contribution in the reconstruction efforts,
helping to put Bosnia and Herzegovina back on its feet
economically.

However, we are concerned that serious obstacles
continue to impede the full implementation of the Dayton
Peace Agreement. Mutual mistrust and animosity among the
different ethnic groups continue to obstruct efforts towards
realizing the ultimate objective of making peace in Bosnia
and Herzegovina an irreversible process. We wish to
remind the parties concerned that there is no viable
alterative to the Peace Agreement as the foundation for
building lasting peace and prosperity in a multi-ethnic,
multicultural and multireligious Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The attainment of this goal requires the full commitment
of the Bosnian leaders themselves. They all must be
willing to take bold steps towards establishing a
multiethnic State within its internationally recognized
boundaries, with fully functioning common State
institutions that command the support and confidence of
the people.

When the parties accepted the Dayton Peace
Agreement two years ago, they made a contract and a
commitment to, inter alia, respect the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. It is therefore imperative that they keep
their commitments, including ensuring that all the joint
State institutions are duly constituted and functioning
efficiently and effectively, and that all the attributes of a
sovereign State are fully bestowed on Bosnia and
Herzegovina to enable it to take its rightful place within
the family of nations. In this regard, the Bosnian entities
must work strenuously towards resolving the problems
now confronting the State, from the issue of appropriate
State symbols to the question of the currency and to
various laws that need to be passed by the parliamentary
Assembly.

My delegation believes that a durable peace can be
guaranteed in Bosnia and Herzegovina only through
reconciliation among its people on the basis of the
principles of justice and the rule of law. It is therefore
imperative that the perpetrators of the horrendous crimes
against humanity in Bosnia and Herzegovina be made to
face the consequences of their past actions. In this regard,
we are seriously concerned that many of the indicted war
criminals, including the most-wanted indictees, Radovan
Karadzic and Ratko Mladic, are still at large and continue
to exercise political influence and leadership in the Serb
entity. Their continued freedom constitutes a major
obstacle to the efforts to create a lasting peace in a
unified Bosnia and Herzegovina. If the long-term
prospects for peace are not to be undermined, they must
be immediately apprehended and brought to trial before
the Tribunal established for this purpose in The Hague.
The trial and appropriate punishment of those guilty of
the heinous crimes against humanity are indispensable in
bringing about national reconciliation, on which so much
of the future of Bosnia and Herzegovina depends. My
delegation believes that SFOR has a critical role to play

 

in apprehending these indicted war criminals. In this regard,
we commend the courageous action of SFOR in arresting
the two indicted war criminals.

To his great credit, the President of the Tribunal,
Judge Antonio Cassese, in presenting the Tribunal's fourth
annual report to the General Assembly last month, was
forthright in singling out the Serb entity and the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia as the parties that have repeatedly
refused to cooperate with the Tribunal. We view their
refusal to recognize the authority of the Tribunal established
by this Council as a direct affront to the Council and the
United Nations as a whole and one which should not be
allowed to continue with impunity.

My delegation is concerned at the continued violations
of freedom of movement and at the harassment, destruction
of property and discrimination on the basis of ethnicity and
political affiliation that occur in many areas, especially in
the Serb entity. This has hampered the safe return of
refugees and displaced persons, and only a quarter of the
estimated 2 million refugees and displaced persons have
been able to return, most to the areas in which they belong
to the ethnic majority. It is essential that all the relevant
agencies, including SFOR and the IPTF, provide the
necessary support to the High Representative and the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) in the successful implementation of the return
programme, particularly with regard to minority returnees,
who have thus far encountered political, security and
administrative impediments. Clearly, the success of the
return programme is critical to the realization of a viable
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

As the peace implementation process in Bosnia and
Herzegovina enters its most critical stage, it is imperative
that the relatively safe and secure environment created by
the presence of the multinational force be maintained and
further consolidated to ensure that all the efforts and
resources invested so far will bear the desired results. The
international community cannot take the risk of
withdrawing the multinational forces from Bosnia and
Herzegovina at a time when State institutions are still weak,
suspicions and mistrust are still very much in evidence and
indicted war criminals are still free and exercising influence
and authority in the background.

In this regard, Malaysia welcomes the ongoing
discussions on the future role of the international
peacekeepers after the expiration of the SFOR mandate in
June 1998. We hope for a final consensus on this vitally
important issue and are encouraged by some positive
developments in that direction. We welcome in particular
the decision of the United States to extend the role of its
forces in SFOR. We consider a continuing military role
by the United States as pivotal to the viability of the
international peacekeeping force in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We believe that the further presence of an
international force is necessary, and, as a troop-
contributing country, Malaysia will be prepared to engage
in consultations on that subject.

Clearly, there is a need to build confidence,
understanding and friendship among the ethnic groups in
Bosnia and Herzegovina so that it may be able to sustain
the process of national reconciliation. For this purpose,
Malaysia is prepared to make a modest contribution by
organizing a series of informal forums or workshops with
the participation of Bosnian groups and individuals and
international experts and facilitators. With the support of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Malaysia proposes to convene
this forum in Malaysia soon. We believe that, given its
unique multi-ethnic, multilingual and multireligious
background and experience at nation-building, Malaysia
can make a positive contribution in this area. While the
international community will continue to assist, the main
responsibility for carrying out the tasks of nation building
ultimately lies with the Bosnian people themselves. Only
when they earnestly and sincerely carry out their
commitments under the Peace Agreement will the peace
settlement be truly achieved and the peace process
irreversible.

