Mr. Mufioz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
you, Sir, for giving me the floor as a representative of a
Member State, especially given that some
representatives of the United Nations agencies wanted
to take the floor before us. I would like to thank you in
particular for convening this meeting on the situation
in Haiti, the report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) (S/2009/129) and the recent visit by a
Security Council delegation headed by Ambassador
Urbina of Costa Rica.

While endorsing the statement made by the
Permanent Representative of Uruguay on behalf of the
Group of Friends of Haiti, at the outset I would also
like to reiterate Chile's commitment to the stabilization
process in Haiti. Since the beginning of the Haitian
crisis in February 2004, my country has joined the
efforts of the international community to avert a civil
war and to contribute to the reconstruction process of
that Caribbean nation. To that end, we participated in
the Multinational Interim Force in Haiti in the first
phase and, since then, we have maintained an active
presence in MINUSTAH throughout its five years of
existence.

We welcome the resolute measures taken by
President Rene Preval to consolidate democracy in his
country and to strengthen the rule of law and respect
for human rights. We believe that full stabilization
should go hand in hand with an inclusive democratic
process in which everyone feels engaged in the
reconstruction and eventual prosperity of their nation.
In that regard, we value the upcoming elections of
19 April and hope that they take place in the most
normal possible conditions.

While recognizing the improved security
conditions in Haiti, such as the decrease in the number
of kidnappings, we are also encouraged to note the
progress made on four of the five benchmarks
established by the Secretary-General: political dialogue
and elections; extension of State authority, including
border management; strengthening of security; and the
rule of law and human rights. Likewise, enhanced
patrolling of maritime and land borders should
continue with increased international assistance in
order to mitigate the potential destabilizing effect of
drug trafficking.

In particular, we would like to express our
profound concern over the stagnation of Haiti's
socio-economic development and food security. The
inextricable linkage between security and development
is fundamental to understanding the current situation in
Haiti. Therefore, we believe that appropriate
coordination between all stakeholders involved in
building peace in Haiti, as established in resolution
1840 (2008), must include efforts to improve the socio-
economic indicators for Haitians. Without that, the
achievements of the past five years in Haiti could
rapidly disappear.

The next donor conference for Haiti, to take place
in Washington, DC, on 14 April, is a positive sign.
Chile, given its position as a country with a bilateral
cooperation policy with Haiti in such areas as
education and the promotion of kindergartens, will
participate and contribute, within its capacity, to the
success of that conference so as to ensure the due
implementation of development programmes for the
Caribbean nation under the key principle of national
ownership. Concurrently, it is urgent to further foster
private investment, which helps to create employment
and an environment favourable to foreign and national
investment.

Allow me to underscore not only the historic
commitment of my country but also the efforts of a
large number of Latin American countries. Those
countries account for nearly 60 per cent of the Blue
Helmets in MINUSTAH and, under such initiatives as
the "2 x 9 Mechanism" and the recently established
Working Group for the Latin American coordination
and cooperation with the Haitian National Police, are
seeking to formulate coherent and sustainable
strategies to optimize the contributions of our troops
and police, both within MINUSTAH and in training
and cooperation programmes with the Haitian National
Police. To cite just one statistic, this year our country
will train more than 70 Haitian National Police officers
in Chile at the Carabineros Police Sciences Academy.
The programme will continue for the next few years.
I conclude with an appeal that we not forget
Haiti. The recent hurricanes and their devastating
consequences for the population, together with the
food and economic crises, make it more urgent to
continue to work towards the goal that brings us
together today: achieving a lasting peace in Haiti with
full respect for and the promotion of human rights,
strengthening of the rule of law and democracy and
real progress in terms of development and dignity for
its population.

Finally, my country remains committed to Haiti
and, alongside the United Nations, will persevere in the
pursuit of all these humanitarian objectives in that
brotherly Caribbean country.

