Mr. Mercado (Philippines): My delegation
thanks the Chinese presidency for having convened
this important public meeting. We welcome back to the
Council Deputy Foreign Minister Pahad and thank him
for his briefing.

We take this opportunity to acknowledge the
unstinting efforts of President Mbeki in trying to find a
way to move the Ivorian peace process forward. We
also thank Ambassador Adekanye for his views and
recommendations on behalf of the African Union (AU)
as to how the Council could support the Pretoria
Agreement.

The situation in Cote d'Ivoire has been and
continues to be challenging. The mediation process has
experienced its fair share of stumbling-blocks and
failures. But, through the perseverance of President
Mbeki, a breakthrough was achieved in Pretoria on 6
April last. My delegation welcomes this development
and fully supports this peace accord. We hope that the
parties will consider the Pretoria accords as the final
guiding Agreement and unconditionally implement
their commitments.

Allow me to share my delegation's views
following the signing of the Pretoria Agreement. First,
my delegation is of the view that there can be no
military solution to the conflict in Cote d'Ivoire. We
are therefore particularly encouraged by the
commencement of the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR) of the National Armed Forces
and the Forces nouvelles, starting with the four-day
withdrawal of heavy weaponry from the front line on
21 April 2005.

Secondly, as all parties to the conflict have
agreed to cease all hostilities, there should no longer be
any recruitment of troops by any of the parties,
including from neighbouring States.

Thirdly, the momentum gained from the signing
of the Pretoria Agreement must be maintained. The
major actors must realize the stakes involved and rise
to the occasion. Trust must be established among the
Ivorian parties. As Ambassador Adekanye of Nigeria
said, sacrifices have to be made.

We hope that the major decisions on an important
political issue in Cote d'Ivoire, namely, the amendment
of article 35 of the Constitution, will be made in a
statesman-like manner, taking into account the lessons
of history.

Lastly, with less than six months left before the
elections planned for October, my delegation agrees
that the Council should urgently consider the
mediation's request for assistance relating to security
and the elections, in order that free, fair and peaceful
elections can take place as scheduled.

We support the need to revisit the mandate of the
United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire, and look
forward to the report of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations on how the request for
assistance by the mediation can be translated into
concrete action.

