Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Luxembourg thanks the Russian Federation for taking
the initiative to organize this debate on peacekeeping
operations, an important topic that comes directly
under the purview of the Security Council. I also
thank the Secretary-General for his statement and for
his personal commitment, within the context of his
priorities under his mandate, to the task of building
a strengthened partnership for peacekeeping and for
enhancing the ability of the United Nations to ensure
the protection of civilians.

I fully endorse the statement to be made by the
observer of the European Union.

Since the deployment of military observers
to monitor the truce in the Middle East in 1948,
peacekeeping operations have been at the core ofUnited
Nations endeavours. They have constantly evolved
in complexity and diversity. They have often been
conducted in difficult environments where their role is
no longer limited to overseeing a ceasefire or a simple
line of demarcation. The Security Council recognized
that shift when it adopted resolution 2086 (2013). In so
doing, the Council defined more robust mandates for
strengthening the protection of civilians.

On that basis, the Council decided, in adopting
resolution 2098 (2013), to provide the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
with an intervention brigade in order to prevent the
expansion of the armed groups in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and to neutralize
and disarm them in a "robust, highly mobile and
versatile manner". That strengthened mandate has
already borne fruit against the Mouvement du 23 mars
and other armed groups. It should continue to remain
in force. In the case of MONUSCO, the implementation
of that mandate has also made it possible to bolster the
protection of civilians and thus to fill in some of the
gaps in that area revealed by the report of the Office
of Internal Oversight Services (A/67/787). The mandate
itself is one thing. Those responsible for peacekeeping
operations still need to have the will and the capability
to implement their mandate.

In that context, I would like to stress the contribution
of new technologies that can improve understanding of
a given situation and thereby strengthen the safety and
security of peacekeepers deployed in difficult terrain.
A trial application has been in place in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo since last December, with the
deployment of drones under MONUSCO's mandate.
Those drones also enable the Mission to monitor the
movements of armed groups and thus to enhance
the information available for military operations. In
addition, they enable better surveillance of displaced-
persons camps. The information thus obtained improves
the Mission's effectiveness with respect to civilian
security in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo. That positive experience should encourage us
to equip other United Nations operations with similar
systems according to their needs.

I will not dwell on the theme of inter-mission
cooperation. The temporary transfer of personnel and
equipment from one operation to another to address
a sudden deterioration in one situation is sometimes
necessary in the short term. But the recent case of South
Sudan has shown the limits of that approach. Without
being able to significantly increase the resources of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS),
the Security Council was well advised, in adopting
resolution 2155 (2014), to reframe the Mission's mandate
by making the protection of civilians its top priority and
authorizing UNMISS to utilize all necessary means to
ensure the protection of civilians.
Peacekeeping operations have a crucial role to play
in protecting highly vulnerable populations, especially
women and children. It is also essential that we deploy
capacities specifically dedicated to those tasks,
particularly advisers on the protection of children and
women. Nor should we forget that in the context of
peacekeeping operations, Blue Helmets are often the
first to deal with situations of violations concerning
women and children or of Violence towards them. The
fate of those women and children depends largely on
their ability to handle such situations properly.

Peacekeepers should therefore have specific
training before and during their deployment to enable
them both to cope with these situations and take the
necessary decisions that arise. We welcome the fact
that in resolution 2143 (2014), the Security Council
recommended that the United Nations and troop- and
police-contributing countries provide targeted and
operational training in order to prepare their staff to
help prevent violations against children.

I would like to conclude by expressing
Luxembourg's deep appreciation for the commitment of
the peacekeepers, police officers and civilian staff who
do a vital job, often in difficult conditions, in order to
carry out the demanding mandates the Security Council
entrusts to them. We pay homage to the memory of
the more than 3,200 men and women who have given
their lives since 1948 in performing their duties in the
service of the United Nations for the maintenance of
international peace and security. The best tribute we
can give them is to learn the lessons of the past and to
improve the tool we possess in peacekeeping operations,
in the interests of the civilians those operations are
mandated to protect, and to labour unceasingly to
create the political conditions our Blue Helmets need
to succeed.

