Mr. Lolo (Nigeria): I, too, welcome His
Excellency Mr. Abdurahman Ibrahim and Mr. Lamamra
to this meeting. I should like in particular to thank
Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah for his untiring work in
Somalia, and more especially for the clear and
comprehensive briefing that he gave this morning.

It is evident from the briefings we have received
that the situation in Somalia remains dire. In spite of
this, the Transitional Federal Government (TFG) is
making progress. We commend the efforts of the TFG
in spite of these difficulties. The consolidation of the
process in Somalia, however, cannot be deepened in a
situation in which the TFG faces severe budgetary
gaps, the security environment remains volatile and
unpredictable, the humanitarian situation is in fact
worsening, piracy is on the increase and constraining
economic challenges remain. It is in this regard that we
believe that the remaining time before the end of the
transition period will be pivotal and must be seized to
facilitate the return of peace, security and stability to
Somalia.

On the political front, there is a need for more
progress in the drafting of the new constitution, based
on consultations. We commend the agreement reached
on 15 March with Ahlu Sunna Wal Jama'a, which is a
milestone that should foster sustained political
dialogue and the furtherance of the Djibouti
Agreement. There is also a need to intensify
international support for the TFG in its effort to extend
its authority internally, provide services and confront
the security challenges in the country.

In the economic sector, there is a need to
recognize Somalia's economic challenges and to
support the TFG's efforts to generate revenue. I should
like to echo a point made by Mr. Ould Abdallah this
morning regarding the payment of fishing license fees
to the TFG rather than to individuals as a concrete way
to contribute to the generation of revenue in Somalia.

The international community must also focus
attention on Somalia's economic development needs,
especially job creation. The integration of the Somali
economy into the wider regional economy should also
be encouraged. These efforts should be complemented
by the consistent delivery of humanitarian services.
While we appreciate the immense contributions that
have been made to Somalia, we lend our support to the
Secretary-General's appeal to Member States to fulfil
their financial pledges to the TFG, especially those
made at the Brussels conference. Let me also add that
we support the Istanbul conference to be convened on
22 May.

Stabilizing the security environment is vital for
the strengthening of the Government and the building
of State capacity and institutions in Somalia. Increased
support is required for Somalia's security forces
through strategic training, the provision of adequate
resources for the payment of salaries, and the building
of the national security and stabilization plan.
Measures to fight piracy, deter foreign fighters and
protect civilians and aid workers should be enhanced.
The implementation of existing essential measures
should also be improved.

Let me now reiterate our full support for the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and call
for, first, the full implementation of the AMISOM
support package; secondly, enhanced remuneration for
AMISOM. troops to bring it into line with United
Nations rates; thirdly, reimbursement for transportation
and other logistics provisions; and, fourthly, the
establishment of a multilateral peacekeeping force in
Somalia under the aegis of the United Nations and the
African Union.

We welcome the Secretary-General's efforts to
operationalize the joint planning unit to ensure the
coherence and coordination of United Nations
activities in the country. We look forward to his review
of the implementation of the United Nations strategy
for Somalia, which we hope will take into
consideration the need to integrate the United Nations
system in Somalia.

In conclusion, we salute the gallant men and
women of the military forces of Uganda and Burundi
for their efforts and commitment to the cause of peace
in Somalia. We also salute the dedication of
international aid and humanitarian workers in the
country.

