Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
voted in favour of resolution 2197 (2015), prepared by
the Permanent Mission of the United Kingdom, which
renews the mandate of the United Nations Peacekeeping
Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP). We believe that the role
of UNFICYP is crucial. By preventing a resumption
of fighting and by contributing to maintaining order
and a return to normal life, the Force strengthens trust
between the communities and contributes to the overall
efforts of the United Nations to support negotiations
between Cypriots. In particular, UNFICYP contributes
to facilitating the good offices mission of the Special
Adviser aimed at reunification under a bicommunal
and bi-zonal federation with political equality. It is
therefore crucial that the mission's mandate has been
renewed.

Another essential aspect of the work of the Force is
to support the humanitarian efforts of the Committee on
Missing Persons on behalf of the victims' families. As
the resolution notes in its preambular section, 50 years
after they disappeared, half of all the missing have yet
to be located and more than 70 per cent have yet to be
identified. Given those statistics and the advanced age
of the parents of the disappeared, France is committed
to seeing the Committee's work move at a faster pace
through closer cooperation and speedier approval of
requests for access to all the areas concerned.

Following the positive momentum resulting from
the signing, on 11 February 2014, of a joint statement
by leaders of the two communities, it is regrettable
that intercommunal negotiations have stalled. It is
important that the negotiations resume in order to find
a comprehensive solution as soon as possible, based on
agreed principles. Along with the Secretary-General,
France underscores the importance of a conducive
environment to move the negotiations forward.

As the Force begins its fifty-first year of existence,
I would like to reiterate France's commitment to a
resolution of the Cyprus issue. We commend the
tireless efforts to that end by Ms. Lisa Buttenheim,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and
by Special Adviser Espen Barth Eide. We reiterate to
them our full support.

