Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank Malaysia for having convened
this debate and for leading the Informal Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict. We welcome
the recommendations of the Secretary-General and
appreciate the work ost. Leila Zerrougui, Mr. Anthony
Lake and their teams in preventing and eradicating the
brutal violations to which children are subjected to both
during and after conflicts.

We align ourselves with the statement delivered by
the representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Children and Armed Conflict and with the
statement delivered by the representative of Slovenia
on behalf of the Human Security Network. Chile is a
member of both groups.

We emphatically condemn the six most egregious
categories of violations that the Security Council has
identified. We States have the primary responsibility
of fighting against impunity and of prosecuting and
punishing the perpetrators of atrocity crimes committed
against children. Ifwe are unable or disinclined to do so,
it is incumbent upon the International Criminal Court
to prosecute the crimes covered by the Rome Statute.
The Court's recent conviction of Jean-Pierre Bemba
for crimes against humanity and war crimes, including
rape, which recognizes his command responsibility,
serves as a precedent in that regard.

We call for reparations for victims, including
children, of such atrocities through the Trust Fund
that has been established for that purpose. The
multidisciplinary rehabilitation and reintegration
of boys and girls affected by these grave violations
must be at the core of the United Nations system and
of mediation and peace efforts. The Colombian peace
process provides an good example in that connection.

Similarly, we must bolster national capacities and
the capacity of the Organization in order to provide
it with the necessary tools to protect and reintegrate
affected children, who above all should be recognized
as victims, in strict compliance with the law and
taking into account the special needs of girls. In that
regard, we call for enhanced predeployment training
for mission personnel in order to ensure that child-
protection advisers have direct access to heads of
missions, without confusing their role with that of
human rights advisers.

It is crucial that reports on this topic and lists of
those responsible for the grave violations under this
agenda item be based on verified, timely and impartial
information, thereby avoiding double standards in
their drafting. Only in that way can we ensure that
the respective working group and the system at large
respond to the need to protect children.

Chile notes with concern the increasing use of
schools and hospitals for military purposes, including
the stockpiling of weapons, as well as attacks carried
out against such facilities. We call for the effective
implementation of resolutions 2143 (2014) and 2286
(2016) - co-sponsored by Chile - in addition to
the Lucens Guidelines for Protecting Schools and
Universities from Military Use during Armed Conflict,
as well as the Oslo Safe Schools Declaration.

Children are not only deprived of their right to
education, they are also victims of violent extremism,
propaganda and incitement to hatred. We must redouble
our efforts to eradicate such phenomena and implement
effective protection measures through a broad, not
merely military, approach that addresses the root causes
and establishes preventive measures by promoting a
culture of peace.

The success of the Children, Not Soldiers
campaign is not sufficient, it must go hand in hand
with the effective implementation of the action plans
of committed States, with the support of the elevant
partners. To that effect, we insist on the need to continue
efforts to ensure that all perpetrators commit to prevent
and eradicate such violations.

Finally, Chile expresses its appreciation to United
Nations and non-governmental organization personnel,
some of whom are here today, for their decisive efforts
to eradicate these violations and to safeguard the
childhood of the millions affected by conflict through
consideration of this Council agenda.

