Mr. Mayr-Harting: I would like to thank Under-
Secretary-General Feltman for his important and
informative briefing.

(spoke in French)

I also thank the Permanent Representative of Mali for
his statement today.

The European Union condemns the actions carried
out by terrorist and criminal groups against the Malian
Armed Forces, threatening the territorial integrity of the
country and the safety of its population. Against such
a backdrop and in keeping with relevant resolutions of
the Security Council - specifically resolutions 2056
(2012), 2071 (2012) and especially 2085 (2012) - the
European Union supports the efforts of the region
and of the international community. We welcome the
rapid response of France, with the support of other
States members of the European Union and a number
of African countries, to the request from the President
of Mali for military assistance against terrorist and
criminal groups.

The European Union supports the rapid deployment
of the African-led International Support Mission in
Mali (AFISMA), pursuant to resolution 2085 (2012),
and reiterates its commitment to swiftly providing
financial assistance to the Mission, in particular
through the mobilization of the African Peace Facility.
Preparations are under way to provide financial and
logistical support in close cooperation with the African
Union and the Economic Community of West African
States.

The European Union will also participate in the
donors conference scheduled for 29 January in Addis
Ababa. In that context, the European Union takes a
favourable view of the most recent letter of the Secretary-
General on the different options for providing logistical
support to AFISMA. The European Union hopes that
the Security Council will be able to quickly decide on
authorizing a solid system for financing the Mission.

In response to the direct request of the Malian
authorities, and in accordance with resolution 2085
(2012), the European Union decided to deploy a training
mission to provide military training to the Malian
Armed Forces. Brigadier General Francois Lecointre
has been appointed Force Commander, and an initial
technical team should arrive in Bamako in the coming
days in order to deploy the Mission in February.

Political progress is crucial to ensuring stability in
Mali over the long term. In that respect, the European
Union earnestly requests the Malian authorities to
adopt and implement as soon as possible a road map
to re-establish democracy and constitutional order. It
encourages an inclusive national dialogue open to the
populations ofthe north and all groups that have rejected
terrorism and recognized the territorial integrity of
the country. The army must be reformed and placed
under civil authority. Once those conditions are met,
the European Union is determined to gradually resume
its development cooperation and to swiftly disburse the
scheduled funding.

The European Union reiterates the importance it
attaches to close cooperation with the Malian efforts
and those of other regional and international partners.
Accordingly, and in close connection with the United
Nations and the African Union, the European Union
is planning to convene, in Brussels on 5 February, the
next ministerial meeting of the international support
and follow-up group on the situation in Mali, as many
have mentioned today.
The European Union is prepared to strengthen
without delay its support for the efforts of humanitarian
organizations to assist the populations in Mali
and neighbouring countries in need. It emphasizes
the importance of effective coordination among
humanitarian stakeholders under United Nations
auspices, and reiterates its call on all parties involved to
allow unfettered humanitarian access to populations in
need and to ensure the safety of humanitarian workers.

The European Union calls on all parties to ensure
the protection of civilian populations and to respect
international humanitarian law and human rights. Very
particular attention should be focused on the situation
of children - not only those who live in combat zones
or who carry weapons, but also those whose daily
lives have been disrupted by forced displacement or
humanitarian problems. All parties and individuals
engaged in Mali will be held accountable for their
actions.

The European Union emphasizes the importance
of maintaining stability in the Sahel and of preventing
a negative impact on neighbouring countries. In that
context, it reiterates its commitment to supporting
Mali's neighbours as part of its Sahel strategy in order
to strengthen their security and development. To that
end, the appointment of a Special Representative of the
European Union for the Sahel should be forthcoming
shortly.

