Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for
presenting her eighteenth report on the situation in
Darfur. Since the Security Council decided to refer
the situation in Darfur to the ICC, the Office of the
Prosecutor has informed the Council in a transparent
manner about its work, and we would like to thank it
warmly for that.

The reports of the Office of the Prosecutor give
the Council an opportunity to evaluate the ICC's
progress in combating impunity and to become aware
of the numerous obstacles confronted by the Court.
Unfortunately, the concerns that the Council has often
expressed in the past remain pertinent. We must note
once again with deep regret that the arrest warrants
delivered by the ICC for four individuals accused of war
crimes and crimes against humanity and, in one case,
genocide have not yet been executed. We are deeply
concerned to take note of the list that Ms. Bensouda has
given in her report of cases of non-cooperation on the
part of the Government of the Sudan with the Court in
spite of their obligations under resolution 1593 (2005).
We also regret that the President and the Minister of
Defence of the Sudan have been able to travel to several
countries in the region, including those that are parties
to the Rome Statute.

During the past six months, the security and
humanitarian situation in Darfur has continued to
deteriorate significantly. Conflicts have become more
and more frequent and more and more deadly in several
parts of Darfur. Approximately 460,000 persons have
been displaced between January and November 2013,
which is more than double the total number of people
displaced in the two years prior.

We are also very much concerned by attacks against
civilians, especially through aerial bombardment;
the many acts of sexual and gender-based violence;
frequent attacks against those who come to assist the
Sudanese people, particularly humanitarian workers
and the Blue Helmets; and the repeated refusals to
provide humanitarian access. Those crimes threaten
a peace process that is already fragile, based on the
Doha Document for Peace in Darfur. The Council
condemned them clearly in its resolution 2113 (2013).
Luxembourg encourages the Office of the Prosecutor
to continue to monitor the situation in Darfur closely
and to promote the investigations having to do with the
crimes committed there.

Serious threats continue to weigh on the safety
and security of the humanitarian staff and African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) personnel. We condemn in the strongest
possible terms attacks against UNAMID, which have
caused 13 deaths among peacekeepers and many
wounded people since the beginning of the year. To
date, none of the investigations conducted by the
Government of the Sudan on those attacks have resulted
in the slightest condemnation. It is unacceptable that the
Government refuses to cooperate with the ICC, while at
the same time it does not take the necessary measures
at the national level to combat impunity.

We ask all Member States, whether or not they are
States parties to the Rome Statute, and all regional and
international organizations concerned to cooperate fully
with the ICC, as required by resolution 1593 (2005).
For its part, the Security Council must ensure effective
follow-up of cases referred to the ICC. It must not shirk
the inherent responsibility in the cases referred to the
Court. Generally, we believe that it is vital to strengthen
cooperation between the Council and the ICC. The
two institutions are complementary. They pursue the
same objectives, each one in the framework of its own
mandate: preventing conflict, and combating impunity.
We believe that the Council should think about what
more it could do to assist the Court, especially to assist
the Court to execute the mandates given to it.

One way of helping the Court would be to list
individuals under an ICC arrest warrant on the
sanctions Committee established pursuant to resolution
1591 (2005). Another specific measure that the
Security Council could take would be to answer the
correspondence that the Court has addressed to it on
cases ofnon-cooperation. As recalled by Ms. Bensouda,
the Court depends on the cooperation of States in order
to be able to discharge its mandate. The silence of the
Security Council in that context is not encouraging a
change of attitude on the part of the Sudan.

In conclusion, I would like to assure Ms. Fatou
Bensouda of the full support of Luxembourg in the
resolute action that her Office continues to conduct
to combat impunity. We associate ourselves with her
vibrant appeal for stronger action from the Security
Council and States parties to the Rome Statute so that
justice can finally be done for the victims of the Darfur
conflict.

