Ms. Qwabe (South Africa): I, too, would like to
thank the Chairpersons of the three Committees for
their informative briefings.

I will make a few general remarks that are
applicable to all three committees and some specific
comments on the resolution that was recently adopted
renewing the mandate of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004).

The Chairmen of the three committees are
making noteworthy efforts to ensure that there is better
coordination between the Committees, as well as
between their experts. Joint visits by the Counter-
Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED) and the
Monitoring Team of the Al-Qaida/Taliban Committee
help to prevent duplication. However, the issue of
duplication can be adequately addressed only by the
adoption of decisions by the Security Council that
would further consolidate the work of the Committees.

Improving transparency in the work of the three
subsidiary bodies is very important. If Members
continue to be in the dark on important processes that
directly affect them, it will merely perpetuate distrust
of the Council. Open briefings and direct meetings
between the subsidiary bodies and Member States,
such as those that have already been held, are
important measures to clarify issues and to improve
transparency.

The Chairmen also briefed the Council on their
work in the promotion of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. The Global Strategy is an

attempt by the United Nations membership as a whole
to address the scourge of terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, as well as to identify the conditions
conducive to its spread. It is therefore important that
the three subsidiary bodies complement the
implementation of the Global Strategy, and we have
noted significant progress in that regard since the
Strategy's adoption.

I would now like to make some specific
comments with regard to the 1540 Committee.

I would like to begin by reiterating South Africa's
firm conviction that weapons of mass destruction do
not guarantee security, but rather detract from it. As
long as those weapons exist, the world will always face
the threat of nuclear catastrophe. Non-proliferation and
disarmament are mutually reinforcing processes. We
therefore welcome the fact that the recently adopted
resolution 1810 (2008) includes language on
disarmament, arms control and the right to the peaceful
uses of nuclear, chemical and biological technology,
within appropriate safeguards.

South Africa shares the international
community's concerns regarding the existence of
networks dealing in the illicit transfer of nuclear-
related technology and believes that closer
international cooperation is necessary to root out the
phenomenon of the illicit trade in technology that
could be used in the manufacture of weapons of mass
destruction. Our experience with illicit networks, in
which South Africa is the only country amongst many
affected countries to successfully prosecute suspects
thus far, suggests that there is considerable room for
improvement, also in the most developed countries,
with regard to international cooperation and
enforcement machineries.

That experience has prompted us to insist on the
inclusion of language on networks in the current
resolution. It is clear that the greatest threat posed by
weapons of mass destruction and related technologies,
materials, financing and delivery systems falling into
the hands of non-State actors originates from the States
that possess or are capable of possessing such
weapons, and from countries with an advanced
industrial base.
With its mandate extended through resolution
1810 (2008), the immediate challenge for the 1540
Committee will be to develop a balanced programme of
work that will address the real challenges at the heart
of the proliferation risks posed by non-State actors,
such as how the international community should
respond to illicit proliferation networks.

