Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): Today's
debate is extremely important. I would first like to
thank Ambassadors Jeno Staehelin and Dieter Kastrup
for their statements. I also congratulate them on the
quality, detail and thoroughness of the results achieved
in the Interlaken and Bonn-Berlin processes. The way
in which they were carried out was remarkable and
exemplary on several counts. We would like, through
State Secretary Hans Dahlgren, to thank Sweden for its
readiness to continue this work.

In the first place, this approach was remarkable
because it was grounded in a willingness to cooperate
and undertake a constructive exchange between
members and non-members of the Security Council, on
the one hand, and the United Nations and civil society,
on the other. In fact, the booklet before us owes a great
deal to the enlightened contribution of academics,
researchers, private sector professionals, non-
governmental organizations and research institutes. We
warmly thank all of them.

The processes took place in an exemplary way
within the context of a targeted approach to sanctions.
It should be recalled that sanctions are meaningless
unless they are part of a comprehensive political
strategy. We must never lose sight of their objectives.
The better they are targeted, the greater the pressure
exerted where needed, all the while reducing the risk of
negative and undesired effects on innocent civilian
populations and third States. The best possible
implementation will ensure the maximum effect. When
we are all committed to an unprecedented effort to
combat terrorism, in a struggle that has, in particular,
taken the form of economic sanctions against Osama
bin Laden and his associates, no one can doubt that the
results of the Interlaken process will make a valuable
and immediately useful contribution. Moreover, what
can be said of arms embargoes if not that their effective
implementation is a matter of urgency, for if they were
truly effective they would make it possible to end wars
because of a lack of arms supplies.

The booklet that has just been submitted to us is
of excellent quality and has come at the right time.
Allow me to take this opportunity to focus on two
specific points that have emerged from the conclusions
submitted to us - conclusions that, as the Council is
aware, are of particular importance to the French
delegation.

First, the Security Council must conclude its
normative work on sanctions and adopt the conclusions
of the Working Group on General Issues on Sanctions
as quickly as possible. That group has done excellent
work under the chairmanship of Ambassador
Chowdhury of Bangladesh. We have every confidence
in the ability of Ambassador Richard Ryan to lead our
work to success under his presidency.

In addition, it seems to us that, as our friend
Ibrahima Fall has just emphasized, the time has come
to set up, under the authority and control of the
Security Council and its sanctions committees, a
unified, permanent instrument to monitor sanctions and
the traffic in raw materials in armed conflicts.

We need a unified instrument. Two years of
experience with the various ad hoc panels of experts
created by the Council to monitor sanctions against
UNITA, Sierra Leone, Liberia and Afghanistan, or to
inquire into the illegal exploitation of the natural
resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
have demonstrated that the problems and the kinds of
traffic are the same from one regional crisis to the next.
The networks and those responsible for violating
sanctions and illicit trafficking are frequently the same,
and in each case the same causes produce the same
effects.

For example, the trafficker Victor Bout appears in
every report. The panels of experts have worked in the
same countries, with the same institutions, and have
asked the same sorts of questions. Some experts have
even had to modify their itineraries in order to avoid
arriving at the same time, or just after, their colleagues
from another panel. The membership of the various
panels has been remarkably similar for a very simple
reason: the Council and its sanctions committees
always need the same kind of expertise which is
lacking in the Secretariat. It is also the same expertise
that we need to monitor sanctions and to control and
investigate the role in armed conflicts of illicit
trafficking in raw materials. This is why we
systematically find in one committee after another an
expert on diamonds, an expert on arms trafficking and
yet another expert on financial networks.

The mechanism that we propose would be an
instrument available to both the Council and the
sanctions committees under its authority. It would be
entrusted with specific tasks and called on by the
Council to draft separate reports on the various
questions being examined. It would be a matter not of
mixing everything up, but, on the contrary, of gaining
the full benefit of the synergies that exist between the
different subjects and crises, which, although not the
same, are linked and interconnected, particularly on the
African continent.

A considerable amount of frequently overlapping
data has been compiled by the various panels. It is time
to use them and deal with them in a more cohesive
way. In short, it is time for the Council to be more
systematic and to set up an instrument that would avoid
any duplication of panels with similar competencies.
We would waste less energy, time and money.

The second reason for setting up this new
instrument is that we also need a permanent monitoring
instrument. Particularly with regard to the sanctions
against UNITA, experience has shown that it is
imperative to ensure continuity of monitoring for as
long as sanctions are in place. Otherwise, a disastrous
political signal would be sent. That was our experience
last week in our debate on UNITA and the requests
made by the Government of Angola.

Sanctions must, of course, be limited in duration,
but they should be effectively implemented for as long
as they are in place. To accomplish that, their
implementation must be the subject of both monitoring
and assistance. In that regard, creating a permanent and
unified monitoring instrument would, as Mr. Fall
emphasized, make it possible to establish long-term
working relations with regional and technical
organizations, such as the Organization of African
Unity, the Economic Community of West African
States, the Southern African Development Community,
Interpol, the World Customs Organization and the
International Civil Aviation Organization, whose
cooperation is indispensable in order to ensure respect
for sanctions.

France took note last week, in the course of our
consultations on the extension of the Monitoring
Mechanism on Sanctions against UNITA, of the
interest of the membership of the Council in our ideas
and of the readiness of all to engage in a serious
discussion, with a view to reaching consensus as
speedily as possible on the issue. In this spirit, my
delegation intends to submit an updated proposal and
to call for discussions at the expert level, with a view
to reaching a unanimous decision of the Council. We
believe that a consensus-based approach is
indispensable in dealing with this important issue.

