Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to Mr. Mladenov for his
briefing on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question. That is the way the agenda
item we developed together is written, so let us abide
by it.

We deplore the fact that the status quo in the
occupied Palestinian territories, the epicentre of the
potential for conflict in the Middle East, is untenable,
consisting as it does of an endless series of crises.
The result is that it blocks any movement towards
achieving a comprehensive, sustainable Arab-Israeli
settlement and resolution of the Palestinian question on
internationally recognized foundations, which include
the relevant Security Council resolutions, the Arab
Peace Initiative, the Madrid principles, including the
principle of land for peace, and the two-State formula,
which provides for the creation through negotiations of
a State of Palestine coexisting in peace and security
with Israel.

Against a backdrop - repudiated by the entire
international community - of aggressive revision
of agreements previously arrived at, including in the
Security Council, any prospects for a resumption
of the negotiation process are receding. The gulf of
misunderstanding and mistrust between Palestinians
and Israelis is widening. What is now front and centre
is not the call for peace and peaceful initiatives but
violence, unilateral measures and provocative rhetoric.
In the Gaza Strip, where only recently much effort had
succeeded in creating a relative lull, the tensions have
not subsided. A willingness to show restraint must be
maintained. Actions resulting in civilian casualties and
the destruction of civilian facilities in the Gaza Strip
and in Israel should be firmly condemned.

Considering the current worsening of the
Palestinian-Israeli issue, we have been urging the
parties to immediately end hostilities. We appreciate
and support the mediation efforts of Egypt and the
United Nations to restore the ceasefire. We hope it will
be sustainable and long-term, that it will enable the
international community to mobilize efforts to improve
the dismal humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip and
focus on advancing the political process. Of course, we
particularly emphasize that any assistance to the Gaza
Strip should be carried out in close coordination with
the legitimate Palestinian authorities, led by President
Abbas, and should conform to the goal of restoring
Palestinian unity.

We urgently need to mobilize our collective
diplomacy in order to prevent the failure of the efforts
that all of us in the international community have made
together to establish the conditions for implementing
the only viable solution there is, a two-State solution
based on direct negotiations between Palestinians and
Israelis. It is through the direct dialogue format that
we can work to find answers to all final status issues,
including those regarding Jerusalem, refugees, borders
and all the security issues that are crucial to the region.
These sensitive issues cannot just be taken off the
negotiating table before the parties can discuss them.
If they are not settled, they will still surface as painful
shocks for everyone.

The policy of creating faits accomplis on the ground
in an attempt to anticipate the outcome of a bilateral
discussion ofthese issues is not acceptable. We consider
the expansion of Israeli settlements, the demolition of
Palestinian property and the eviction of Palestinian
families illegal, in contravention of international law
and detrimental to a two-State solution. The holding
of municipal elections in the occupied Syrian Golan
by Israeli authorities is equally unacceptable and
illegitimate. This dangerous step, which violates more
than one Council resolution, could have far-reaching
negative consequences for a Middle East settlement as
a whole.

Russia's position remains consistent. We maintain
and develop relations with all the States in the region
based on a positive agenda. We support a resumption of
active efforts by the Middle East Quartet ofinternational
mediators, which is still the only mediation format
approved by Security Council resolutions. Russia's
proposal for hosting a summit between the leaders of
Palestine and Israel is still on the table, and we want
to point out that the Palestinian leader has repeatedly
confirmed his agreement with that initiative. We will
continue our financial and political assistance to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). UNRWA's work
is vital, as it has an important stabilizing effect in the
Palestinian territories and the countries of the Middle
East. It must be able to survive and function fully.

In conclusion, we want to once again urge our
colleagues in the Council to refrain from making
threats and unfounded accusations, and instead do the
essential work of strengthening the overall atmosphere
of trust in the Security Council, the Near and Middle
East and North Africa and to abandon policies of
confrontation once and for all. Israelis, Palestinians,
Saudis and Iranians all deserve to live in prosperity and
security, but if that goal is to be achieved, the regional
security architecture must be comprehensive and
indivisible, and diplomacy and dialogue channels must
be brought to bear. We believe that Russia's security
concept for the Persian Gulf constitutes a good basis for
launching efforts in that direction. History has shown
us that we can succeed in the Middle East only when
we work together according to the principles enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations of respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of States.

