Mr. Bin Mubarak (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to congratulate you, Madam President,
on your assumption of the work of leading the Council
this month, and to express to you our sincere wishes for
the usual success of the United Kingdom delegation.

I am also grateful for the opportunity to address
the Security Council for the first time since His
Excellency President Hadi appointed me Ambassador
Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary and Permanent
Representative of the Republic of Yemen to the United
Nations. I would also like to thank the Secretary-
General and his Special Envoy to Yemen, Mr. Martin
Griffiths, for his genuine efforts since he assumed the
role of Special Envoy in order to achieve lasting peace
in Yemen.

Since the beginning of the military operation in
Al-Hudaydah governorate, the Yemeni Government
and the coalition to restore legitimacy in Yemen have
supported the efforts of the Special Envoy to achieve a
peaceful solution that spares Al-Hudaydah city and all
other Yemeni cities controlled by the Houthi militias
military actions and to ensure that the suffering of
its people is not exploited by the Houthi militias to
further violate international humanitarian law and to
threaten international security and navigation. We have
heeded his repeated calls and those of the international
community for de-escalation on the western coast.

While the Special Envoy undertakes such efforts
to relaunch the peace operation in Yemen, the Houthis
continue their military build-up and to dig tunnels. They
are biding their time to launch counter-attacks against
our Yemeni people and to threaten the international
maritime waterways.

The political leadership and the Yemeni Government
will engaged positively with the plan proposed by the
Special Envoy so long as the plan takes into account
the three terms of reference - the Gulf Cooperation
Council initiative and its Implementation Mechanism,
the outcome of the National Dialogue Conference and
the relevant Security Council resolutions, in particular
resolution 2216 (2015) f as the bases for consultations
and peace negotiations in Yemen. To that end, my
Government has provided its observations in writing to
the Special Envoy.

The choice of the Yemeni Government has
always been comprehensive and lasting peace based
on restoring the State institutions, putting an end to
the coup and re-establishing security and stability.
That will not be achieved with merely verbal support
for the efforts of the Special Envoy, but by bringing
more political pressure to bear on the Houthi militias
and through unequivocal messages from the Security
Council that the international community will not
accept the continuing Yemeni suffering, the seizing
of State institutions and threats to international
maritime navigation.

It is time to implement the resolutions of the
international legitimacy. Otherwise, the solution will
be contingent on the situation on the ground as long
as those militias continue to control vital regions of
Yemen under unfounded pretexts. That will prolong
the conflict and the suffering of civilians throughout
Yemen. There is daily bombardment by the militias
of residential areas in Taiz, Lahij, Al-Jawf, Mar'ib
and Al-Bayda, in addition to daily sniper attacks on
civilians, mostly women and children, in the city of Taiz.
Those acts should be condemned and the perpetrators
held accountable. The militias should not be allowed to
continue such acts, which are a form of genocide, let
alone turn San'a into a massive jail where the so-called
supervisors are free to loot and imprison or kill anyone
who opposes them, especially after the recent uprising
in December.

The militias' ongoing control of strategic areas
in Yemen, where they launch attacks on international
waterways, requires a decisive stand on the part of
the Security Council. The most recent attack against
the two Saudi oil tankers belonging to the National
Shipping Company of Saudi Arabia and the laying of
hundreds of naval mines to harm ships and Yemeni
fishermen and damage the marine environment are
further examples of the Iran-backed Houthi practices
to undermine the interests of Yemen, the region and the
whole world by imposing a sectarian agenda sponsored
and supported by Iran.

The Panel of Experts on Yemen, whose mandate
was extended in accordance with paragraph 5 of
resolution 2402 (2018), has confirmed beyond doubt
that the Houthis were responsible for the attack against
the Saudi and Turkish ships on 3 April and 10 May.
Those practices constitute a breach of international
humanitarian law, contribute to the deteriorating
security in the region and have a negative impact on
commercial shipments and the delivery of humanitarian
assistance to Yemen.

Everybody is aware that the attacks by these
militias continue unabated against densely populated
civilian areas of the kingdom of Saudi Arabia, using
Iranian missiles in flagrant Violation of all international
laws and norms and Security Council resolutions, in
particular resolutions 2216 (2015) and 2231 (2015). With
regard to today's explosion near Al-Thawra hospital in
Al-Hudaydah, the Arab coalition has just announced
that it did not undertake any military operations in that
area and has no targets there and that due investigations
will take place.

The Yemeni Government, which is internationally
recognized as the elected Government, underscores
that all efforts of the United Nations through its Special
Envoy should respect the constitutional State authorities
and their legitimacy as entitled to oversee Government
institutions and all the Yemeni governorates without
exception in accordance with the law. The contrary
would contravene the general terms of reference and
international standards and enable the militias and the
de facto authorities to pursue their agenda against the
Yemeni people.

The international Organization has overseen the
peace negotiations under the umbrella of the Security
Council in accordance with the resolutions of the
international legitimacy. For the past three years and
at every stage of the peace negotiations, those militias,
with the world watching, have sought to undermine
peace efforts by creating crises and resorting to
delaying tactics. The Yemeni Government has warned
against that repeatedly, and the Council knows that we
were very close to making progress towards peace at
the negotiations held in Kuwait, but due to the militias'
intransigence, they refused to sign at the last minute.

Therefore, based on our previous experience
and because we are keen to end the suffering of our
Yemeni people, and believing that the best and least
costly solution is a political one, we stress that any
negotiations that are not based on putting an end to
the coup and on the implementation of international
resolutions, thereby enabling the legitimate authorities
to discharge their duties towards all the people in all
areas and leading to the resumption of the political
process, which has been stalled by the coup, would be
but hollow words that complicate the situation and fail
to achieve the genuine objectives of the peace talks.

We also underscore the primacy of the
confidence-building measures that were agreed upon
during the consultations held in Switzerland, with a
focus on humanitarian aspects, including the release
of detainees and prisoners, and on ensuring that the
militias do not hinder the delivery of humanitarian
assistance. These militias not only seize humanitarian
relief supplies but also impede their delivery and use
them for military purposes. In addition, they should
cease laying mines, a crime that demonstrates Houthi-
Iranian recklessness and undermines the future of our
people, whom they send to the front to meet their deaths
on the basis of misleading slogans and information.

The upcoming consultations cannot succeed if
they do not focus on alleviating the human suffering,
dealing with security aspects and then achieving the
desired political objectives, consecutively.

The human suffering continues in Yemen and the
situation is deteriorating daily. This unprecedented
humanitarian disaster of the twenty-first century is the
result of a war fuelled by a foreign agenda that uses the
militias to achieve its goals in the region. All relevant
United Nations reports have confirmed without a doubt
that those who are pillaging the wealth and resources
of our people, impeding the delivery of humanitarian
assistance and preventing United Nations staff from
carrying out their duties freely are the same ones who
are fighting and perpetrating horrendous acts to retain
control of the major gateway to these resources.

My Government therefore calls on the international
organizations operating in Yemen to expand their
activities in order to cover all parts of the country.
There are five relief centres in Yemen, each of which
has land, sea and air ports that they can use to channel
assistance. The decentralization of humanitarian
efforts will ensure the effective use of funds and their
equitable access to all beneficiaries and people affected
throughout Yemen.

Looking at the international efforts made to
alleviate this humanitarian disaster, we cannot but
commend the genuine efforts of Mr. Mark Lowcock
and his team as well as those of all international and
regional organizations operating in Yemen. We also
commend those donor countries that have met their
commitments under the humanitarian response plan,
notably the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the United Arab
Emirates and the sisterly State of Kuwait. We also call
on other donor countries to meet their commitments.

The Government of Yemen will continue to make
all possible efforts and compromises in order to
achieve lasting peace. This war was imposed on us
by the militias, which staged a coup against the State
and its institutions. This situation is not acceptable
to the Yemeni people, even if they have to face it
alone. The militias will be held accountable for any
consequences related to the non-implementation of
international resolutions.

In closing, I should like to say that I was asked
recently by a Western official why we are not seeing a
migration exodus by Yemenis, as is the case with other
countries that are experiencing similar conflicts. I told
him that the Yemeni people are not only attached to their
land and soil, but they also have hope. They believe in
an inclusive national agenda, which they hope will be
implemented soon. Children in my country continue to
dream of a bright future that will bring a smile back
to their faces, and mothers continue to pray every day
for peace, security and stability to prevail throughout
Yemen. Please do not let them down.

