Mr. Mardini: Today the Security Council adopted
resolution 2462 (2019), thereby upholding international
humanitarian law and protecting principled
humanitarian action. It shows that States remain
committed to their obligations under international
humanitarian law and to ensuring that people in need
can be reached and protected in times of armed conflict.

I am addressing the Council today because the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) is
concerned about the growing impact that counter-
terrorism measures can have on impartial humanitarian
action. We understand States' legitimate concerns and
their need to take necessary measures to ensure security
and eliminate terrorism. But certain measures, most
notably counter-terrorism legislation and sanctions,
can criminalize and restrict humanitarian action. What
is at stake is our ability to cross front lines in order to
deliver humanitarian assistance for communities living
in areas controlled by armed groups and individuals
designated as terrorists. Counter-terrorism measures
can have a negative impact on our ability to visit people
who have been detained, recover dead bodies, train
armed groups on international humanitarian law and
facilitate mutual detainee releases and swaps. In short,
our ability to carry out our mandate is increasingly
hampered. As a consequence, people are suffering at
the very moment when international humanitarian law
should be protecting them.

The ICRC has always condemned violence,
including acts of terrorism, against protected persons.
However, the international community must find the
right balance between the legitimate concerns of States
providing security and the importance of international
humanitarian law and impartial humanitarian action.
We welcome the efforts to find that balance in the
resolution adopted today. The next step is to walk the
talk. The commitments to safeguarding humanitarian
action in the resolution mean nothing to populations
in need if they are not implemented. When States take
resolution 2462 (2019) back home and incorporate it into
their domestic legal order, we ask that they take effective
measures to protect principled humanitarian action and
preserve the humanitarian space. We also encourage
States to engage with humanitarian organizations
to find concrete solutions to this very critical issue.
That would be a tangible way to demonstrate their
commitment to the 1949 Geneva Conventions in their
seventieth anniversary year.

Counter-terrorism measures remain a critical issue
for the ICRC. Our President, Mr. Peter Maurer, will be
here to brief the Council next week and will reiterate
the great importance of this matter.

