Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria): I would like to
thank China for convening this open debate on such
a consequential issue that is directly linked to our
commitments to the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations. I commend your
initiative and thank you, Mr. President, for the concept
note (S/2015/87, annex) that has defined the areas to
be explored in that context. Algeria obviously aligns
itself with the statement to be made on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement by our colleague from Iran,
and I would like to add the following comments.

Algeria is ofthe firm view that it is high time for the
United Nations to reflect on how the Organization and
the Security Council should adhere more efficiently to
their mandate, missions and the great expectations that
the Charter and the community of nations have placed
on their shoulders. Seventy years have gone by since the
inception of the United Nations, but while its methods
have barely evolved, the world has in the meantime
undergone a complete metamorphosis. In addition to
the long-standing, everlasting threats to international
peace and security, other challenges of a different
nature are putting pressure on an already overburdened
Security Council agenda. Terrorism in its different
forms, threats of genocide and diseases that know no
borders are hindering the security of nations and the
safety of citizens. Needless to say, the pitiless shadow
of continuous and perilous conflicts and the threat of
weapons of mass destruction still cast a baneful shadow
over the whole of humankind. We believe that the
questions to be addressed are the following ones.

How can we improve the efficiency of the United
Nations system, and specifically of the Security Council,
while always bearing in mind the goals, purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, that all
of us deem profoundly valid? The rule of law, openness,
democracy, dialogue, peaceful settlement of disputes
and the very principles enshrined in the first article of
the Charter should be the guiding rod.

How can we use these reflections to define the
operative tracks for the next 70 years of the Organization?
One cannot ignore the fact that unfulfilled promises
and unaddressed expectations might undermine the
confidence of the whole world in the United Nations.
We have to fully understand that the world has radically
changed during the past 70 years, but the Security
Council and its interaction with other organs have
barely evolved. The Security Council has not adapted
itself either to a global constituency that has increased,
or to the necessity to adapt its working methods. In that
regard, I would like to say the following.

First, the membership of 15 States does not reflect
today's world. Secondly, its working methods, including
transparency, ought to be improved. Thirdly, the use of
veto power is not compatible with the open societies
that we look forward to building, and obviously Algeria
welcomes the ideas aimed at limiting its application,
as a first step. Fourthly, we should reflect on ideas
and methods, not only to react to conflicts, but also
certainly to prevent and forestall new ones. Conflict
prevention and peacebuilding should be as important
as peacekeeping. We look forward and we expect the
Council to strengthen as far and firmly as possible its
ties, bonds and interaction with regional organizations
and countries that are engaged in mediations and
conflict-solving endeavours.

Algeria also believes that Chapter VI and
Chapter VIII of the Charter ought to be privileged in
many circumstances. We are also of the view that the
Council could and should create organs that might help
in fulfilling necessary tasks such as inquiries, fact-
finding missions or information that could help perform
the tasks of the Security Council.

Finally, Algeria strongly believes that the
responsibility of the General Assembly should not be
forgotten and must be respected in accordance with the
mission bestowed by the Charter of the United Nations.

