Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I wish to
thank Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi, Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006), for his presentation of
the quarterly report of the Committee covering the
period 24 March to 24 June 2015, and I would like to
congratulate him for his leadership. When it comes
to the Iranian nuclear dossier, Chad welcomes the
continued negotiations between Iran and the P5+l in the
framework of the Joint Plan of Action. In that regard,
the Framework Agreement on the Joint Plan of Action
on Iran's nuclear programme, signed in Lausanne,
Switzerland last 2 April, represents a major step
forward, as the framework makes it possible to envision
an optimistic future for all stakeholders. We hope that
the ongoing negotiations taking place in Vienna will
make it possible to settle the technical details in order
to reach a final agreement by the deadline of 30 June
of this year.

In this critical phase in the peaceful settlement ofthe
Iranian nuclear issue, we encourage all parties to act as
constructively as possible in order to reach a successful
conclusion to the negotiations. Furthermore, we express
our concern over reports of the use of a computer virus
to spy on the hotels where the negotiations are taking
place, and we call on the competent authorities of the
countries involved to do their utmost to shed light on
those ill-intentioned activities and ensure appropriate
conditions for continued negotiations.

We reiterate that the Islamic Republic of Iran has a
right to develop a full civilian nuclear-energy industry,
and that, in the event of a final agreement, all United
Nations sanctions against Iran should be lifted.

With regard to the report of the 1737 Committee, we
welcome the fact that no incidents have been reported
during the past three months. We encourage members
of the Committee to continue their discussions of
the report, and we call on the Committee to continue
facilitating the implementation of the provisions
contained in Security Council resolutions 1737 (2006),
1747 (2007), 1803 (2008) and 1929 (2010).
To conclude, we hope that the ongoing negotiations
will lead to a peaceful negotiated settlement of the
Iranian nuclear issue and the immediate and complete
lifting of all sanctions. We are pleased by the positive
developments in those negotiations. They amply
demonstrate that diplomacy can succeed better than
confrontation and threats.

