Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the delegation of Lithuania for having organized
today's debate, and its Minister for Foreign Affairs for
participating in it. Together with my colleague from
the United Kingdom, I note that today - Valentine's
Day - happens to be the day when the United Nations
and the European Union get together. It is obviously a
sign.

I salute the High Representative of the European
Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy. The
European Union is endowed with original tools and a
proactive policy based on a comprehensive approach to
crisis resolution. It is more than ever in Africa, which
occupies nearly 70 per cent of the time and energy of
the Security Council, that the European Union plays
its role in promoting peace and security, most often in
cooperation with the United Nations.

In Mali, for example, the European Union has
given its support rebuilding the defence force, working
in perfect complementarity with the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali. The deployment of the European Union
training mission in Mali to train the Malian armed
forces contributes to the same goal of restoring Malian
sovereignty as that of the Blue Helmets. The Security
Council was recently able to meet the Commander of
the training mission in Mali, and we took note of the
effectiveness of the Mission's efforts.

Clearly, today it is the crisis in the Central African
Republic that compels our attention. Since December,
the international military presence has grown stronger
in the country. The size of the African-led International
Support Mission in the Central African Republic has
increased from 2,000 to 6,000 soldiers in a few weeks.
We are grateful to the African Union for that. The force
is supported, as members of the Council know, by the
1,600 French soldiers of Operation Sangaris. Earlier
today, the President of the French Republic decided to
strengthen those 1,600 on the ground with an additional
400 soldiers. It will soon receive the support of the
European Union force to the Central African Republic,
as was decided by European Foreign Ministers on
10 February. The operation will make an important
contribution to the efforts made to provide security
and protection of civilians in the region of Bangui. It
is crucial that the European force be in a position to
be deployed quickly and that States members of the
European Union go into action to help. The involvement
of the High Representative and the Secretary-General
in convincing still reluctant Member States to join in
is essential in that respect. Any delay by the European
Union would be difficult to understand.

Until now, thanks to the Africa force supported
by the French forces, many lives were saved and large
massacres avoided. We are nevertheless confronted
with a situation of general insecurity born of the
collapse of the Central African State. What do we need
today in the Central African Republic? First of all,
money is needed to put civil servants back to work, in
particular police and paramilitary police, followed by
international police units, because the challenge that
we must meet requires today police more than soldiers.
Soldiers cannot control crowds or protect individuals.

In all those priority areas, the United Nations,
through the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in the Central African Republic, which needs to
be strengthened as the Security Council has requested,
and, as soon as possible, through a peacekeeping
operation, and the European Union, through the
significant cooperation that it is implementing
in the Central African Republic - all of those
organizations - have an essential role to play. They act
together and with Africans to allow Central Africans to
live again in peace.

We are at a turning point in the crisis management
in Central Africa. We have avoided the worst but we
still must put an end to the cycle of ethnic and religious
violence and prevent the country from descending into
chaos. But as the Secretary-General said, we must act
quickly - on the security front; on the political front,
by promoting national reconciliation, fighting impunity
and preparing for elections; and on the humanitarian
front. That requires the efforts of all, and the European
Union and the United Nations should do more. They
will have to do it swiftly and realistically and creatively.
We confidently expect to see the commitment of the
United Nations and the European Union fulfilled in a
crisis where values are at stake and where France is
doing its duty.

Beyond its deployment in the field, the European
Union is also a valuable partner of the United Nations
in the search for lasting solutions to international
crises. In Syria, despite the persistent impasse in the
Council, the European Union is firmly committed to a
democratic transition and has been very vocal on that
issue. Since May 2011, the European Union has imposed
a wide range of individual financial and trade sanctions
against the regime; they were necessary and we applaud
them. With more than €600 million in humanitarian
aid, the European Union and its States members are the
primary support of the Syrian population, including
in neighbouring countries. And the European Union
continues to make its presence felt in assisting with
the dismantling of the Syrian chemical arsenal by
contributing to the trust funds that are financing the
joint mission of the United Nations and Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons created for
that purpose.

Similarly, on the Iranian nuclear issue, we thank
the High Representative for her exemplary commitment
in working with the E3+3 in order to keep the door
open for dialogue with Tehran. It is both the United
Nations sanctions and those of the European Union that
brought about the progress that we have seen recently.
With the adoption of a joint plan of action in November
2013, which began to be implemented in January, the
appropriateness of that approach is clear. The dialogue
is ongoing and the European Union will play its full
role in helping to define a long-term solution.

Finally, the ideal of peace that the European Union
is seeking today to extend beyond its borders is already
at work in its immediate environment. The European
Union plays its role at the heart of the European
continent: in the Balkans, a region once ravaged by war.
While disturbances marred recent days in a number of
cities in Bosnia and Herzegovina, it is for the Union to
continue its efforts to bring stabilization and economic
development to that country. Promoting bilateral
dialogue between Serbia and Kosovo, the European
Union offers them an opportunity to find their place in
a space that is beyond them. Only that perspective will
allow them to turn the page on conflict once and for all.

In addition, following a decision by the European
Council in December, the first intergovernmental
conference, which opened Serbia's accession negotiations,
was held on 21 January. Serbia now has everything
it needs to join the European Union. Similarly, the
Commission was authorized to open talks with Kosovo
to negotiate a stabilization and association agreement.

I conclude by saying that this particular work by
the European Union resulted three years ago in the
adoption of General Assembly resolution 65/276, which
establishes the place of the European Union as a partner
and friend of the United Nations.

In paying tribute to the work of Baroness Catherine
Ashton over the past four years, I also want to emphasize
that the European Union is more than simply a regional
organization. It is the pillar of a coherent and effective
international system. It is a group of States that have
embarked upon an undertaking without precedent and
without parallel.

