The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Nigeria.

1, too, would like to thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe for
his very detailed briefing on the current situation in the
Middle East. It is clear that, in the weeks following the
tragic events of 31 May, important lessons have been
learned by all parties. While the incident and its
consequences are most regrettable, we welcome the
decision of the Israeli authorities to ease the
restrictions on goods entering the Gaza Strip by land.
Commendable as this step is, we believe that a
complete and unconditional lifting of the ban is
imperative to bringing an end to the humanitarian crisis
that has resulted from the Gaza blockade. The blockade
is indeed a collective punishment meted out on
innocent people in Gaza, and we hope Israel will live
up to its obligations under international humanitarian
law.

We commend the positive role played by the
Egyptian authorities in averting yet another
confrontation by allowing an aid vessel to unload its
cargo at Al-Arish, from where the goods were
transported in trucks to the Rafa crossing into Gaza.
We encourage such prudence and circumspection by all
sides in handling similar situations in the future to
avert the use of force.

We note Israel's decision to commission a panel
of inquiry led by retired Israeli Supreme Court Justice
Jacob Turkel to investigate the flotilla incident. It will
be necessary for the panel in its work to meet
international standards of independence and
transparency, as envisaged in the presidential statement
of 1 June (S/PRST/2010/9). The findings of the panel
should aim to command credibility and legitimacy.
Indeed, there is scope for Israel to consider the well-
meaning offer of the Secretary-General to facilitate an
impartial and independent investigation of the flotilla
incident.

While the past few months have been testing
times in the region, the next few months may prove
even more trying. The demolition of Palestinian homes
last week and the approval of the new settlement in
East Jerusalem will no doubt inflame passion and
reaction. Therefore we renew our call on Israel to
refrain from deliberate acts of provocation. In the same
vein, we urge the Palestinians to exercise restraint and
also guard against inflammatory rhetoric as well as acts
of Violence. Mutual confidence is what the two sides
need in order to proceed to direct talks, building on the
gains of recent rounds of proximity talks. Time is fast
running out, and faith in the hope of attaining a two-
State solution within 24 months, as envisaged by the
Middle East Quartet statement of 19 March 2010 in
Moscow, is gradually eroding.

In order to recapture the momentum, we call on
all interlocutors, including the Arab League, not to
waver in their determination to achieve a lasting peace
in the Middle East. In this respect, we welcome the
efforts of the Middle East Envoy, Senator George
Mitchell, to hold further talks between Israel and the
Palestinians. We also welcome the Visit of Catherine
Ashton to the region, undertaken in an effort to ease
the distribution of humanitarian aid in Gaza.

The continued detention of Gilad Shalit without
access to visitors does not serve any useful purpose for
the peace process. On the contrary, it fuels mistrust and
heightens animosity. His unconditional release would
create a new atmosphere conducive to peace. Indeed, a
prisoner exchange between the Israeli and Palestinian
authorities would go a long way towards easing
tensions and building much-needed confidence.

Now more than ever, the parties to this dispute
need to demonstrate their undivided commitment to
peace. They must remove all obstacles to the
resumption of direct negotiations to resolve the
outstanding permanent status issues.

The Council, for its part, should continue its
supportive role in the peace process, fostering security
and stability within the occupied Palestinian territory.

For our part, we shall remain firmly committed to
the goal of seeing a secure State of Israel living side by
side in peace, harmony and security with an
independent State of Palestine with recognized borders.
While peace in the Middle East is attainable, it must be
underpinned by sustained political will and
commitment. The Middle East needs peace, and so
does the rest of the world.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Egypt.

