Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I would
first like to thank Mr. Herve' Ladsous and Mr. Staffan
de Mistura for their briefings. I also welcome Deputy
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan Jawed
Ludin, whom I also thank for his briefing. Allow me to
make the following remarks.

We would like to reiterate our concern over the
continued prevalence of difficult security conditions
through Afghanistan, which is the main source of
concern for Afghans and the international community.
We also condemn the civilian casualties and the attacks
that have targeted Afghan and international forces and
staff of the United Nations and other international
organizations, particularly humanitarian organizations.
We call upon all parties to fully abide by the rules of
international humanitarian law.

Lebanon is convinced that a successful solution
for Afghanistan requires two basic elements.

The first is national reconciliation among all
sectors of Afghan society, because the future and the
destiny of the Afghan people will depend upon
coexistence and shared governance and
responsibilities. Experience has proven that eliminating
any sector of society is impossible and that diversity
within the framework of national unity is the genuine
formula for peace. Therefore, my country calls for
successful confidence-building measures among the
relevant stakeholders in order to reinvigorate dialogue
and reconciliation, especially following the
assassination of the former President and head of the
High Peace Council, Burhanuddin Rabbani.

Secondly, strengthened bilateral and multilateral
relations between Afghanistan and its neighbouring
countries, based upon good-neighbourliness and
mutual trust for the sovereignty and independence of
States, would contribute towards ensuring sustainable
security and stability of Afghanistan and its
surrounding countries, as well as economic integration.
It would also help to put an end to the two scourges of
the drug trade and terrorism.

On the other hand, in the light of the Secretary-
General's report, Lebanon welcomes the efforts made
to improve socio-economic development, enhance
transparency, combat corruption and to eliminate
illiteracy, in particular among Afghan women. Such
efforts will facilitate realization of the requirements of
a modern, democratic State and long-term stability.

However, my country is concerned by the reports
of widespread mistreatment and torture of detainees
and the exploitation and increasing incidence of killing
and maiming of children. We call upon the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan to continue
to exert its utmost effort to end those violations.

Lebanon welcomes what was agreed upon at the
Istanbul Conference for Afghanistan, which was held
on 2 November and which resulted in the adoption of
the Istanbul Process on Regional Security and
Cooperation for a Secure and Stable Afghanistan. The
Istanbul Conference affirmed the active, regional
vision that forms the basis for enhanced cooperation in
the region on many issues, especially with regard to
security.

We also welcome the commitments made by the
international community and the Afghan Government
in the Bonn Conference held at the beginning of the
month, aimed at the peace process, regional
cooperation, governance, security and development.

It is important for the international community to
continue to support Afghanistan after completion of the
transfer of security responsibilities to Afghan
authorities in 2014 in a manner that will guarantee
Afghanistan's territorial integrity and independence
while continuing to strengthen its capabilities and
ensure prosperity.

In conclusion, Lebanon would like to express its
genuine appreciation for the efforts of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Staffan de
Mistura and the rest of the United Nations staff who
have worked under extremely difficult conditions to
serve Afghanistan. Mr. De Mistura had previously
served in Lebanon and Iraq and has demonstrated the
same level of dedication and effort in his service to
achieve the laudable objectives of the United Nations.
We wish him every success in his new duties. We also
wish his successor, Mr. Jan Kubis, every success.

