Mr. Pavlyuk: Let me join others in expressing
sincere condolences to and solidarity with the people
of Haiti at this tragic moment.

On behalf of the Secretary General of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), I would like to thank the Chinese presidency
and all members of the Security Council for inviting
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe to this important thematic debate. This is a
timely debate and a useful follow-up to the highly
stimulating retreat with heads of regional organizations
organized by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon over the
past two days.

With 56 participating States, the OSCE is the
most inclusive security organization in the Euro-
Atlantic and Eurasian region, recognized since 1993 as
a regional organization under Chapter VIII of the
United Nations Charter. Later this year, the OSCE will
mark the thirty-fifth anniversary of its founding
document, the Helsinki Final Act, and, with this, of its
signature concept of cooperative and comprehensive
security, which encompasses the politico-military,
economic, environmental and human dimensions.

As a regional organization, the OSCE has been a
long-standing partner of the United Nations in the
maintenance of international peace and security. It
contributes to United Nations efforts in two important
ways. First, the OSCE actively promotes among its
own participating States the ratification of relevant
United Nations conventions and the implementation of
Security Council resolutions, such as those on
combating terrorism and the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction, in particular resolution 1540
(2004); in some areas, the OSCE adopts additional
commitments complementary to those of the United
Nations. Secondly, the OSCE complements the work of
the United Nations in conflict prevention, crisis
management and post-conflict rehabilitation, in some
cases taking the lead in facilitating the settlement of
unresolved conflicts in its region, such as the Nagorno-
Karabakh and Transnistrian conflicts.

Over the past two years, three issues in particular
have tested the OSCE-United Nations partnership in
maintaining international peace and security. In
Georgia, the OSCE and the United Nations worked
together for many years before August 2008 in seeking
to promote peaceful conflict resolution and long-term
stability. After August 2008, the two organizations
underwent in parallel the withdrawal of their field
presences. Since October of that year, the OSCE and
the United Nations, together with the European Union,
have co-chaired of the Geneva discussions. Despite
enduring challenges on the ground, we are making
progress, due in large part to our close cooperation.

In Kosovo, the OSCE mission has continued to
implement its mandate, based on Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999). It has helped to ensure stability
in Kosovo and the continuity of the international
presence there after its restructuring.

Beyond the borders of its participating States, the
OSCE has been contributing, within its mandate
defined by the 2007 Ministerial Council decision in
Madrid, to the United Nations-led international effort
in assisting Afghanistan. Last year, the OSCE Office
for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights
deployed, in close cooperation with the United Nations
Electoral Assistance Division and the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, an election support
team, following up on similar efforts in 2004 and 2005.
The OSCE has also focused on enhancing the capacity
of Afghanistan to manage its borders with its Central
Asian neighbours, including through the training of
Afghan personnel, at the OSCE Border Management
Staff College opened in Dushanbe, Tajikistan, in May.

In 2010, the OSCE will continue to work closely
with the United Nations on these and many other
common challenges, such as arms control and
confidence- and security-building measures;
transnational threats and challenges, including
combating terrorism; economic and environmental
challenges, including energy security and the
protection of the Aral Sea; tolerance and
non-discrimination; and human rights and fundamental
freedoms, as well as democracy and the rule of law.

Tomorrow, Secretary of State and Foreign
Minister of Kazakhstan Kanat Saudabayev will address
the OSCE Permanent Council meeting in Vienna at
which he will formally inaugurate the 2010 OSCE
chairmanship of Kazakhstan. In three weeks from now,
on 5 February, he will address this body to outline the
priorities of the 2010 OSCE Kazakh chairmanship. I
believe that this established annual address by the
OSCE Chairperson-in-Office is also of value to the
members of the Security Council, as it provides them
with first-hand information on the situation in the
OSCE area.

The year 2010 is particularly significant for
European security, for the OSCE, and for OSCE
cooperation with the United Nations. For the first time,
the OSCE is chaired by a Central Asian State. Central
Asia traditionally has been a region of close OSCE-
United Nations cooperation - from addressing the
conflict in Tajikistan in the early 1990s to assisting
States of the region in addressing their diverse needs
today.

This year, the OSCE will take forward the
renewed dialogue on the future of European security.
The so-called Corfu Process was given strong political
impetus by OSCE foreign ministers at the Ministerial
Council meeting in Athens in December. The ministers
also noted with interest the proposal by Kazakhstan to
hold an OSCE summit in 2010 and tasked the
Permanent Council to engage in exploratory
consultations to determine the extent of progress on the
OSCE agenda and to inform their decisions.

In line with the ministerial decision on furthering
the Corfu Process, the dialogue will also provide an
opportunity to review existing mechanisms of
cooperation and to examine possibilities for
strengthening further the OSCE's relations with the
United Nations and other international, regional and
subregional organizations on the basis of the 1999
Platform for Cooperative Security. The OSCE remains
fully committed to strengthening cooperation with the
United Nations and to providing assistance to the
Security Council.

Maintaining international peace and security also
requires close cooperation and coordination among all
organizations at the regional level, as well as the
exchange of information and experience between
regions. In this spirit, the OSCE maintains active
dialogue with its Mediterranean and Asian partners for
cooperation - including Japan, currently a member of
the Security Council - and last year was particularly
happy to welcome Australia as the twelfth partner for
cooperation, thereby bringing a new Asia-Pacific
perspective to our deliberations. In addition, the OSCE
has extensively exchanged experiences with regional
organizations in other parts of the world, many of
which are represented in this Chamber. Also in that
context, the OSCE strongly welcomes this thematic
debate.

