Mr. Neewoor (Mauritius): We thank you,
honourable Minister, for presiding over this important
meeting today. We also welcome the Minister of
International Development of Norway and thank her
for her participation in the discussion today.

We wish to thank Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
and Dr. Peter Piot, Executive Director of the Joint
United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS)
for their important briefings this morning.

The open meeting of the Security Council today
on the theme "The responsibility of the Security
Council in the maintenance of international peace and
security: HIV/AIDS and international peacekeeping
operations" is a timely event, in our View, for two
distinct reasons. First, the AIDS pandemic continues to
take a heavy toll of human lives daily across the world,
leaving in its wake destitution and despair in millions
of homes. The HIV/AIDS tragedy has afflicted the
African continent more severely than anywhere else.
Communities have been wiped out wholesale; valuable
human resources so essential for the social and
economic development of nations have fallen victim,
leaving behind voids not easy to fill. I can only
reiterate what has been said on so many occasions
before - that African Governments need a much larger
measure of international support and assistance as they
grapple relentlessly with the deadly AIDS pandemic
with their limited resources.

In July last year the Security Council adopted
resolution 1308 (2000), in which the impact of
HIV/AIDS on societies and nations was brought into
focus, and several measures have been recommended
to be taken by relevant United Nations agencies and at
national levels aimed at containing the pandemic. It
also addresses the risk factor for men and women
deployed in United Nations peacekeeping operations.
We commend all the efforts undertaken by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations in creating
awareness among its personnel on the seriousness of
the issue. However, these efforts need to be further
intensified, as well as complemented by the initiatives
of the troop-contributing countries to better prepare
their troops by training them in and informing them on
the preventive measures necessary in the field.

More importantly, the resolution recognizes for
the first time that HIV/AIDS has impacts on the
stability and security of nations and societies. The
work carried out by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Medical Support Unit in tandem has
been most encouraging not only from a training point
of view, but as a joint effort to act as a facilitator in
testing and counselling individuals affected by the
virus. Obviously, we know that there remains a great
deal to do, as mentioned both by Mr. Guehenno and Dr.
Piot today.

The second reason why we regard today's open
meeting of the Security Council, devoted to the AIDS
issue, as timely is that it is an opportunity for us to
express our appreciation and thanks to Ambassador
Richard Holbrooke, on this day when he completes his
tenure as Permanent Representative, not only for his
initiative of placing the HIV/AIDS question on the
Security Council agenda for the first time in January
2000, during the United States Council presidency, but
also for the impetus he provided, under which
President Clinton, Vice-President Al Gore and the
United States Congress came forward to commit
substantial new funds to help fight HIV/AIDS. In this
regard, we recall particularly the order signed by
President Clinton last year to encourage the United
States pharmaceutical industry to bring down the costs
of medicine for treatment of HIV/AIDS sold in Africa.

Ambassador Holbrooke undoubtedly has made a
significant contribution to raising awareness about
HIV/AIDS through his action at the United Nations.
We thank him warmly as we wish him well in his
future endeavours. We thank him, finally, for having
been a good friend of Africa and my country during his
tenure and for his very frank and candid statement in
this Chamber this morning, covering a host of very
important issues of concern to the international
community.

Fortunately, there are drugs today that help in the
treatment of HIV/AIDS, and the use of such drugs has
already brought about a marked decline in the
incidence of AIDS in the industrialized nations. The
initiative President Clinton has taken to help bring
down the costs of drugs in Africa for HIV/AIDS
treatment may not necessarily make the drugs cheap
enough and affordable for all in the near future, but it
is an important step in that direction. Similar initiatives
need to be taken to cover all developing nations and,
more importantly, to ensure access by all HIV Victims
to life-saving medication at reasonable costs. We also
believe that international financial institutions that
have the resources at their disposal need to do a lot
more, in concert with the United Nations system, in the
global battle against HIV/AIDS.

