Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
thanks the United Kingdom and Jordan for having
prepared resolution 2201 (2015). We are pleased that,
with the constructive engagement of Council members,
the text could be negotiated quickly and unanimously
adopted. We believe, indeed, that the very difficult
circumstances currently facing Yemen necessitated the
expression by the Council of at least three messages.

The first is that of the full ability of the Council
to act in unision in support of the Yemeni transition.
Between 2011 and 2014, in a turbulent regional
environment, Yemen demonstrated its exemplary
ability to conduct a peaceful and orderly incremental
transition to democracy, with the support of the Gulf
Cooperation Council and the Security Council. Since
July 2014, this positive momentum has been reversed to
an alarming extent. While the transition was entering
its final phase - not only the most important but also
the most sensitive - Yemen has gradually become
mired in political and security instability that threatens
to negate the efforts of the Yemeni people and the
international community. It was essential, in this very
delicate phase, that we remain united alongside the
Yemeni people.

The second message is stresses the urgent need
for the Yemeni parties to engage in the good-faith
negotiations facilitated by the United Nations to
resolve their differences through a political solution.
We recall, in this respect, our full support for the good
offices mission conducted by the Special Adviser to
the Secretary-General, Mr. Jamal Benomar. Through
resolution 2201 (2015), the international community
unequivocally rejects the use of force to achieve
political goals and unilateral acts that contradict the
search for a negotiated solution. Instead, it calls on all
parties in Yemen to respect the rules of the democratic
game and to define, in the framework of an inclusive
process, a consensual political solution that respects
previous agreements, including the GCC Initiative and
Implementation Mechanism, the conclusions of the
National Dialogue Conference, the Peace and National
Partnership Agreement and its security annex. As
the resolution points out, while previous agreements
have not been respected, this solution must be strictly
implemented.

Lastly, the resolution sends a firm message in
favour of the unity, integrity and stability of Yemen.
The political vacuum in the country promotes the
manifestation of violent discord that threatens its
integrity. This is true not only politically, with the
divisions that I have just mentioned, and at the regional
level with the disturbing ascendency of secessionist
tendencies, but also in terms of security, with the
strengthening of the threat posed by Al-Qaida in the
Arabian Peninsula. France is particularly concerned
about this aspect in the light of the violent attacks
sponsored by that terrorist organization in early
January.

While the extension of a situation without inclusive
political solution crisis reinforces terrorism, France
renews its commitment to a resumption of the political
transition that would restore the conditions of the
anti-terrorist cooperation.

