Mr. Barro (Senegal) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, Mr. Stephen O'Brien, for introducing
the thirty-ninth report of the Secretary-General on
the humanitarian situation in Syria (S/2017/445) and
for his enlightening briefing. Through him, Senegal
again pays tribute to the ongoing sacrifices made by
the emergency medical personnel acting on behalf of
Syrian civilians, who are suffering through their sixth
year of conflict.

My delegation recalls the devastating impact of the
conflict on the children of Syria. In particular, I should
like to focus on the fate of the 2.4 million children who
have been displaced from their homes and the 280,000
children who still living in besieged areas. In that
regard, we echo the appeal launched by the Committee
on the Rights of the Child, calling for an investigation
into crimes committed against children, including
through active cooperation with existing mechanisms,
such as the Fact-finding Mission in the Syrian Arab
Republic, the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism, the Independent International Commission
of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic, and the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
on international crimes committed in the Syrian Arab
Republic.

Despite the efforts under way, the cessation of
hostilities triggered by the Astana process, which
initially elicited hope and optimism, remains fragile.
Unfortunately, we are still witnessing a large number of
Syrian Victims, in addition to the ongoing destruction
of public infrastructure, such as schools, health-care
facilities and markets, in violation of international
humanitarian law and resolution 2286 (2016). The
United Nations has registered 30 attacks against health-
care facilities and two against schools.

Despite the current difficult situation, the
United Nations and its partners continue to provide
humanitarian assistance in extremely difficult
conditions to the people most in need, whose numbers
have seen a substantial reduction of some 20,000 people
in 13 besieged areas of the country. However, there
still remain 624,000 people in need. In that regard, my
delegation notes that there has been an improvement
in humanitarian access to some areas that have been
besieged by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL), thanks to locally signed agreements. We remind
all parties to the conflict of their obligations under
international humanitarian law and human rights law to
ensure access to those providing assistance, including
medical supplies, in safe, unrestricted, unconditional
and unimpeded conditions via the most direct routes,
in line with the relevant Security Council resolutions.

That having been said, my delegation reiterates
its call on the relevant authorities of Syria to continue
delivering facilitation letters, which are essential to
the optimal implementation of the programmes of
the humanitarian agencies of the United Nations and
their partners. We hope that the cessation of hostilities
will spread throughout the country and that, better
yet, it will translate into a significant improvement
in the delivery of humanitarian assistance under
United Nations coordination. My delegation therefore
welcomes the efforts made by the guarantors of the
Astana process, namely, Russia, Turkey and Iran, in
particular the memorandum of understanding whereby
they are committed to creating de-escalation zones
in specific areas of the country so as to facilitate the
cessation of hostilities, humanitarian assistance and
a return to conditions conducive to the peace process
under United Nations auspices.

My delegation reiterates its encouragement to the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons,
through the Fact-Finding Mission, in its efforts to shed
light on the use of chemical weapons in the attack
on Khan Shaykhun in order to hold accountable the
perpetrators of that heinous act, whose many victims
included children. We reaffirm the priority of fighting
and violent extremism terrorism, including ISIL
and the former Al-Nusra Front, pursuant to a global
strategy that respects international humanitarian law
and relevant Security Council resolutions.

In conclusion, we reiterate our faith that a negotiated
political solution is the only way out of the crisis in
Syria, which has had devastating consequences, in
line with the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex)
and resolution 2254 (2016) and under the auspices
of the United Nations. We welcome the sixth round
of negotiations led by Special Envoy Staffan de
Mistura, which will promote the ongoing exchange of
information on pertinent issues, such as constitutional
reform, the political transition, national integrity and
the fight against terrorism.

