Mr. Garcia Moritan (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):

I would like to begin by congratulating the Russian
Federation on having assumed the presidency of the
Security Council for October and by thanking it for the
invitation to take part in the open debate on a topic that
is so important for the international community - the
situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question.

Argentina is deeply concerned by the conflicts
taking place in the Middle East, which have generated
a great humanitarian crisis, the growth of terrorism
and the spread of fundamentalist groups. My country
favours a solution to the conflict through dialogue
and diplomacy; respect for international law and the
sovereignty, independence, national unity and territorial
integrity of States; the rejection of the acquisition of
territory by force and trust in the constructive role and
persuasive power of the international community to find
paths towards dialogue and progress in negotiations.

Regarding the situation in the Syrian Arab Republic,
Argentina is deeply concerned about the humanitarian
situation in the country and condemns all acts of
violence, in particular against the civilian population.
We regret the fact that the Security Council has been
unable to reach an agreement to adopt measures with
a view to establishing a ceasefire and ensuring access
to humanitarian assistance, especially in Aleppo. To
that end, Argentina and 69 other Member States have
asked the President of the General Assembly to hold
a meeting to discuss the item. We anxiously await
the informal meeting of the General Assembly to be
convened tomorrow.

The situation of Syrian refugees is particularly
alarming. In May, the Argentine Republic dispatched
a contingent of White Helmets to Lebanon in order to
offer their assistance to a refugee camp. Likewise, as
President Macri announced at the Summit for Refugees
and Migrants on 20 September, Argentina expressed
its intention to receive 3,000 Syrian refugees with the
financial support, technical assistance and logistical
backing of the international community.

Argentina is also deeply concerned by the deadlock
in the negotiations between Israel and Palestine. We
support a just, comprehensive and lasting peace on the
basis of the two-State solution, with the State of Israel
and the Palestinian State coexisting side by side in
peace and security on the basis of the 1967 borders and
other decisiosn reached by the parties in the negotiating
process. Likewise, we acknowledge the right of the
State of Israel to live in peace alongside its neighbours
within safe and internationally recognized borders, as
well as the right ofthe Palestinian people to establish an
independent and viable State recognized by all nations.

My country reiterates its concern over the persistent
and ongoing expansion of illegal Israeli settlements in
the occupied Palestinian territories, and calls for an
end to such expansion. Settlements impede peace and
weaken the prospects of two States living in peace and
security, and thereby promote the perpetuation of an
unsustainable status quo. At the same time, Palestinian
leaders must honestly address Israeli security concerns.
Hamas and other Palestinian groups must end
incitements and attacks against Israeli citizens. Rocket
launches from the Gaza Strip against Israel must also
stop immediately. My country strongly condemns all
terrorist attacks and is therefore convinced that just as
there is no military solution to the conflict, no solution
can be imposed by terrorist methods.

Argentina reaffirms the special status ofJerusalem,
in accordance with the relevant United Nations
resolutions, and rejects any unilateral measure to alter
that status. My country believes that the holy city must
be a peaceful place where people can come together,
and that unrestricted access to the holy sites must be
ensured for the three main monotheistic religions of
Judaism, Christianity and Islam.

Peace is possible only through dialogue and
negotiation that respect the parameters acknowledged
by the international community, namely, the two-
State solution on the basis of relevant United Nations
resolutions, the agreements signed between the parties,
the Quartet road map, the Arab Peace Imitative,
a mutually acceptable solution to the question of
Jerusalem, and ajust resolution to the refugee question.

On 28 September, we were saddened to learn of
the passing of the former President of Israel, Shimon
Peres - a statesman who worked tirelessly for a two-
State solution that would allow Israel to live in peace
with Palestinians and the other countries ofthe region.
His commitment was acknowledged when he received
the Nobel Peace Prize, along with Yitzhak Rabin and
Yasser Arafat. Similarly, Israel and Palestine must
work together to build peace, while the international
community must not shirk its responsibility to work
jointly on a solution to the decades-long conflict.

