We thank Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock and Special Envoy Geir Pedersen for their briefings. My delegation is following with serious concern the increased coronavirus disease (COVID-19) cases across the country. We also note with concern that the latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/1031) indicates that 92 percent of the confirmed cases are not traceable. With limited health-care facilities, it is very challenging to manage all of the confirmed and suspected cases, including preventing the widespread transmission of the virus among communities. In addition, more health-care workers are reported to have contracted the virus, thus further reducing the capacity on the ground. The already vulnerable Syrian people are not only facing the pandemic, but also dealing with the impact of an economic downturn, accompanied by increased food insecurity and the risk of acute malnutrition, not to mention having to live every day surrounded by the threat of violence in certain areas of the country. In that context, my delegation wishes to highlight three pertinent points. First, despite these challenges, enhanced humanitarian responses are crucial. Indonesia is pleased to note that the United Nations and its humanitarian partners are continuing to address the logistical challenges following the reduction of the cross-border operation. We were fully aware that the operation with the one remaining border crossing would not be perfect, however we hope that with several adjustments, such as the expansion of the hub and the United Nations-funded road rehabilitation project, more humanitarian aid can be delivered through the Bab Al-Hawa crossing. All cross-border and cross-line modalities should be explored, particularly in the north- west and north-east. These humanitarian operations must definitely be increased, and the remaining gaps addressed ahead of the winter season. We would also like to stress the crucial needs of the people in the Al-Hol and Rukban camps, including by addressing the water shortages around Al-Bab, in northern Aleppo, and the regular disruption of the Allouk water station, which affect many people in Al-Hasakah governorate. Once again, Indonesia echoes the appeal of Under-Secretary-General Lowcock and urges all relevant parties to ensure immediate, safe and unimpeded humanitarian access for United Nations humanitarian convoys to all areas and populations in need across Syria. We call for no politicization, only saving lives. Secondly, sustaining calm is one of the vital priorities. We are alarmed about the ongoing violations of the ceasefire agreement in the Idlib de-escalation zone. Although the ceasefire largely continues to hold, tensions risk leading to an escalation. We regret recent military activities in Idlib and urge all parties to cease attacks. We echo the Secretary-General's call to establish a nationwide ceasefire, pursuant to resolution 2254 (2015), and to contain destabilizing incidents. The Syrian people at least need a non-violent environment to effectively address their current situation of an economic crisis and a pandemic. Humanitarian activities depend on all parties' firm commitment to respect the ceasefire agreement and exercise maximum restraint, as well as to abide by international humanitarian law in order to protect civilians and civilian infrastructure. Thirdly, it is imperative to advance the political process, pursuant to resolution 2254 (2015). In that regard, we thank Special Envoy Pedersen for continuing his active engagement with all key parties, including during his recent trip to Damascus. I echo what Special Envoy Pedersen stated earlier with regard to the Constitutional Committee - that it is important for Syrian parties and international players to build trust and confidence step by step and gradually develop a wider political process to implement resolution 2254 (2015), while at the same time making sure that all parties are aiming for substantive and concrete results for the sake of the Syrian people. Indonesia believes that, at this stage, the Constitutional Committee needs to advance its substantive work, facilitated by the United Nations. We therefore sincerely hope that the Committee's next meeting, in Geneva, will soon materialize. In conclusion, I wish to reiterate that continued, good-faith cooperation and dialogue among all Syrian parties are key, and that we must always respect a Syrian- led and -owned political track.
