Mr. Mangoaela (Lesotho): Madam President, permit
me at the outset to express our deep appreciation for the
opportunity afforded us to share our views with the Council
on an issue that is very close to the heart of the people and
the Government of Lesotho - namely, the situation in our
sister country Angola.

We also express our appreciation for the Secretary-
General's balanced and informative report on the United
Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III).

The tragedy of Angola is the result of its being for a
long time a victim of cold-war rivalries and the resultant
destabilization. The demise of apartheid in South Africa
raised hopes for an end to Angola's agony, but that was not
to be. The people of Africa in general, and of southern
Africa in particular, would like to see the conflict in Angola
ended and the people there beginning to reconstruct their
country and their lives.

We are encouraged by the fact that, even though the
peace process has been slow, the Government has shown a
renewed determination to forge ahead with it. In this
regard, the withdrawal of its forces from Pedra do Alemao,
the start of the quartering of its rapid reaction police and
the termination of the contract of the firm "Executive
Outcomes" are evidence of a strong commitment to the
peace process and are to be welcomed. Our hope now is
that UNITA will respond in kind by beginning the
quartering of its own troops.

The Secretary-General's efforts in reminding the
parties of their obligations under the Lusaka Protocol need
to be supported and encouraged.

Angola - a country generously endowed with natural
resources whose exploitation could go a long way towards
uplifting the condition of its own people and could also
make a significant contribution to the economic
development of the region - needs to be reconstructed.
Infrastructure must be rebuilt, internally displaced people
and refugees must be resettled, social services must be
resumed and land-mines must be cleared. We call upon
the international community to spare no effort and to
ensure that the investment that has so far been made to
bring life in Angola back to normal is not dissipated.

While the impatience of the international community
with the slow progress of the peace process is
understandable, it should, however, not be allowed to
become cause for despair. We in Lesotho therefore
support the Secretary-General's recommendation that the
mandate of UNAVEM. 111 be extended for a further six
months, until 8 August 1996, in order to give our
collective endeavours in Angola a chance to succeed.

