Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish at the outset to express our honour and pleasure at
seeing you, Madam, presiding over the work of the
Security Council on this very important and sensitive
issue. Your presence, Madam Minister, in the Chair
adds honour and prestige to the excellent work being
performed by the Chilean presidency in the person of
the Permanent Representative of Chile, Ambassador
Heraldo Mufioz.

(spoke in English)
The Council has before it a comprehensive report
(S/2003/1053) submitted by the Secretary-General,
who deserves our congratulations. I would also like to
thank Mr. Olara Otunnu and Ms. Carol Bellamy for
their introductory remarks. I should add that the report
constitutes a step forward in the efforts that the United
Nations began to undertake more than 10 years ago,
when the first Independent Expert on children and
armed conflict was appointed.

Creating a world fit for children is tantamount to
guaranteeing the future of all humankind. In recent
years, United Nations efforts to focus international
attention on child-specific issues in the context of
armed conflicts have been expanding in order to
respond to the demand for action, given the seriousness
of the issue and the growing number of conflicts
affecting children in different parts of the world.

Brazil, for its part, has always attached great
importance to the promotion and protection of the
rights of the child. Over the years, negotiations
concerning the international instruments related to this
issue have been a continuous source of inspiration for
our legislators and policy makers. Brazil is fully
committed to the implementation of the Convention on
the Rights of the Child, and has recently ratified the
Optional Protocols thereto.

The situation of children continues to be
alarming, as they are preyed upon by parties to armed
conflict around the world. Their vulnerability makes
them easy victims of all sorts of abuse and gross
violations of humanitarian law. It is precisely because
the efforts of the international community to address
this problem still fall short of what is needed to end the
grievous suffering of children in armed conflict that
this issue must continue to be taken up by the United
Nations system and, most appropriately, by the
Security Council.

In order to maximize the effect of the Council's
action in this regard, it seems to our delegation that
close coordination with the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council is needed, given the
complexity of the issue, the social and economic
responsibilities of those organs and their central role in
ensuring assistance to children in need.

Indeed, the treatment to be given to the issue of
children and armed conflict will certainly benefit
greatly if the issue is squarely placed within the context
of the more general problem of children in need. This
is a task that various organs of the United Nations
system must address in the context of close
coordination and cooperation among themselves as
well as with Member States and non-governmental
organizations. Coordination among the relevant
departments of the Secretariat also should be
strengthened and continuously reviewed.

The Secretary-General's report contains
constructive elements that, further developed and duly
implemented, are capable of greatly improving the
situation. One of those elements is the provision of a
list of parties to armed conflict that recruit or use
children in conflict situations, which would seem to be
an indispensable tool for the purpose of devising
strategies to deal with the problem.

For such a list to become a more efficient
instrument, however, it must be made as precise as
possible through continuous updating and refinement.
This entails the creation of institutional mechanisms
capable of leading the process of engagement with the
parties responsible for the involvement of children in
armed conflict. Needless to say, such mechanisms
should also be reporting mechanisms. This also
includes the possibility of adding or excluding names.

As it is not possible to ascribe that responsibility
to one single agency or actor within the United Nations
family, given the uneven presence of such bodies in the
afflicted areas, such mechanisms should include, to the
extent possible, members of the Special
Representative's office, the United Nations Children's
Fund (UNICEF) and other relevant United Nations
agencies having adequate field presence in designated
areas, and child protection advisers, whose
participation in peacekeeping operations has proved
useful and is therefore deserving of expansion.

Once established, such working groups would be
able to open lines of dialogue with parties in conflict,
extract commitments regarding action plans for the
demobilization of child soldiers, and monitor
compliance. The information provided by such
mechanisms would be the basis for all further action.

Such mechanisms could also be responsible for
ensuring that special provisions for children are
included in disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes, keeping in mind the
stigmatization faced by children in armed conflict. The
handing-in of weapons should not, however, be
required for eligibility, which should be defined by
broad criteria, in order to include not only combatants,
but also those in ancillary activities. Monitoring and
follow-up of demobilized children is also necessary.
Brazil is in favour of applying a graduated and
targeted approach with regard to parties that fail to
adopt measures aimed at ending violations concerning
children and armed conflict. As to this point, the
Secretary-General has made constructive
recommendations in his report, such as the imposition
of travel restrictions on leaders and their exclusion
from Government structures and amnesty provisions; a
ban on the export or supply of small arms; a ban on
military assistance; and restrictions on the flow of
financial resources to the parties concerned.

For such measures to be implemented, they must
first rely on precise information, and, secondly, they
must be finely tuned, so as to avoid problems common
to sanctions and the conditioning of assistance, which
often delay and even prevent the provision of
humanitarian aid to those who most need it - in this
case, children trapped in situations of conflict.

Given the persistence of the problem of children
exposed to armed conflict and the need for more
developments in the field, the Security Council should
demonstrate its political will and, within the scope of
its functions and powers, take upon itself the
responsibility for maximizing the United Nations
system's response to the issue of children in armed
conflict. That is what is required if we are successfully
to prevent childhood from being a primary victim of
warfare. That is what is necessary to uphold the rights
of children and to guarantee a future in which children
can be bearers of hope and confidence as they emerge
from conflict situations.

