Mr. Serrano: Let me begin by thanking you,
Mr. President, for having invited the European Union
(EU) to this timely and important debate.

The candidate countries Turkey, Croatia and the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia; the countries
of the Stabilisation and Association Process and
potential candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro, and Serbia; as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova, Armenia, Azerbaijan and
Georgia align themselves with this statement.

Following the established practice, the full
version of the European Union statement is being
circulated. I will read out an abridged version.

At the outset, I wish to acknowledge the
important statements delivered by the Foreign Minister
of Japan, the Secretary-General, the ministers of
Afghanistan, Sierra Leone and Timor-Leste, and the
Managing Director of the World Bank. Let me also
commend you, Mr. President, for your personal
commitment to the peacebuilding cause.

The follow-up to last year's report of the
Secretary-General on peacebuilding in the immediate
aftermath of conflict (S/2009/304), the 2010
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) review, and the
ongoing reflection on United Nations peacekeeping
represent three key priority areas. The European Union
will follow and engage in these processes very closely,
and certainly in the implementation of the Secretary-
General's report and the United Nations civilian
capacity review.
On several occasions we have failed to break the
cycle of crisis and have missed windows of opportunity
for decisive action. The international community has
witnessed too many countries relapsing into conflict
within short periods of time. The figure of 30 per cent
of countries falling back into conflict within five years
of a peace agreement is unacceptable in terms of
suffering, in terms of missed opportunities and in terms
of lost investments. Reversing this trend is a shared
responsibility and something we owe the people most
affected by conflict.

Building peace is about much more than ending
war. Peacebuilding aims at building a vital bridge
between short-term crisis management and longer-term
efforts to consolidate stability by preventing the
recurrence of the conflict cycle through human
development, State-building and support to civil
society.

We have learned from our common experience
over the past decades that no single template can be
applied to complex situations in which priority areas
span the areas of peace and security, development,
humanitarian affairs, human rights and the rule of law,
including the fight against impunity.

In order to meet this daunting challenge, the
European Union believes that additional efforts should
be devoted not only to generating greater national
ownership as the foundation for peacebuilding efforts,
including by supporting increased participation by
women, but also to identifying credible priorities, to
designing coherent peacebuilding strategies, to
providing rapid, flexible and predictable financial
support, and to forging effective national, regional and
international partnerships.

The Peacebuilding Commission has the potential
to champion that agenda. The case of Sierra Leone is
an excellent example that demonstrates the PBC's
added value. The European Union is contributing
substantially to efforts there, while focusing on good
governance, the rehabilitation of priority infrastructure
and general budgetary support.

At present, the European Union is engaged
worldwide in 12 civilian and military crisis
management operations that cover a wide array of
activities. We are also cooperating actively with the
United Nations in eight different theatres.

The new structures for the management of the
EU's external relations, under the leadership of High
Representative Ashton, aim at bringing closer together
all the instruments at the EU's disposal and at
increasing the coherence of the European Union's
short-, medium- and long-term actions.

In Timor-Leste, the European Union has provided
more than $400 million since 1999 in development and
humanitarian assistance. For the period 2009 to 2013,
the European Union will continue to provide support to
the people of Timor-Leste, in the amount of
$100 million, in areas such as rural development,
health and food security, security sector reform and the
social integration of internally displaced persons.

Finally, on Afghanistan, contributions to
improving governance, electoral reform, the rule of
law, respect for human rights and Afghan institution-
building are at the heart of the European Union's
support in that country. Through its action plan, the
European Union, in cooperation with the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and other
international partners, continues to provide long-term
assistance to Afghanistan in institution building and
civilian capacity programmes, including at the sub-
national level.

Let me conclude by reiterating that we cannot fail
to meet the challenge of supporting post-conflict
countries in building lasting peace. The United
Nations, with its global legitimacy and in close
partnership and coordination with the main actors, has
a central role to play. The European Union remains
resolutely determined to actively support those
collective efforts to better assist countries in building
sustainable peace.

