Nana Effah-Apenteng (Ghana): Mr. President,
may I first congratulate you and the other members of
the delegation of the Russian Federation on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month and also commend you for having
organized this debate on contemporary threats to
international peace and security. Also, permit me once
again to congratulate the new Secretary-General on his
assumption of his high office and to express my
delegation's appreciation for his presence here with us
for the first time in the Council and for his statement.
We wish him success in his new assignment.

Globalization has thrust upon the global
community new and multifarious threats to
international peace and security of a scope and
intensity that could never have been anticipated by the
founding fathers of the United Nations. In the process
of trying to eliminate the traditional threats, the
international community has been confronted with new,
and, in some cases, more dangerous ones, which
threaten our common well-being and survival.

Understandably, our immediate priority must be
to deal with ongoing conflicts and imminent threats
such as terrorism and all forms of extremism. We must
also remain focused on the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction, small arms and light weapons, as
well as gross abuses of human rights, including ethnic
cleansing and genocide. Equally critical are the
problems of global warming and the weaponization of
outer space, which are serious potential threats and
must be kept on our radar. Nor must we lose sight of
the widening gap between the rich and poor, both
within and among nations, which is bound to have a
destabilizing effect on international peace and security.

In short, threats to international peace and
security cannot be dealt with piecemeal through a
patchwork of initiatives that merely address the
symptoms without really touching on the root causes.
The realities of today require that the Council pursue
its mandate within a comprehensive conceptual
framework of peace and security. It is through such an
approach that the Security Council can provide
leadership that is inspiring, effective and credible in
the process of tackling the problems that threaten to
compromise the survival of humankind.

Development must be an important component of
our collective security system. Combating poverty and
improving education and health care will save millions
of lives as well as strengthen the capacity of States to
combat terrorism, organized crime and prevent other
threats. If development is deemed so crucial to
security, then more determined and focused efforts
should be made to monitor the implementation of
internationally agreed goals, including the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs). We encourage the

appropriate United Nations organs, departments and
agencies to redouble their efforts in helping Member
States to achieve those goals.

It has long been recognized that in dealing with
conflicts, more emphasis should be placed on conflict
prevention. We acknowledge the substantive progress
that has been made through United Nations
peacekeeping operations, especially in Africa, and in
laying a foundation to deal effectively with conflicts.
To consolidate peace throughout Africa and in conflict-
ravaged countries in other areas, it is imperative to
emphasize that a coordinated, coherent and integrated
approach must be taken to post-conflict peacebuilding,
with a view to achieving sustainable development. We
believe that this is precisely what the Peacebuilding
Commission is supposed to help us achieve.

Unquestionably, global terrorism is one of the
foremost threats to international peace and security
today. Terrorism, a constantly mutating phenomenon,
represents an assault on the fundamental principles of
law, human rights, and the peaceful settlement of
disputes, on the basis of which the United Nations was
founded. In accepting that terrorism cannot be
justified, irrespective of the reasons behind it, we must
be careful not to ignore grievances such as political
oppression and alienation, which breed terrorism. For
the international community to defeat terrorism and the
threat it poses, we must act with unflinching
determination to resolve the political disputes and
long-festering conflicts which generate support for
terrorism.

We recognize that the Security Council has
played a commendable role in this field through its
landmark resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001), 1540
(2004) and 1624 (2005). However, much more remains
to be done in providing technical assistance to help
Member States comply with those resolutions and
implement the strategy that has recently been adopted
by the General Assembly. Moreover, we are so close to,
yet so far from, completing the cycle by concluding a
comprehensive convention on international terrorism.

Transnational organized crime also has the
potential to heighten the risks posed by all the other
threats. Terrorists, for instance, use organized criminal
groups to move money, men and materials around the
globe. Governments and rebels sell natural resources
through organized criminal groups to finance wars. In
the process, the capacity of States to establish the rule

of law is weakened. Combating organized crime
therefore becomes essential in fighting hideous trans-
border crimes such as trafficking in human beings.

Preventing the spread and use of weapons of
mass destruction by States and, more importantly, by
non-State actors is imperative to ensure a more secure
world. The challenge lies in taking effective measures
to reduce the demand for such weapons and curb the
supply of materials as well as the technology for their
production. We therefore regret the failure of the 2005
Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) to adopt
any agreement. Despite recent controversy related to
the issue of nuclear proliferation, the NPT still enjoys
near-universal membership, and we remain convinced
of its viability and integrity as a sure way of containing
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.

A related issue is the threat that the proliferation
of small arms poses to international peace and security.
With a reported circulation of about 40 million
worldwide, small arms have become the real weapons
of mass destruction in many countries, especially -
paradoxically - in Africa, where such weapons are not
manufactured. We welcome the Council's efforts in
encouraging Member States to fully support the
recommendations contained in the Programme of
Action adopted at the July 2001 United Nations
Conference.

We are also encouraged by the adoption by the
General Assembly in 2005 of an international
instrument to identify and trace illicit small arms.
However, our commitment to dealing with the threats
posed by such weapons has been seriously undermined
by the failure of the 2006 United Nations Conference
to Review Progress Made in the Implementation of the
Programme of Action. Our confidence has also been
shaken by the failure of the Council, despite the
strenuous efforts made by some of its present members
and States that were members in the immediate past, to
agree on a draft resolution on this issue last year.

On balance, it is evident that the Security Council
has played a commendable role in dealing with both
imminent and potential threats to international peace
and security. But it should be noted that, despite the
Council's important role in the maintenance of
international peace and security, it is only one of the
many organs and the wide array of international bodies
and entities dealing with some aspects of the threats

that have been identified. It is of cardinal importance,
therefore, that, in discharging its obligations under the
Charter, the Council endeavour to foster a genuine
partnership with some of those entities, such as the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), the African Union and the European
Union, which have so far proved active in this field.

It behoves the Council also to look for more
creative ways of actively engaging and involving in its
work the wider membership of the United Nations, the
non-members, which are expected to comply with its
binding resolutions and decisions, including the
generic legislation of the Council. Such an approach,
we believe, will bring more effectiveness and success
to the Council's work.

Lastly, we believe that the time has come to
expand the membership of the Council.

