Mr. Ileka (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): Allow me first of all to discharge a
pleasant duty and to express my great pleasure at
seeing you, Mr. President, preside over the Security
Council. Indeed, Portugal, your country, has close and
centuries-old links with the political and cultural area
to which my country, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, belongs - old and close ties, as I said, in
particular with the kingdom that gave its name to two
countries in the Central African subregion, that is, both
Congos - Congo-Brazzaville and Congo-Kinshasa.
In the same vein, I would like to acknowledge all
the merits of your predecessor, the representative of
Nigeria, and thank her for her excellent presidency of
the Security Council last month and to say to her that
all Africa was proud during Nigeria's presidency.

I would also like to thank Ambassador Roger
Meece, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for the Democratic Republic of the Congo, for
the report that he has just presented, which lays out the
current situation in my country (S/2011/656). I am
grateful to him for the excellent reports that he
regularly presents to the Council. Indeed, Ambassador
Meece has described the situation in my country. The
Democratic Republic of the Congo greatly appreciates
his conclusions and recommendations and hopes that
the Security Council will support Ambassador Meece
and give his report the appropriate follow-up.

The Ambassador has also described the state of
preparations for the elections. I dare to think that, with
the expertise of the Independent National Electoral
Commission (INEC) and with the assistance provided
to it by the Government, the United Nations,
multilateral and bilateral partners and the various
non-governmental organizations, the INEC will be up
to the task and will not miss its historic rendezvous
with history in 20 days' time.

In general, and all things being equal, I can
affirm, if I am not mistaken, that within the same
timeframe, the electoral campaign of this year 2011 is
much calmer than that of 2005-2006. It is true that
tensions exist between certain candidates for the
National Assembly. For example, in Kindu recently, the
offices of two candidates, both claiming the
presidential majority, were burned by respective
supporters. Likewise, there have been tensions in
Kinshasa, Katanga province and Kasai Province, more
precisely in Mbuji-Mayi, where a 13-year-old girl was
killed at home, in her house, by a stray bullet after a
police officer had shot in the air to disperse
demonstrators. In that case, the perpetrator of the shot
was arrested and an investigation of his superiors was
opened.

Moreover, both provincial and national
authorities are sparing no effort in urging militants of
the various parties to act with further restraint, not to
turn to violence and to encourage political actors to
engage in responsible speech. It is important that each
and every candidate understand that the elections are
not an end in themselves, but a step towards
consolidating the young Congolese democracy.

Some acts, such as the affair of the stealth
airplane in Kisangani, could recall tragedies of King
Ubu and make one smile, but words that are
completely out of place, calls to insurrection and
incitement to hatred and violence should be completely
banned from all discourse. It is in that sense that the
precautionary step taken by the Government last
Sunday to cut a media signal in Kinshasa must be
understood. Moreover, that same channel was
suspended this very morning by the Audio-Visual and
Communications High Council, as the spectre of
Rwanda and its thousand hills is not far away.
Unfortunately, it seems to remain alive in certain
Congolese politicians.

In order to maintain calm and civil peace in my
country, it is important that the Security Council and
the international community condemn that kind of
agitation and its reprehensible words with the greatest
11-58366
energy. Not to condemn and not to convey to all the
appropriate messages of peace and decency will be
interpreted by extremists of all sides as a license to set
in motion the spiral of violence.

Far from trying to be alarmist, I believe that when
we see the first signs and harbingers of a crisis that
could escalate, it is better to prevent it than to remedy
it later. We must act quickly so that each and every
person does not doubt the will of the Government and
its multilateral and bilateral partners to resolutely take
to its end, without disastrous procrastination, the
electoral process that will shape the Congo of
tomorrow.

