Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to thank Mr. Ian Martin,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Nepal, for his detailed briefing about the latest
developments in the situation in Nepal. In recent times,
the political situation in that country has undergone
some important, positive changes that we welcome. We
are convinced that they will have an important positive
impact on the course of the peace process.

The holding of free democratic elections was
followed by a peaceful transition from a monarchic to a
republican form of Government. The election of the
president of the country is to be held on 19 July. We
hope that that is going to be another important
milestone in the development of the peace process.

We expect that the 25 June agreement between
the political parties of the country will have
meaningful importance for efforts to move forward the
democratic process. The signing of that agreement was
possible thanks to the willingness of the main political
forces to engage in constructive joint work. We hope
that a similar spirit of cooperation and compromise
will be demonstrated by the Nepalese parties in their
approach to resolving other matters in carrying out the
tasks of the peace process.

After the elections to the Constituent Assembly,
the main part of the United Nations Mission in Nepal
(UNMIN) mandate was successfully completed. I
would like to take this opportunity to thank the head of
the Mission, Mr. Martin, and all of his colleagues, for
their fruitful and highly professional work in carrying
out their mandate. We support the request of Nepal to
extend the Mission in Nepal for six further months in a
downsized form, and we agree with the Mission's
mandate to monitor the implementation of measures
taken in respect of the arms and armed personnel of the
parties and to assist the parties in implementing their
agreement on the management of the arms of the
parties.
The report of the Secretary-General reaffirms the
fact that the presence of the Mission has great potential
to give Nepal assistance in the area that they have
delineated. We endorse the recommendation of the
Secretary-General regarding the gradual, stage-by-
stage downsizing of the strength of the Mission. On the
whole, we take an optimistic view of the prospects for
further progress in the peace process in Nepal, the
main responsibility for which continues to be borne by
the leaders and people of that country.

