The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of the United Kingdom.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2013/350), Special Representative Jan
Kubis for his informative briefing this morning, and
Ambassador Zahir Tanin for his substantive comments.

Let me begin my remarks by condemning the recent
attacks in Kabul and elsewhere in the country. We have
seen multiple deaths and injuries of civilians, including
women and children. These attacks are reprehensible
and unjustifiable.

I will focus my statement today on four key areas:
security transition, the peace and reconciliation process,
the 2014 elections and the Tokyo Mutual Accountability
Framework.

First, the United Kingdom welcomes the
announcement of the fifth and final traunch of security
transition, which saw the Afghan National Security
Forces take lead responsibility for security across the
whole country. The Afghan National Security Forces
continue to grow in confidence and capability. We
remain convinced that they will be ready, willing and
able to effectively manage Afghanistan's security after
2014 and to tackle any residual insurgent threat.

Secondly, an Afghan-owned and Afghan-led
peace and reconciliation process is critical for lasting
stability. In this context, the United Kingdom welcomes
the opening of a Taliban political office in Doha.
The understandable and legitimate concerns of the
Afghan Government about this development musty
be addressed. I welcome the remarks made by the
representative of the United States in this regard.

Peace processes are long, complex and difficult.
The Afghan peace process will be no exception. But it is
right to engage the Taliban in a peace process, not least
to confront them with the need to give up the armed
struggle and take up a political role. The international
community must do all it can to support this Afghan-
led process.

Afghanistan's closest neighbours continue to have
an invaluable role to play in Afghanistan's security,
stability and prosperity. The United Kingdom supports
the Istanbul Process and other initiatives that encourage
trade, economic prosperity and security. Central to
the regional effort is Afghanistan's relationship with
Pakistan. In the past 12 months, both sides have done
much to advance the relationship and the dialogue about
Afghanistan's peace process. With the new Pakistani
Government in place, we encourage both sides to
renew their focus on the benefits of a more trusting and
mutually supportive relationship.

Thirdly, with respect to the 2014 elections, the
importance of the presidential and province elections in
April 2014 cannot be overstated. We have seen positive
progress in recent months, but there is still much to
do. We strongly urge the Afghan National Assembly
to give priority to the passage of vital electoral
reforms. The United Nations has an important role to
play in preparations for elections. As we move closer
towards our shared objective of credible, inclusive and
transparent elections, UNAMA must continue to use its
ongoing dialogue with the Government of Afghanistan
to articulate the hopes and concerns of the international
community.

Turning now to the Tokyo Mutual Accountability
Framework, it is the fundamental agreement outlining
both the steps that the Government of Afghanistan needs
to take to improve economic and political governance
for continued progress and the commitments that the
international community needs to fulfil in terms of long-
term support. We reiterate our call to the Government
of Afghanistan to make significant progress with
respect to the Accountability Framework by the 3 July
senior officials' meeting. We hope to have a productive
discussion on the steps needed to get reforms adopted.
That, in turn, will enable the international community to
continue to work towards meeting its aid effectiveness
commitments.

One issue covered by the Tokyo Mutual
Accountability Framework is the rights of women. There
have been some positive steps in the last 12 months,
but there is still more to be done. In particular, the
Government of Afghanistan must continue to work to
reduce the barriers that women face, including through
tackling violence against women and supporting
women's political participation.

In conclusion, we must not underestimate the
challenges ahead. But through continued partnership
between the Government of Afghanistan, the United
Nations and the rest of the international community,
we can meet our shared objective of a stable, inclusive
and prosperous Afghanistan. The United Kingdom
will continue to play a committed role in that shared
endeavour.

I now resume my functions as the President of
the Council. I would like to remind speakers that they
should keep their comments to four minutes or less. I
shall bring down the gavel if speakers go significantly
beyond that time limit. Longer statements can, as usual,
be circulated in writing.

I now give the floor to the representative of India.

