Mr. Fall (Guinea) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to associate itself with the good
wishes that the Council has expressed for Ambassador
Shen, who is leaving us, and to say how much we have
appreciated his wisdom and his contribution in the
work of the Council.

I would like to say, Mr. President, how much my
delegation has appreciated the work done by your
delegation this month. My delegation has just
completed its first month as a member of the Council
and, thanks to your openness, we have been able to
assess the course that we will be taking together.

My delegation particularly appreciated the fact
that, under your presidency, Sir, we discussed many
issues relating to Africa - indeed, almost all of the
African questions - on the Council's agenda. Above
all, you deserve the credit for your inspired decision to
organize a public debate on the situation in Africa.
That meeting, which was a great success, demonstrated
the great interest that Member States have in Africa.
The meeting enabled us to consolidate our respective
approaches to Africa, provide diagnoses and identify
current problems, as well as to share our hopes. We
hope that the important elements contained in the
presidential statement that resulted from that historic
meeting will be duly considered and taken into account
by the Secretariat, as well as by the Council itself, so
that we can bolster our partnership with African
institutions: the Organization of African Unity - in
particular its Mechanisms for Conflict Prevention,
Management and Resolution - and subregional
organizations.

We all agree that peace and security must be
restored and consolidated in Africa so that that
continent can take up the challenge of development.
You deserve a great deal of credit, Sir, and my
delegation would like to very warmly congratulate you.

Secondly, my delegation welcomes the format of
the debate that you organized on counter-terrorism. The
interactive dialogue that was employed on that
occasion in the discussion among members and
non-members of the Council, as well as the Chairman
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee, was very useful.
It enabled all Member States to take the pulse of and
assess the remarkable work done by the Committee,
and I would like to congratulate you for that,
Mr. President.

Another issue is the question of the Middle East.
The Council has just taken the innovative step of
organizing a briefing on the question of the Middle
East. That wise decision was implemented during your
presidency, Sir, and we had a very useful exchange on
recent developments in the situation in the Middle
East.

On the questions of procedure and
documentation, the Council was not able - as
Ambassador Mahbubani would have liked - to
complete its work. Some progress was made. Let us
hope that the Council will soon be able to reach
agreement on that point.

In conclusion, I would like to say once again how
much my delegation has appreciated the work that you
accomplished, Sir, as President during the month of
January and tell you how greatly we have benefited
from it.

