Ms. Bakoyannis: It is a pleasure and an honour
to speak before the Security Council. The Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) is the
largest and most inclusive regional arrangement under
Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter. When
times are as challenging as they are, close cooperation
between the Security Council and a key regional player
such as the OSCE becomes all the more indispensable.
In my statement today, I will outline the priorities of
the Greek OSCE chairmanship for 2009 and address
some of the key issues common to the agendas of both
of our organizations.

Our first priority is to strengthen the OSCE in the
field. Unfortunately, 2008 saw a serious crisis in the
Caucasus. The crisis in Georgia is a reminder that we
must do more to translate the principles of the United
2
Nations Charter and the Helsinki Final Act into durable
reality on the ground.

We have devoted great attention to ongoing
discussions on the future OSCE presence in Georgia. In
the absence of a consensus, the OSCE Mission to
Georgia has found itself since 1 January in a phase of
technical closure. Our position is clear: the OSCE
should do more in Georgia, and not less, and the Greek
chairmanship intends to play an active role to that end,
as an honest broker. The OSCE's experience, its
diverse toolbox and its comprehensive approach to
security are unparalleled assets.

On 12 February, OSCE participating States
extended the military monitoring activities of the
Mission until 30 June. We also followed closely the
agreement on the extension, until 15 June, of the
United Nations Mission in Abkhazia. I see both
decisions as recognition of the need for the United
Nations and the OSCE on the ground. Much more is
needed.

The Greek OSCE chairmanship will continue
consultations on a more comprehensive OSCE
presence in Georgia. In the meantime, we are
committed to the Geneva framework, which is
co-chaired by the United Nations, the OSCE and the
European Union (EU). The Geneva platform
demonstrates the importance of cooperation between
these three major actors. This is the only framework
where all the parties to the conflict meet. Despite steep
challenges, we are making progress. Last week,
agreement was reached in Geneva on mechanisms for
incident management. This is a vital first step towards
confidence-building and eventual conflict-settlement.
We must now make these mechanisms work in
practice.

Humanitarian issues in the region remain a major
focus for the OSCE. To illustrate, the Organization was
asked to address the disruption in the delivery of gas to
South Ossetia. The OSCE assisted both sides in
identifying the cause for the disruption and taking
corrective measures. On 25 January, gas deliveries
resumed. The Greek chairmanship is equally dedicated
to resolving the disruption in the supply of water in the
region, and also to addressing the issue of detainees
and missing persons at the request of the parties.

While the situation in Georgia has drawn much of
our attention, it is not the only common challenge we
face. The situation in Kosovo and the restructuring of
09-25140
the international presence there is also high on the
OSCE agenda. We welcome the endorsement by the
Security Council of the Secretary-General's report of
24 November 2008 (S/2008/692), which underscored
the importance of the OSCE's role in building and
monitoring Kosovo's institutions and in supporting its
minority communities. The OSCE Mission in Kosovo
will continue to implement its mandate based on
resolution 1244 (1999).

My recent visit to Pristina strengthened my
conviction that the OSCE Mission remains a stabilizing
factor in Kosovo, ensuring the continuity of the
international presence and maintaining good working
relationships with all communities. May I also
underline here the excellent cooperation that our
Mission enjoys with the rest of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo, and in
particular with Special Representative Lamberto
Zannier.

The Greek OSCE chairmanship is dedicated also
to taking the OSCE further in the field of border
security and policing. In this respect, deepening the
OSCE's engagement with Afghanistan will remain a
priority in 2009 and beyond. Afghanistan has been an
OSCE partner for cooperation since 2003. I should say
that it is a special partner that has expressed an interest
in practical cooperation to address concrete problems.
In this respect, a multi-million-euro package of
assistance and capacity-building projects was prepared,
in consultation with the Afghan authorities as well as
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and other international actors. Most of
those projects are entering the operational phase. As a
result, the OSCE will provide training, including
through our field operations in Central Asia, to Afghan
experts on issues such as border management and
security, border patrolling, counter-narcotics policing,
customs management and travel-document security.

In addition, the OSCE has been working closely
with Afghanistan's Independent Electoral Commission,
in consultation with the United Nations Electoral
Assistance Division, UNAMA and the United Nations
Development Programme. Our Office for Democratic
Institutions and Human Rights has been providing
targeted assistance to the Commission's efforts in
election observation and other election-related issues,
following up on recommendations made as a result of
OSCE election support missions to Afghanistan in
2004 and 2005.
09-25140

I am convinced that the OSCE, with its expertise
in police training and border management and its long
experience in Central Asia, can make a meaningful
contribution to the security of Afghanistan and its
neighbourhood. We should stand ready to consider
further assistance to the country, as required, while
recognizing the coordinating role of the United Nations.

Other new avenues of OSCE-United Nations
cooperation have also opened up in Central Asia. For
instance, I believe that the OSCE's long experience on
the ground can be of benefit to the United Nations
Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central
Asia.

The priorities of the Greek chairmanship span the
three OSCE dimensions. The OSCE will continue to
play a key role in the fight against terrorism. The thrust
of the OSCE's anti-terrorism work aims to support the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1373
(2001). The ratification of universal anti-terrorism
conventions and protocols is of special importance, as
is our work to enhance legal cooperation in criminal
matters related to terrorism, to counter the financing of
terrorism and to improve travel-document security.

Cooperation with the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime is intensive, as is our collaboration
with the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate. The OSCE will continue to support the
implementation of the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy.

This year, the OSCE Economic and
Environmental Forum, which will take place in Athens,
will examine cross-dimensional aspects of the
migration phenomenon. Uncontrolled migratory
movements represent a significant challenge to OSCE
participating States. I believe that there is great
potential for cooperation with the United Nations in
that important field.

The OSCE should also play a role in helping to
address the long-term threat of climate change. We will
initiate a multilevel dialogue on this issue, aimed at
underpinning the work of the United Nations.

The start of this year highlighted the challenge of
ensuring the security of energy supplies. The 2003
OSCE strategy document for the economic and
environmental dimension can provide a starting point
to initiate a working-level dialogue that includes
energy producers, consumers and transit countries.
3

In the human dimension, the Greek chairmanship
will seek to strengthen the broad thematic area of the
rule of law. Gender equality is also a priority. Dialogue
and exchange of experience with the United Nations
system will be particularly beneficial in this area. The
Greek chairmanship will devote attention to the
situation of the Roma and Sinti and to the fight against
hate crimes. Freedom of religion and human rights
education will also be given prominence.

Greece is also determined to maintain the highest
standards for OSCE election observation activities.
This year will see important elections throughout the
OSCE region. Election observation must remain a
flagship activity of the Organization.

Finally, let me draw the Council's attention to the
adoption by the Helsinki Ministerial Council of a
declaration on the occasion of the sixtieth anniversary
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. The
participating States reaffirmed their strong commitment
to the declaration and recommitted themselves to act in
conformity with its purposes and principles.

The OSCE was designed as an inclusive forum
for political and security dialogue. It should be no
surprise that the first high-level multilateral discussion
of the proposals by President Medvedev and others for
a renewed European security dialogue took place
within the OSCE, during the Helsinki Ministerial
Council. Those exchanges confirmed the OSCE as a
unique platform. Its inclusive composition and
signature concept of comprehensive security remain
unparalleled across the Euro-Atlantic and Eurasian
landscapes. OSCE participating States are currently
discussing how to take this process forward. Certainly,
OSCE experience is flexible and can be drawn on in
many different ways. Greece stands ready to organize
meetings at any level to facilitate further dialogue.

Times are not easy for our States or for our
societies. The global economic crisis casts a long
shadow and will affect us in ways that are still
unpredictable. In such circumstances, it is our
responsibility to consolidate the pillars of a rules-based
international order. It is Vital to strengthen further the
partnership between the OSCE and the United Nations
across the three dimensions and in all the regions
where we operate. This will be consistently on the
agenda of the OSCE Greek chairmanship in 2009.

