Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): Let
me start, Sir, by congratulating you on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the
current month. We express our pride in seeing you, the
representative of sisterly Syria, in the presidency of the
Council, and we pay tribute to the great skill and
efficiency you have displayed in moving the work of
the Council forward. Our thanks also go to your
predecessor, the Permanent Representative of
Singapore, and to the members of his delegation for
their skilful and efficient stewardship of the Council
during the past month. I would further like to thank all
members of the Council for responding to the Arab
Group's request, made by the representative of the
Kingdom of Bahrain, to convene this important
meeting of the Security Council.

On 10 June, Israeli occupation forces reoccupied
the Palestinian city of Ramallah, from which they
withdrew last night, and imposed a military curfew on
the headquarters of the President of the Palestinian
Authority, President Yasser Arafat, in that city. A few
days earlier, the occupation forces attacked the
President's compound with tank shells and bombarded
most of the buildings in the compound. In the course of
that operation, two people were killed and the personal
safety of President Arafat was undoubtedly put at
immediate risk. Throughout that period, the Israeli
occupation forces maintained a tight siege on
Palestinian cities, and on several occasions reoccupied
them for days, killing many civilians, abducting many
more citizens and laying waste to many institutions;
this threatens the present and the future of the
Palestinian people.

In addition, Israel has feverishly tried to
institutionalize the appalling situation resulting from
the military assault against our people. It has removed
the lines that define the areas under the control of the
Palestinian Authority under signed agreements, by
isolating residential areas in the West Bank and the
Gaza Strip from one another and isolating all such
areas from occupied East Jerusalem, by reinstating
military administration and by requiring licenses to
move people and goods from one Palestinian city to
another.
Furthermore, the colonization of our Palestinian
land continues unabated through the building of more
and more illegitimate settlements, including the
settlement activity that is now in its initial stages on
Mount Scopus in East Jerusalem. Since 28 September
2000 and, on a greater scale, since 29 March 2002,
Israel, the occupying Power, has committed great
atrocities against the Palestinian people, including
undoubted war crimes and acts of State-sponsored
terrorism. We are, of course, waiting for the issuance of
the report of the Secretary-General on recent Israeli
actions in Jenin and other Palestinian cities, as
requested in General Assembly resolution ES-lO/lO,
adopted during the tenth emergency special session. As
we await that report, we call upon the international
community and the Security Council to condemn all
such acts and to take serious steps to put an end to
them immediately, as they represent a gross violation
of the provisions of the Fourth Geneva Convention and
other international humanitarian legal instruments, as
well as of Security Council resolutions.

Israel has blatantly rejected the relevant Security
Council resolutions; indeed, it has shown contempt for
them. How can the Security Council allow this
situation to continue? When will Security Council
resolutions - in particular the recent resolutions 1402
(2002) and 1403 (2002) - be implemented?

Israel, the occupying Power, claims that all its
acts of destruction and suppression are designed to pre-
empt suicide bombings - bombings that we, for our
part, have condemned time and again. Israel's claim
cannot be taken seriously. It is not acting in self-
defence, and its actions will yield only
counterproductive results that will not serve its
declared objectives.

The true political purpose of all of Israel's actions
is to take us back to the period before the Oslo
Accords. Their purpose is to destroy the Palestinian
Authority and to prevent any final settlement between
the two sides so that Israel's process of colonizing the
territory can continue, with more and more settlements
being built, thereby preventing the establishment of a
Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as its capital.

In the past, we have said that Mr. Sharon and his
Government want to kill off any attempt to salvage the
Oslo Accords and end the deteriorating situation on the
ground. Specifically, we referred to the fact that
Mr. Sharon would like to make the Mitchell
recommendations a dead letter. In this context, he has
devised various scenarios, the most significant of
which is his insistence on seven days of complete calm.
Regrettably, some have covered for him, and
Mr. Sharon has indeed succeeded in aborting progress
on the Mitchell recommendations.

Now, Mr. Sharon has come up with a new idea.
He is insisting that there is no Palestinian partner for
him to work with and refusing to negotiate until
changes have been made on the Palestinian side.
Palestinian issues remain entirely a matter for the
Palestinians; Israel has nothing at all to do with them.

However, an evolution of the domestic
Palestinian situation and the rebuilding of its
infrastructure is in the national Palestinian interest. For
our part, we are working seriously to move in that
direction. But it must be made clear that the creation of
genuine and strong State institutions will be impossible
while we are under occupation and, in particular, while
we are dealing with unabated and deliberate Israeli
destruction.

It must also be made clear that Mr. Sharon's true
purpose is to cause further devastation and, if possible,
to create a state of chaos on the Palestinian side. In that
way Mr. Sharon believes that he will be able to put an
end to the entire peace process.

The international community, which has not
succeeded in preventing Mr. Sharon from killing off
the Mitchell recommendations, should prevent him
from stifling all hopes for peace before it is too late. If
people need further proof of the true attitude and
genuine intentions of Mr. Sharon, they need only read
his ignominious article, published in The New York
Times on 9 June. Mr. Sharon's complete and blatant
sabotage of Security Council resolution 242 (1967) in
itself should be vigorously condemned by the Security
Council, given the dire consequences of such sabotage.
Of course, Sharon did not stop there, but reiterated his
well-known rejection of any attempt at a bilateral
settlement between the two sides, at this stage or in the
future, insisting on only a long-term interim solution.
Sharon repeated his lies and made ludicrous comments
about the idea of an international conference, ending
by taking a clear position on the issues of the borders
and Jerusalem that, in essence, represents a total
rejection of the initiative of Crown Prince Abdullah of
Saudi Arabia - an initiative that, after being adopted
at the Beirut Arab Summit, has become an overall Arab
initiative.

It is well known that Mr. Sharon was implicated
in war crimes, massacres, including at Sabra, Shatila,
Kibya, Khan Younis and, most recently, perhaps -
pending receipt of the report of the Secretary-
General - in the Jenin refugee camp. Furthermore,
Mr. Sharon is now taking on - with great
conviction - the role of the enemy of peace. This man
must be stopped; that would represent the beginning of
a return to the path of peace.

Only a comprehensive approach that addressed all
aspects of the problem - political, economic and
security - could salvage any hope from this true
tragedy and help to build peace in the region. More
important, such an approach would require the
development of a clear definition of the final form of
the resolution of the problem. This definition would
include the emergence of the State of Palestine in the
West Bank and the Gaza Strip, with East Jerusalem as
its capital, on the basis of the 1967 borders, guaranteed
security for Israel and other countries of the region and
the establishment of normal relations among all these
States. The existence of such a clear definition of the
final solution would in itself create a new and different
dynamic allowing all other major aspects to be
addressed, including the current security situation and
the creation of State institutions, an international
presence on the ground, the proposed mechanism for
negotiations between the parties - that is, the
international conference - and even interim steps
towards the final objective, so long as a specific time
frame is spelled out.

That is precisely what we need; in the absence of
such a vision, we will continue, at best, to remain in a
vicious circle. My fear is that we will descend into
more dangerous conditions in Palestine and, indeed,
throughout the entire Middle East.

What do we want from the Security Council?
From our point of View, there are three priorities. First,
Israel's practices against the Palestinian people must be

condemned and ended, while the outcome of the

voiding of the Oslo Accords - including the
preservation and maintenance of the Palestinian
Authority - must be rejected. Secondly, efforts must

be made to implement the relevant Security Council
resolutions. Such efforts are an official responsibility
of the Security Council as a matter of principle, but are
particularly significant in View of the critical and
deteriorating conditions on the ground. Thirdly, a
campaign for a comprehensive approach towards a
solution must be engaged, allowing the Council to play
its natural role in this regard.

We want the Security Council to take the required
measures immediately, because - in all honesty and
candour - the situation, particularly with regard to the
intolerable conditions in which our people are living,
does not allow for any delay. Some members of the
Council hold a different view. We have been clearly
informed that there is a serious political impetus to
address the situation on the ground and to push towards
political action and that important developments are
anticipated shortly. We have also been informed that
meetings of the "quartet" and the Group of 8 are to be
convened that may make a positive contribution to the
issue.

Given all this, we, along with the entire world,
shall wait and see what happens in the next few days.
We do so while we continue to maintain that the
Security Council has its own Charter responsibilities
and a natural role in the question of Palestine and the
situation in the Middle East.

