Mr. Petrella (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): We have
adopted a primarily technical measure aimed at facilitating
a smooth transition between the missions that are currently
deployed. I am referring to the International Civilian
Mission in Haiti (MICIVIH) and the Civilian Police
Mission in Haiti (MIPONUH), and to the new International
Civilian Support Mission in Haiti (MICAH), the draft
resolution on which will be considered shortly in the
General Assembly. The Secretary-General, in paragraph 44
of his most recent report (S/1999/1184), recognizes the
need to ensure a smooth transition.

The adoption of resolution 1212 (1998) began a
process of coordination among the main bodies of this
Organization. On the basis of Economic and Social
Council resolution 1999/11, the group of the Friends of
the Secretary-General for Haiti, in consultation with the
Secretariat and the Government of Haiti, prepared the
draft resolution creating the International Civilian Support
Mission in Haiti (MICAH), which is endorsed by the
Group of Latin American and Caribbean States.

We affirm that the resolution that we have just
adopted is almost unprecedented in the history of the
United Nations. We are completing one of the final links
in the process of coordinating the various stages involved
in conflict resolution. Peacekeeping - the purpose of the
Civilian Police Mission in Haiti (MIPONUH) and the
other missions which preceded it - is now being
followed by the consolidation of peace, governmental
institutions and a democratic system. At every stage, each
of the main bodies involved has carried out its task to the
fullest. Argentina expressed its commitment to support the
democratic institutions in our sister country of Haiti by
providing resources and military and police personnel
since the beginning of the United Nations presence.

Once again, we express our thanks to all the
members of the Council who have accepted this technical
and transitional extension. I also take this opportunity to
thank Mr. Julian Harston for the excellent way in which
he carried out his tasks as the Representative of the
Secretary-General, and we welcome his replacement, Mr.
Alfredo Lopes Cabral, to whom we offer our full support
in the accomplishment of that same task.

