Ms. Colakovic' (Bosnia and Herzegovina): First
of all, my delegation would like to welcome the
Presidents and Prosecutors of both Tribunals. I would
also like to express my deepest appreciation to the
President and Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) for
presenting their report (see S/2008/729). We are also
grateful for the assessments they contain.

The work of that Tribunal has been crucial, and
continues to be crucial in advancing the cause of
justice in my country and in the countries of the region.
It is important that the Tribunal leave an international
criminal justice legacy for the future, reaffirming the
very idea that there can be no reconciliation without
justice, no justice without law and no meaningful law
without a court to decide what is just and lawful.

The consistently positive assessments in the
reports regarding cooperation between Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the ICTY prove the strong
determination of my country to serve justice. In
addition, the War Crimes Chamber of the State Court
of Bosnia and Herzegovina is fully operative,
demonstrating the willingness and capability of my
country to conduct such trials. Bosnia and Herzegovina
will continue to provide access to Government archives
upon official requests from the ICTY.

My country recognizes and commends the efforts
of Prosecutor Serge Brammertz in securing justice for
victims and their families. We reiterate our readiness to
continue to cooperate fully in that regard.

Bosnia and Herzegovina welcomes the arrest of
two of the four most wanted fugitives, Radovan
Karadzic' and Stojan Zupljanin. Their arrest represents

a major breakthrough. However, much remains to be
done to arrest the two remaining fugitives and bring
them to the Tribunal in The Hague. Bosnia and
Herzegovina therefore calls for the immediate arrest of
the two remaining indicted war criminals who are still
at large, Ratko Mladic and Goran Hadzic. We fully
support the continuation of the work of the Tribunal
until justice is brought to the families of the victims.
Only then can we say that the mandate of the Tribunal
is complete.

The implementation of the completion strategy
remains of great concern to us. We are aware that the
strategy's residual mechanisms are very complex and
require further consultations within the relevant bodies
of the United Nations. Those mechanisms should be
carefully designed in order to address the issue of
prosecuting those subject to outstanding warrants and
arrest and to ensure that impunity is not an option.

Bosnia and Herzegovina appreciates the valuable
support provided by the United Nations and its
Member States for the work of the Tribunal. We look
forward to the continuation of that support until all
conditions are met for the end of the Tribunal's
mandate.

In order to live up to the spirit and letter of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, whose sixtieth
anniversary we commemorate this year, we the
Member States and the United Nations - depositary of
the Declaration - should not hesitate to fully support
the Tribunal in order to send the strong message that
crime will not remain unpunished.

