Mr. Cohen (United States of America): As
members of the Security Council, we must ensure
that we use the time and resources of the Council
wisely and where the needs are greatest. In the light
of last week's open debate on working methods of the
Security Council (see S/PV.8539), today's very lengthy
relitigations of historical grievances, which do nothing
to move things forward in Kosovo, only underscored
the wisdom of our strong support for a reduced number
of Council meetings on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). While
the United Nations continues to have a useful role to
play in Kosovo, that can be carried out through the
United Nations country team. The United States would
welcome a clear path to phase out UNMIK, which has
achieved its original mandate, and a transition of its
activities to a country team.

We share the Secretary-General's concern about
the heightened tensions between Belgrade and Pristina.
The priority of both sides should be to lower tensions,
remove barriers and immediately return to dialogue
negotiations. For Kosovo, that means suspending tariffs
on Serbian imports. For Serbia, that means avoiding
provocative actions and words and ceasing its campaign
against Kosovo's international standing - an effort
that runs counter to normalization.

Kosovo's independence is a reality. Both parties
need to advance on their respective European paths,
which will take courageous leadership and flexibility.
The twentieth anniversary of the end of the conflict
in Kosovo should remind us all that it is time to move
beyond the past and commit to a durable lasting
peace for the future. Among the reforms necessary to
advance European integration and economic growth,
strengthening the rule of law is a top priority. The
United States supports Kosovo's lawful efforts to
combat smuggling and corruption. The operation
carried out by the Kosovo police on 28 May took place
in various communities throughout Kosovo, targeted
corrupt officials and other individuals and led to the
arrest of suspects from multiple ethnicities.

It is deeply regrettable that Kosovo police officers
encountered roadblocks, came under fire and were
wounded during the operation. It is unacceptable to
obstruct a legitimate law enforcement operation. The
alleged involvement of two UNMIK personnel and an
UNMIK vehicle is an issue of serious concern that we
are following closely as the facts present themselves.
As in any such operation, it is imperative that proper
after-action investigations establish the facts, and we
understand that those are ongoing.

Suspending the legitimate exercise of law
enforcement is not in the interests ofpeace and stability
in the region or ofany ofthe people ofKosovo, regardless
of ethnicity. Such events once again demonstrate how
critical it is for the parties to immediately return to
dialogue negotiations to achieve a normalization deal.

