Mr. Hidayat (Indonesia): Let me begin by
expressing my delegation's congratulations to you, Sir,
upon your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of May and also thank your
predecessor, the Permanent Representative of the
Russian Federation, for his able manner in conducting
the Council's deliberations at a crucial juncture of the
unfolding developments in the Middle East.

Indonesia remains profoundly concerned at the
humanitarian tragedy befalling the people of Palestine.
The plight of the civilian population in several
Palestinian towns, cities and refugee camps continues
to worsen with a shortage of even the basic necessities
of food and medical supplies. Equally alarming is the
continuing siege of the Church of the Nativity in
Bethlehem, much to the affront of the international
community, which condemns it. Meanwhile, we are
still grappling with what actually occurred in Jenin -
the full extent of the death toll and material
devastation.

My delegation therefore appreciates the efforts of
the Secretary-General to implement Security Council
resolution 1405 (2002), with the dispatch of a fact-
finding team to assess accurate information regarding
the recent events in Jenin. Regrettably, however, the
visit did not materialize due to the lack of cooperation
on the part of the Israeli Government, despite untiring
endeavours to accommodate its concerns. This cannot
but constitute yet another act of defiance against the
will of the international community. The disbandment
of the fact-finding team has therefore now left a void as
to the true situation prevailing therein. It would have
been in the interest of all concerned parties for the facts
on the ground to become known, so that appropriate
action could be taken to prevent the further
deterioration of this humanitarian tragedy.

The fact that Israel continues to flout Security
Council resolutions should in no way diminish the
pressure on its Government. On the contrary,
considering that the Council's credibility is at stake, it
is incumbent on the international community to sustain
its demand that the Israeli authorities fully implement
its resolutions 1402 (2002) and 1403 (2002) in a
prompt manner. In my delegation's View, there can be
no respite from this escalating crisis unless and until
there is an immediate withdrawal of all Israeli forces
from the occupied Palestinian territories.

Finally, now more than ever, the Council has to
take resolute and immediate action, including
deploying the long-overdue international security force
in the occupied Palestinian territories. It simply cannot
remain passive vis-a-vis this dangerous and intolerable
situation, with its attendant massive loss of life, human
suffering and repercussions for regional peace and
security. It is our earnest hope that our meeting today
will contribute to the cessation of violence and
bloodshed.

