The President (interpretation from Chinese): I should
like to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Tajikistan, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Alimov
(Tajikistan) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (interpretation from Chinese): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them document
S/ 1996/354, which contains the text of a letter dated 16
May 1996 from the Permanent Representative of Tajikistan
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council, transmitting the text of a letter dated 14
May 1996 from the President of the Republic of Tajikistan
addressed to the President of the Security Council.

Following consultations among the members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council condemns the recent
violations of the Tehran cease-fire agreement of 17
September 1994 (S/ 1994/ 1102, annex I), in particular
the planned and organized offensive by the armed
Tajik opposition in the Tavildara region. It strongly

deplores the loss of life of civilians and of members
of the CIS Collective Peace-keeping Forces as a
result of acts of violence. It affirms that such acts
are totally unacceptable.

"The Security Council expresses its grave
concern that all such actions further aggravate the
already serious humanitarian situation in Tajikistan.
It demands the immediate cessation of the offensive
actions and acts of violence.

"The Security Council reaffirms its
commitment to the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the Republic of Tajikistan and to the
inviolability of its borders.

"The Security Council emphasizes its support
for the extension of the cease-fire agreement for the
whole duration of the inter-Tajik talks, and notes
that the Islamic Revival Movement of Tajikistan
(IRMT) has agreed to extend the cease-fire, albeit
only for a further three months. It calls upon the
parties to demonstrate their commitment to peace by
strict compliance with the cease-fire and other
obligations which they have assumed, as well as
with the relevant resolutions of the Security Council.
It also reminds the parties that the mandate of the
United Nations Mission of Observers in Tajikistan
(UNMOT) is subject to the proviso that the
cease-fire agreement remains in force and that the
parties continue to be committed to an effective
cease-fire, to national reconciliation and to the
promotion of democracy.

"The Security Council commends the personnel
of UNMOT for their contribution under difficult
circumstances. It expresses its concern at the
restrictions placed upon UNMOT by the parties and
calls upon them, in particular the Government of
Tajikistan, to ensure the safety and freedom of
movement of the personnel of the United Nations
and other international organizations.

"The Security Council calls upon both parties
to resolve their differences over the functioning of
the Joint Commission, including the issue of security
guarantees for Commission members, and to
recommence the operations of the Commission as
soon as possible.

 

"The Security Council is concerned that the
worsening humanitarian situation makes it all the more
urgent to obtain the required resources and calls upon
Member States and others concerned to respond
promptly in support of the humanitarian relief efforts
of the United Nations and other international
organizations.

"The Security Council invites the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative to
continue their efforts aimed at the earliest possible
resumption of the inter-Tajik talks and calls upon the
countries and regional organizations acting as
observers at those talks to render all possible support
to those efforts."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1996/25.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda. The

Security Council will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 5.25 p.m.

