Mr. Kuchynski (Ukraine) (spoke in French):
Permit me at the outset to extend to you, Mr. President,
my warmest congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council. I also wish to
congratulate the members of your delegation, who
assist you in your work as President. I assure you of
the Ukrainian delegation's full support. I also wish to
extend to your predecessor, Ambassador Kishore
Mahbubani, my most sincere compliments on his
excellent work during his term as President in January.

I also wish to join preceding speakers in
welcoming Mr. Joseph Kabila, President of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and to thank him
for his statement, which is very useful in connection
with the Council's consideration of the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, both internally and
at the regional level.

On behalf of Ukraine, I also wish to extend
sincere condolences to President Joseph Kabila and,
through him, to all the Congolese people on the tragic
death of his father, Laurent-Desire Kabila.

(spoke in English)
The situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is one of the most sensitive and complex issues
on the African continent. We note with satisfaction
that, as the Secretary-General's Special Representative
for the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Mr. Morjane, indicated this morning, the situation in
the country at this moment is more favourable than
ever before, which we believe is due to the strenuous
efforts of President Joseph Kabila. We welcome the
relentless high-level diplomatic efforts; we take them
as an indication that leaders of the countries of the
region are willing to search for ways to advance the
peace process.

We also welcome and support the willingness of
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo - which was quite clearly expressed by
President Joseph Kabila in his inaugural speech, as
well as during his meetings in Paris and Washington
and during his speech today at United Nations
Headquarters - to move towards a peaceful settlement
of the conflict on the basis of transparency, a
constructive approach and comprehensive dialogue
with all the parties concerned.

At the same time, we can see that not everything
goes as planned and expected. In this connection, we
would like to underline, among other elements, the
importance of additional political steps by the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
aimed at promoting the inter-Congolese dialogue,
which is, in our view, a key element in advancing the
peace process in the country. To this end, it is
necessary to intensify political negotiations between
the Congolese parties - and this, quite obviously, is a
very difficult task - in order to defuse the conflict. It
is absolutely clear that a necessary precondition for
this, or the necessary background, should be the
withdrawal of foreign troops from the territory of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, as has been
repeatedly called for in relevant Security Council
resolutions.

We are convinced that the continued movement of
the parties concerned towards the peaceful resolution
of the conflict should, as before, be based on the
Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement, as well as on the
Kampala, Harare and Maputo arrangements, and that
the language of arms cannot be a means of defusing the
conflict.

We firmly believe that all parties to the conflict
should continue constructive dialogue to that end and,
within the framework of the documents, should take
additional measures to accelerate the peace process. In
our View, the activities of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo should be regarded as an impetus to that
process. The parties concerned should do their best to
facilitate its effective and comprehensive deployment,
inter alia by fully implementing the provisions of the
Status of Forces Agreement. I take this opportunity to
reaffirm my country's readiness to contribute to United
Nations peacekeeping efforts in the Democratic
Republic ofthe Congo.

It will be necessary, of course, to focus on solving
quite a number of issues underlying the conflict that
need to be addressed without delay. These include the
withdrawal of foreign forces; the disarmament and
demobilization of members of armed groups; ensuring
the security of the borders between the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Rwanda, Uganda and Burundi;
the safe return of refugees; inter-Congolese dialogue,
as mentioned before; the restoration ofthe national and
regional economy; and regional economic cooperation.

These and other issues pertaining to the
implementation of the Lusaka Agreement will be
discussed at the meeting of its signatories to be held on
21 and 22 February here in New York. We are certain
that all these problems, difficult and complex as they
are, can be resolved only through constructive dialogue
among all parties to the conflict, one of which is the
Democratic Republic ofthe Congo.

Finally, I would like to wish President Joseph
Kabila and his Government patience, tolerance,
perseverance and every success along the bumpy road
to peace and prosperity in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

