Ms. Wallstriim (Sweden): I would first like to
thank this afternoon's briefers. We value Mr. Mogae's
regional perspective, and I would also like to sincerely
thank Ms. Betty Sunday for her testimony here today.
It is important to bring those first-hand accounts to the
Security Council's attention.

I was here less than six years ago and I distinctly
remember the celebrations, the dancing and the jumping
for joy when South Sudan gained its independence and
joined the United Nations. Since then, the hopes and
dreams of the people of South Sudan for achieving
peace and prosperity have been shattered. The current
conflict is predominantly a man-made disaster that
could have been avoided. It has caused too much
suffering, led to innumerable violations of human
rights and triggered a humanitarian crisis of immense
proportions. It must end.
I would like to highlight three aspects that I
believe we should focus on as we work to end this
horrific conflict. First of all, the fighting must stop and
the civilian population must be protected. We know
that the primary responsibility for that lies with the
Government and the parties to the conflict. We, the
international community, acting through the United
Nations, the African Union and the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD), must work closely
together and assist in finding a political solution to the
conflict. In that regard, I welcome the leadership of
the Secretary-General, President Konare and President
Mogae. The joint consultative meeting between the
African Union, IGAD and the United Nations on the
margins of the AU Summit is an example of the kind
of coordination that is necessary to put real pressure
on the parties to the conflict. The crisis in South Sudan
is also part of a complex set of challenges facing the
Horn of Africa. I again want to underline the need for a
holistic regional approach, as we have also heard from
previous speakers.

Secondly, the Agreement on the Resolution of
the Conflict in South Sudan of August 2015 must
remain the cornerstone of our efforts. The increasing
fragmentation of the parties to the conflict and the
reports of growing tensions between various ethnic
groups underscore the importance of complementing
the continued implementation of the Agreement with
an inclusive political process. The proposal for a
national dialogue could offer a way forward. However,
the legitimacy and effectiveness of such a dialogue
can be assured only if it includes representatives of all
parties to the conflict and other stakeholders in South
Sudanese society. Simply put, genuine inclusivity
is of paramount importance. In particular, we must
ensure that women - half of the population - have
an equal say in the dialogue. For the past few years,
Sweden, together with UN-Women, has worked with
the Women's Parliamentary Caucus of South Sudan.
We have sought to strengthen their ability to represent
grass-roots women and generate new ideas to advance
the peace process. The voices of the members of the
Caucus deserve to be heard at the international level,
including by the Council.

Thirdly, the immensely difficult situation for
women and girls in South Sudan must be addressed. It
should improve drastically and without further delay.
The alarming number of cases and accounts of sexual
and gender-based violence are absolutely harrowing
and are a sad reminder of my duties during my time
at the United Nations as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict. The
perpetrators of such acts must be brought to justice and
their victims must receive care and compensation. In
that regard, the hybrid court for South Sudan envisaged
in the peace agreement could be an important measure
for fighting impunity. Furthermore, the unprecedented
level of recruitment and use of children by the parties
to the conflict is unacceptable and should be addressed
without delay.

I want to pay tribute to the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS) and the United Nations
country team for their invaluable efforts to protect
civilians, including the steps they have taken to increase
the safety of women and girls. It is unacceptable that
UNMISS is being hindered from fulfilling its mandate,
and that deployment of the regional protection force has
been delayed.

We must work jointly and resolutely to ensure that
the hopes and dreams of a whole generation are not
lost. The urgency of ending the conflict in South Sudan
cannot be overstated. It must remain at the top of the
international agenda.

