Ms. Coleman (United States of America): We
commend the Prosecutor and her Office for her deep
dedication to the pursuit of justice for the victims of
atrocity crimes in Darfur, even in the face of tremendous
political and logistical challenges.

It is clear that the need for justice continues. In
that regard, it is far too easy to miss the tremendous
suffering of Victims, especially when the tempo of
conflicts in Syria, South Sudan and elsewhere has
meant that the long-lasting conflict in Darfur can all
too often slip off the front pages.

However, we should be alarmed that there has
been far more attention of late paid to criticizing the
efforts of the International Criminal Court (ICC) in
Darfur than to seeking justice for the Sudanese victims
of mass killings, widespread rapes and destruction of
communities, which led this organ to refer the situation
in Darfur to the ICC Prosecutor. We also remain deeply
concerned that President Al-Bashir and others who face
arrest warrants in the ICC situation in Darfur continue
to be welcomed by certain Member States. The
hundreds of thousands of victims of atrocities in Darfur
who saw their loved ones injured or killed, their homes
burned and their communities destroyed must see us
stand with them. Justice can succeed if we persevere in
focusing on the interests of victims and in supporting
the institutions with a mandate to bring truth to light
and power to account.

We have been reminded over and over again of
that fact after turning Cambodia into a grave yard
for almost 2 million people decades ago. Nuon Chea
and Khieu Samphan will serve the remainder of their
lives in prison for their crimes against humanity, and
Hissene Habre, under whose rule 40,000 people were
killed and others were subject to widespread sexual
violence and forced disappearances and torture, is now
serving his sentence in Senegal. In that vein, we are
heartened by the many States that continue to refuse
to welcome to their countries the individuals subject to
ICC arrest warrants in the Darfur investigation, and we
commend those who have spoken out against President
Al-Bashir's continued travel.

There is a path forward for a peaceful, stable
future in the Sudan. A comprehensive peace process
that addresses the political, security and humanitarian
issues at the root of the Sudan's conflict is critical. We
welcome the recent decrease in fighting in many parts
of Darfur and the announcements that the Government
and three of the four largest armed groups in the Sudan
have committed to extend their cessation of hostilities
through the dry season. We call on the Sudan Liberation
Army-Abdul Wahid faction to do the same. It is
critical that the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur have access throughout Darfur to
ensure that any alleged violations of the cessation of
hostilities can be investigated.

Ultimately, accountability for the atrocities
committed in the Sudan is essential for building
adherence to the rule of law and breaking the cycle
of impunity, where past crimes beget future crimes.
Instead, justice can give us a different path of breaking
that cycle of impunity and restoring dignity to victims
and their families through a public acknowledgement
of the gravity of the wrongs done to them. Now is a
time for all of us to recommit to the pursuit ofjustice
in the Sudan.

