Mr. La Yifan (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation is pleased to see you, Sir, holding
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
May. We also wish to thank Ambassador Heller for his
outstanding leadership as President of the Security
Council during the month of April.

I wish to thank Ms. Karin Landgren,
Representative of the Secretary-General in Nepal and
head of the United Nations Mission in Nepal
(UNMIN), for her briefing. I thank her and UNMIN for
their hard work.

The Constituent Assembly of Nepal has begun its
work and will be able to complete the drafting of the
constitution by May 2010. The integration and
rehabilitation of the Unified Communist Party of
Nepal-Maoist (UCPN-M) combatants has been moving
forward steadily. The demobilization of disqualified
soldiers is under way, and the Government of Nepal
has promised to complete that task by 15 July. We view
this important progress positively, and we appreciate
the tireless efforts of the political parties and the
people of Nepal to that end.
We take note of the latest developments in Nepal.
We hope that the parties concerned will keep the
overall situation in mind, handle their differences

appropriately and make a joint effort to safeguard the
peace process in Nepal. We expect and believe that the
Government and the people of Nepal have the ability
and wisdom to continue their efforts, through dialogue
and consultation, to resolve all the legacy issues that
continue to impede the peace process and that, on the
basis of the plans that are in place, they will achieve
lasting peace, stability and development.

The entire staff of UNMIN is fully dedicated and
has been making positive contributions to the peace
process in Nepal; it has our appreciation. We encourage
UNMIN to continue to properly monitor arms and
armies in accordance with the mandate of the Security
Council and to cooperate actively with the Special
Committee with a View to completing, at an early date,
the integration and resettlement of the UCPN-M
combatants.

It should be pointed out that, in the final analysis,
the peace process in Nepal should be led by the people
of Nepal. We believe that, with the support of the
international community, Nepal will be able to re-
embark on the path towards peace and development.

