The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Somalia, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mohamed
(Somalia) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2007/204, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Somalia pursuant
to paragraphs 3 and 9 of Security Council resolution
1744 (2007).

After consultation among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council reiterates its previous
resolutions and presidential statements on
Somalia, in particular its resolution 1744 (2007).

"The Security Council reaffirms its respect
for the sovereignty, territorial integrity, political
independence and unity of Somalia.

"The Security Council expresses its grave
concern at the renewed fighting in Somalia, deeply
deplores the loss of civilian life - condemning in
particular the indiscriminate shelling of heavily
populated areas of Mogadishu - and the
humanitarian impact of the fighting, and calls upon
all parties to immediately end the hostilities and
agree a comprehensive ceasefire.

"The Security Council emphasizes the need
for strengthened efforts to provide humanitarian
relief assistance to Somalia, including assistance
to the hundreds of thousands of displaced
persons, and urges Member States to support
generously such operations.

"The Security Council demands that all
parties in Somalia comply fully with international
humanitarian law, protect the civilian population,
and guarantee complete, unhindered and secure
access for humanitarian assistance. It demands
that the relevant authorities do all they can in this
regard, in particular to facilitate the free
movement of aid and humanitarian workers
throughout Somalia and when entering or leaving
Somalia. The Council also urges the wider region
to help facilitate the cross-border provision of aid
to Somalia, across land borders or via air- and
sea-ports.

"The Security Council reiterates its support
for the political process outlined in the
Transitional Federal Charter, which provides a
framework for reaching a lasting political
solution in Somalia, including the transition to a
permanent, representative Government and
institutions following national elections at the
end of the transitional period.

"The Security Council notes the steps taken
since the adoption of its resolution 1744 (2007),
welcomes the commitment of the Transitional
Federal Institutions to initiate a national
reconciliation process, and stresses the need for
further progress.

"The Security Council urges Somalia's
Transitional Federal Institutions to show
leadership and commitment to reach out to all
components of Somali society, and in particular
to intensify their dialogue with the clans in
Mogadishu. It calls on all parties in Somalia, the
region and the wider international community to
reject violence, to deny safe haven to extremist
elements, to pursue any differences they might
have with the Transitional Federal Institutions
through dialogue, and to summon the political
07-32360
will to take the necessary steps to allow the
Transitional Federal Institutions to deliver a
sustainable, all-inclusive political process.

"The Security Council underlines the need
for the Transitional Federal Institutions to meet
their responsibilities during the transitional
period, with particular regard to promoting the
widest possible political dialogue across Somalia,
and reiterates its commitment to support the
Transitional Federal Institutions in those efforts.
The Security Council calls on all parties in
Somalia and on all Member States to provide
such support.

"The Security Council calls on the
Transitional Federal Institutions to ensure that the
National Reconciliation Congress is convened as
soon as possible and is truly representative of all
segments of Somali society. The Security Council
also calls on all parties in Somalia and other
international partners to work towards that end
and to ensure constructive participation in the
National Reconciliation Congress to pave the way
to a sustained and all-inclusive political process.

"The Security Council condemns those who
threaten the early convening of the National
Reconciliation Congress. The Security Council
recognizes the work of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, the United Nations
Development Programme, the International
Advisory Committee, and Member States to
support the National Reconciliation Congress,
and urges Member States and partners to
contribute continued technical and financial
support.

"The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General, in consultation with the
African Union, the League of Arab States and the
Inter-Governmental Authority on Development,
to do what he can to assist in furthering ceasefire
arrangements and the political dialogue,
especially in Mogadishu.

"The Security Council recalls its readiness,
as set out in its resolution 1744 (2007), to
consider taking measures against those who seek
to prevent or block a peaceful political process,
threaten the Transitional Federal Institutions by
force, or take action that undermines stability in
Somalia or the region.
"The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to report by mid-June on
progress towards convening the National
Reconciliation Congress and the broader political
dialogue, including progress towards a
comprehensive and permanent ceasefire
arrangement, and on any blockages to progress or
threats to the Transitional Federal Institutions.

"The Security Council reiterates that, as set
out in its resolution 1744 (2007), full and
effective deployment of the African Union
Mission to Somalia (AMISOM) is vital. The
Security Council welcomes deployments so far
under AMISOM. and calls on other potential
troop-contributing countries to deploy as soon as
possible to AMISOM. It reiterates its call for
other States and partners to provide logistical,
technical and financial support to ensure the
further deployment of AMISOM. The Security
Council also welcomes the Secretary-General's
offer of planning assistance to the African Union.

"The Security Council emphasizes the
contribution of AMISOM. to lasting peace and
stability in Somalia, condemns any hostility
towards it, and urges all parties in Somalia and
the region to support and cooperate with
AMISOM.

"The Security Council welcomes the
Technical Assessment Mission sent by the
Secretary-General to Somalia and the region. It
requests the Secretary-General to consult the
African Union and troop contributors on how to
urgently strengthen further AMISOM's
capabilities on the ground. It also requests the
Secretary-General, as suggested in his report, to
immediately begin appropriate contingency
planning for a possible United Nations mission,
to be deployed if the Security Council decided to
authorize such a mission. The Security Council
requests the Secretary-General to report by mid-
June on this preparatory work, progress in the
reconciliation process and developments on the
ground, as well as possible scenarios for a
continued international security presence in
Somalia.

"The Security Council states its intention to
review the situation in Somalia following the
report described above from the Secretary-
General, with a view to determining whether the
conditions are in place for deployment of a
United Nations peacekeeping operation."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2007/13.
The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.20 p.m.
07-32360

