Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation welcomes the initiative by Jordan
to hold this open debate, and I thank Under-Secretary-
General Feltman for his briefing.

In humankind's long history over the past several
thousand years, wars and conflicts have brought
about devastation and claimed countless lives. They
have caused the extinction of many civilizations and
prevented humankind's progress and development.
The prevention of war and the pursuit of lasting peace
and development have been the common aspiration of
all. The two world wars that took place over the short
span of 30 years in the twentieth century wreaked
unprecedented havoc on the peoples of the world. They
also left us many fundamental and important lessons.

First, lasing peace calls for a new security concept
characterized by confidence, mutual benefit, equality
and cooperation. Faced with complicated and diverse
security threats and challenges, we must change
the traditional security concepts, respect and take
into account the legitimate security concerns of all
countries and advocate a new security concept for all
based on cooperation. All countries, large or small,
strong or weak, rich or poor, should become defenders
and promoters of peace. We must seek to resolve
differences through dialogue, enhance confidence
through cooperation and achieve general security
through mutual benefits and win-win results.

Secondly, lasting peace calls for the resolution of
disputes by peaceful means. In this age of globalization,
where the interests of States are intertwined and our
fates are interdependent, peace has become our shared
aspiration, and war will never enjoy any support.
History has proved repeatedly that the resolution
of disputes through dialogue, consultations and
negotiation is the only effective way to achieve lasting
peace. The international community should step up
efforts to promote the peaceful resolution of differences
and disputes among the parties to conflicts, prevent
conflicts, stop conflicts from escalating and nip war
in the bud.

Thirdly, lasting peace calls for multilateralism and
the strengthening of the collective security machinery,
with the Security Council at its core. The United
Nations plays an irreplaceable role in international
cooperation aimed at safeguarding the world's security.
Its role should be enhanced rather than weakened. All
States should effectively abide by the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, which
have become the accepted basic norms in international
relations. The Security Council should, in accordance
with the sacred mandate entrusted to it by the Charter,
further enhance its authority and effectiveness, assume
greater responsibilities in maintaining international
peace and security and play a greater role in the
prevention of war and the maintenance of peace.

Fourthly, lasting peace calls for a new concept
of development that promotes mutual benefits
and win-win results. The efforts by all countries
to achieve mutually beneficial cooperation and
common development constitute important bases for
maintaining international peace and security. Against
the backdrop of globalization, countries cannot be
separated from each other, and together they form a
community of common destiny. In seeking their own
development, countries should try to accommodate the
legitimate concerns of others and seek more common
denominators in their interests, with a View to bringing
about optimal development that benefits all countries.
We should seek, through our common development, to
eradicate the breeding grounds for conflicts and attack
the threats to global security at their source, so as to lay
a solid foundation for durable peace and security and a
harmonious world in which all enjoy prosperity.

It is nearly 70 years since the end of the Second
World War. The reflection on that unprecedented
tragedy is far from over. Past experience can serve as
teacher. We are here today to draw lessons from history
so that we will cherish peace even more. Only by facing
up to history squarely and through deep reflection on
and the memory of those lessons can we truly heal the
wounds of war and achieve lasting peace. Attempts to
disregard the truth of history or even to change history,
to deny or conceal crimes of aggression and to reverse
the verdict on the war of aggression not only destabilize
regional peace but also pose serious challenges to
the cause of peace of humanity. The international
community should be highly vigilant in that regard.
In defiance of the strong opposition of the
international community and neighbouring States, the
Japanese Prime Minister, Mr. Abe, recently visited the
Yasukuni Shrine, which honours many Class A and
other war criminals, in order to pay tribute to those
who launched the war of aggression and were soaked
in the blood of the people of the countries that Japan
invaded. The Yasukuni Shrine is a particular tool and
symbol of Japanese military aggression. The fact that
to this very day the war criminals convicted by the
International Military Tribunal for the Far East are
still regarded as deities, the distortion of the history of
aggression, the promotion of an erroneous perspective
of history in an attempt to reverse the verdict on the war
of aggression and responsibility for it and Mr. Abe's
tribute to those Fascist war criminals are nothing less
than a challenge to the victory against Fascism and to
the post-war international order established on the basis
of the Charter of the United Nations.

Such acts would naturally be strongly opposed and
condemned by the Chinese people and Government, as
well as the international community. The Charter of the
United Nations clearly stipulates that members of the
United Nations should be peace-loving countries that
accept the provisions of the Charter. Mr. Abe is trying
to reverse the verdict on the Second World War and
to defend war criminals. That will never be accepted
by people who have a conscience or by countries that
uphold justice. Whether the Japanese leaders choose to
abide by the principles and purposes of the Charter of
the United Nations by accepting the victory in the war
against Facism and the post-war international order or
to support the war criminals is a fundamental question
of principle. The Japanese leaders should recognize
and reflect on the history of aggression and redress
their mistakes through actions so as to regain the trust
of the international community, including Japan's
neighbouring States.

No one can defy the current trend of history. Any
act that refuses to reflect on the history of aggression,
negates the victory of the people of the world against
Fascism and challenges the principles and purposes of
the Charter of the United Nations will be in vain and
will be rejected by history.

China is willing to work with all peace-loving
countries in the world in order to uphold humanity's
conscience, the principles and purposes of the Charter
of the United Nations and international justice and to
drive the world towards common security and lasting
peace.

