Mr. Wisseh (Liberia): I should like to convey to you,
Sir, my delegation's congratulations on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
September 1995. We have every confidence that your
skilful handling of the Council's work thus far will register
further achievements during your tenure of office. To your
distinguished predecessor, the Ambassador of Indonesia, we
offer our appreciation for the effective manner in which he
steered the deliberations of the Council during the past
month.

Allow me also to extend the sincere gratitude of the
Liberian delegation to the Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros
Boutros-Ghali, for the keen interest he continues to
manifest in the search for durable peace in Liberia. In
pursuance thereof, he has consistently recommended that
the United Nations remain engaged in Liberia. His
detailed and insightful twelfth progress report on the
United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL),
contained in document S/1995/781, which forms the basis
of this meeting, gives an account of the gains that have
been made in the peace process and proposes specific
actions for the Council to take in order to ensure that the
current momentum towards a final resolution of the
Liberian conflict is maintained.

To the leaders of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), who took the bold, decisive
action - underpinned by humanitarian considerations -
to rescue Liberia and its people from the carnage that
erupted in 1990, we remain most grateful. Through this
concrete demonstration of African brotherhood and
solidarity, they gave true meaning to the biblical
injunction that we should be our brothers' keepers. With
the dispatch of peace-keeping troops, supported almost
entirely from the meagre resources of their countries, they
offered the blood, sweat and tears of their people so that
Liberians might have a peaceful alternative to war. When
unwholesome incidents threatened to derail the peace
process, the ECOWAS Monitoring Group (ECOMOG)
gallantly proved its military mettle by thwarting those
designs.

Certainly, ECOMOG's presence in Liberia is not
without the frustrations and humiliations that usually
accompany such operations. Yet, through wise political
decision, ECOWAS stayed the course. And now, after
years of painstaking diplomacy, the cumulative results of
several peace agreements have led to the signing of the
Abuja Agreement, which amends and supplements the
Cotonou and Akosombo Agreements, as subsequently
clarified by the Accra Agreement.

This Agreement is being implemented and offers
better prospects for a final peaceful resolution of the
Liberian crisis. In this connection, the Liberian delegation
commends the Chairman of ECOWAS, President Jerry J.
Rawlings of Ghana, for employing his finest diplomatic
skills in nudging the factional leaders to a harmonization
of their differences, which, inter alia, facilitated the
Abuja Agreement. We also commend the Government of
Nigeria for its significant contributions to the negotiations
and for hosting the meeting. The Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Anthony Nyakyi, and the
Reverend Canaan Banana, the Eminent Person of the

 

Organization of African Unity, deserve praise for their role
as facilitators.

The Liberian delegation believes that one of the
crowning successes of the involvement of ECOWAS in
Liberia will be the restoration of peace and stability in the
West African subregion. This will enable ECOWAS to
pursue its goal of economic integration of the region.

It is recalled that in resolution 1001 (1995) of 30 June
1995, the Security Council set a number of conditions for
the extension of UNOMIL's mandate. Among other things,
the Council required the Liberian parties to make serious
and substantial progress towards the implementation of the
Akosombo and Accra Agreements and urged that the
Council of State be installed that a comprehensive and
effective cease-fire be re-established and that the parties
commence the disengagement of their forces.

Within this context, and in accordance with the Abuja
Agreement signed by the parties on 19 August 1995, the
Council of State was installed on 1 September 1995. The
Cabinet has been appointed and is governing the country.
The cease-fire re-established on 26 August is generally
holding, despite minor skirmishes in Lofa County, where
the situation is being addressed by the Joint Cease-fire
Committee.

Against this background, Liberians are more hopeful
than ever that five years of war are receding into the past.
The guns are silent and freedom of movement can be had.
The nation as a whole is engaged in the delicate task of
healing the bitter wounds wrought by the war, in order to
foster genuine reconciliation, unity and stability.

Additionally, the Government is devising strategies to
launch the revival of the economy. In the short term, it is
endeavouring to meet the food and health needs of the
population, to reopen schools in areas that are now
accessible and under its control, and to restore electric
power, potable water and other social amenities to the
capital. Discussions are being held on the key issue of the
reintegration of former combatants into civil society.

As regards the long-term development of the country,
private investors are being encouraged to return to help in
the revitalization of the private sector of the economy. In
this undertaking, Liberia will, for the foreseeable future,
need substantial foreign assistance.

However, all of these efforts can be pursued only in
an atmosphere of sustained peace and security. The
Government is therefore working in concert with the
Cease-fire Monitoring Group of ECOWAS (ECOMOG)
and UNOMIL to implement, in a timely manner, the
crucial elements of disarmament and demobilization of
combatants, as stipulated in all of the relevant
Agreements. We join in the appeal that ECOMOG be
provided additional resources and other logistical support
in order for it to execute its mandate.

For five years ECOWAS has borne a substantial
burden to maintain its presence in Liberia. And in keeping
with Article 52 of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations, which encourages regional arrangements
in the maintenance of international peace and security, the
Security Council, through the creation and dispatch of
UNOMIL, has complemented the efforts of ECOWAS.
UNOMIL's involvement in the peace process has inspired
confidence among Liberians that the international
community is attentive to and supportive of their desire to
restore peace and normality in Liberia. Therefore, it is the
hope of the Liberian Government and people that the
United Nations will provide even more financial support
to ECOMOG. For when a democratically elected
government is inaugurated in Liberia the cooperation
between ECOWAS and the United Nations will indeed be
recorded in the annals of the Organization as a unique
success story, the lessons of which could be applied to
other conflicts in the world.

At this juncture, the Liberian delegation would like
to thank all Member States, the specialized agencies of
the United Nations and the governmental and
non-governmental organizations that have rendered, and
continue to render, much-needed humanitarian assistance
to alleviate the misery and suffering of the Liberian
people.

As the draft resolution provides for the extension of
UNOMIL's mandate and contains significant elements,
the implementation of which is crucial to the transition
from war to peace in Liberia, the Liberian delegation
commends it to the Council for unanimous adoption.

