Mr. Elaraby (interpretation from Arabic): It gives me
pleasure at the outset, Mr. President, to pay tribute to your
ideal conduct of the business of the Council during the
current month and to the remarkable performance of the
friendly delegation of China under your able leadership.

Liberia was among the first African States to attain
independence. It was a member of the League of Nations,
and, with Egypt and Ethiopia, it was one of the three
African States that signed the San Francisco Charter in
1945. Over the years Liberia continued to play an important
role on both the African and international scenes.

We were therefore gravely concerned by the sudden
and all-encompassing deterioration of the humanitarian,
military and political situation in Liberia at a time when the

 

international community had hoped to add that country to
the list of African States that have managed to resolve
their internal problems with wisdom and foresight and in
a peaceful manner, as was seen in Namibia, South Africa,
Mozambique, Eritrea and Sierra Leone.

The delegation of Egypt has considered the
seventeenth progress report of the Secretary-General on
the situation in Liberia. It is regrettable that the rapid
deterioration of the situation there has been brought about
by the lack of genuine political will on the part of the
factional leaders to put an end to the mayhem and
fighting and to restore stability. Indeed, their rejection of
all prior commitments has brought their country to a state
of complete constitutional collapse, anarchy and a vacuum
of law and order. This situation is untenable; it cannot
continue; it is inconsistent with the special meaning of
Liberia's name - "the land of liberty" - and with the
aspirations of its people to a life of stability under internal
national conciliation and external good-neighbourliness
and cooperation.

Egypt has followed with great interest the strenuous
efforts made by the current chairmanship of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) to avert
any further deterioration of the situation in Liberia. Egypt
welcomed the results of the meeting of ECOWAS Foreign
Ministers held at Accra on 7 and 8 May, foremost among
which were reaffirmation that the protocols adopted
recently by the Council of State declaring Transitional
Government to be "the Government of Liberia" and the
Council of State to be its "collective
presidency" contradicted the spirit of the Abuja
Agreement; recognition of the need for all the Liberian
factions to participate in the decision-making process and
the statement that the Transitional Government should
strive to achieve that end in a democratic framework;
non-recognition of any Government that achieved power
by the use of force; and reaffirmation of the need for
elections to be held at the earliest possible opportunity.

The meeting also stressed the conditions to which all
Liberian factions must commit themselves in order to
return to the Abuja framework - primarily complete and
immediate observance of the cease-fire signed on 11 April
1996; the withdrawal of civilian combatants; and the
redeployment of the ECOWAS Monitoring Group
(ECOMOG) in Monrovia to guarantee the liberty and
safety of all civilians, without exception.

In this framework, we received with some
satisfaction yesterday the news from Monrovia of the
combatants' departure from the capital and the expanded
deployment of ECOMOG throughout the city. It is our
hope that the meeting held last Thursday between the

 

representatives of General Roosevelt Johnson and the Krahn
forces, on the one side, and of the National Patriotic Front
of Liberia (NPFL) and General Alhaji Kromah's Wing of
the United Liberation Movement of Liberia for Democracy
(ULIMO-K) on the other - under the joint supervision of
ECOMOG and the United Nations Observer Mission in
Liberia (UNOMIL) - is but the first step, to be followed
by other necessary measures, in making Monrovia a safe
haven and restoring stability to the capital as soon as
possible.

In this regard, I express Egypt's appreciation and
support for the United States initiative to establish an
International Contact Group on Liberia, to include donor
Governments and concerned international and regional
organizations, in order to follow up on the achievement of
the desired settlement in Liberia. I cannot fail to express the
thanks and gratitude of the Government of Egypt for the
effective role played by the United States in the evacuation
of United Nations personnel and that of diplomatic missions
from Monrovia, including the Egyptian Ambassador and the
staff of the Egyptian Embassy, early last month in a well-
organized and rapid operation that deserves our praise and
appreciation.

Egypt reaffirms its full support for the efforts of
ECOWAS and ECOMOG and calls upon the international
community to render all possible assistance to these efforts
without delay. ECOWAS's clear commitment to the
achievement of a peaceful settlement in Liberia - manifest
in its deployment of over 7,000 soldiers under very difficult
circumstances, with which we are all familiar, and at great
cost - is in itself a success that cannot be denied. This is
especially true given the fact that the arms embargo
imposed on Liberia under Security Council resolution 788
(1992) has not been fully or strictly observed. We believe
that it is premature for now to judge this pioneering
regional peace-keeping experiment to be a failure. It is our
hope that it will continue, and we call for more
international support for such efforts.

We agree with the Secretary-General's statement in
paragraph 45 of his report that the withdrawal of ECOMOG
from Liberia before peace is re-established could be
catastrophic not only for the country - whose fate could
echo that of Somalia should the Mission be withdrawn -
but also for the subregion as a whole.

Recent events in Liberia have placed in stark relief the
serious dimensions of the African refugee problem. The
reluctance of a number of States neighbours of Liberia to
take in the refugees on the Bulk Challenger has revealed a
new aspect of the social and economic problems suffered
by the countries of the region as a result of the successive
waves of refugees, which threaten to deplete the scarce

 

resources of the States hosting refugees and, indeed, their
very internal stability.

Recent events have revealed a new and serious
problem of a different kind: the exploitation by the
factional leaders of school-age children in their conflict
by supplying them with weapons, encouraging them to
plant mines and plying them with alcohol and narcotic
drugs in order to achieve their narrow, parochial political
objectives. This situation, in addition to the violations of
personal freedoms and human rights referred to by the
Secretary-General in his report, requires the special
attention of the international community if these problems
are not to become chronic conditions that will be very
difficult to address in the future.

The delegation of Egypt supports the Secretary-
General's proposal to extend the mandate of UNOMIL for
three additional months, on the condition that the factional
leaders undertake to implement changes in that period
leading to the restoration of peace and stability in Liberia.
This, in turn, will lead to the creation of a climate
favourable to the holding of presidential elections in
August. The factional leaders in Liberia must understand
that the presence of ECOMOG is a rare and precious
opportunity that it may be difficult to recreate and must
therefore not be squandered. In particular, the initiation of
negotiations in earnest would undoubtedly be a decisive
factor in the continued provision by the international
community of humanitarian and economic assistance to
Liberia in the future.

Since 1989, 13 peace agreements have failed to
achieve the desired settlement in Liberia. It is
unacceptable for the current efforts to fail as a result of
personal ambitions that do not take the interests of the
Liberian people into account. It is unacceptable for the
Liberian people to be deprived of their legitimate rights
to life and development. It is unacceptable for them to be
left behind in the march of progress.

The first step the factional leaders could take to
prove their good intentions would be to return the
property looted from the United Nations, Embassies and
elsewhere no later than the end of next June. The
plundering and looting of such property is unacceptable
and could jeopardize the return of UNOMIL and the
resumption of its work unless it receives additional
support, which would constitute an additional burden on
the United Nations and its Members. In this connection,
the delegation of Egypt calls upon all Members to pay
promptly their contributions to the peace-keeping budget
in order to enable the United Nations to fulfil its
mandates in Liberia and other countries.

 

We wish to reaffirm our support for the extension of
UNOMIL's mandate and our conviction that the
international community must not abandon Liberia. We
would also like to express our support for the efforts of the
Secretary-General, his Special Representative and all those
who have participated in UNOMIL, including both those
who remained in Liberia despite the difficult circumstances
and those who were provisionally repatriated while awaiting
an improvement in the situation there. We hope that the
next three months will bring tangible, positive
developments in the country.

