Mr. Norstrom (Sweden): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union. The Central
and Eastern European Countries associated with the
European Union - Bulgaria, the Czech Republic,
Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania,
Slovakia and Slovenia - and the associated countries
Cyprus, Malta and Turkey, as well as the European
Free Trade Association countries members of the
European Economic Area, Iceland and Liechtenstein,
align themselves with this statement.

First of all, I would like to express our
appreciation here for the presence of the Foreign
Minister of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Mr. She Okitundu. We are also very grateful for the
briefings by Mr. Guehenno and Mr. Otunnu that we
heard this morning. I would also like to welcome and
recognize the presence of Mr. Hedi Annabi.

For several months developments in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo have inspired
increasing hope. In his report of 8 June, the Secretary-
General describes a situation not merely of obstacles
and difficulties, but also of opportunities and positive
trends. The European Union notes with satisfaction the
Secretary-General's conclusion that progress has been
made in key areas since April and his cautious
optimism regarding the immediate future of the Lusaka
peace process.

The European Union remains fully supportive of
the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement, the consensual basis
for peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Sustained advances should be ensured on all aspects of
the agreement, in particular the orderly withdrawal of
foreign troops, the national dialogue in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration, repatriation or
resettlement of the armed groups. Continued progress
depends, first and foremost, on the parties to the
conflict. The role of the United Nations and the
international community, including the European
Union, and the contribution they can make to peace and
development in the region is clearly defined by the
actions of the parties themselves.

We therefore urge all parties to honour their
commitments fully and in earnest, and to comply
unconditionally with their obligations, thus enabling
further progress to take place in the Lusaka peace
process.

As for the role of the United Nations, important
decisions are to be taken by the Council within the next
couple of days on the future of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC). Taking into account the current
situation and both its positive and its troubling
characteristics, the European Union agrees with the
Secretary-General that the momentum generated by the
disengagement of forces and the withdrawals of foreign
forces should not be lost. The European Union thus
welcomes the proposal of the Secretary-General to
extend the mandate of MONUC and to deploy, within
the force level of 5,537, additional personnel for the
functions envisaged for a transitional period leading up
to the third phase.

The European Union welcomes the cooperation
extended to MONUC by the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and its allies, and
the cooperation between MONUC and the Rwandan
Patriotic Army (RPA) and the Ugandan People's
Defence Forces (UPDF). However, the difficulties and
delays caused by the Front de liberation du Congo
(FLC) and the Rassemblement congolais pour la
de'mocratie (RCD) are unacceptable. The European
Union considers particularly serious the detainment of
MONUC observers by the FLC and the targeting of
MONUC in disinformation campaigns. While
welcoming the fact that disengagement and verification
are near completion in three of the four sectors, we also
note with concern that obstructions have occurred, in
particular by the FLC. All parties should finalize their
disengagement and respect the new defensive
positions. International humanitarian law must be
respected, including in areas from which troops have
been disengaged.

The recent Security Council mission to the region
emphasized that the Council expected to see steady,
consistent progress and strict adherence by the parties
to all agreements and timetables regarding the
withdrawal of foreign forces and the disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation or
resettlement of armed groups. The European Union
fully endorses that position. As regards that process, it
should be based primarily on voluntary reintegration
and repatriation in order to be effective. The
international community may support such a voluntary
process, but the primary responsibility for
implementation lies with the parties themselves. In
particular, the Governments of Zimbabwe and of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo should cease all
support to such armed groups, and Rwanda should
honour its commitment with a view to repatriation and
reintegration. The European Union recognizes the need
to differentiate among various categories of members
of the armed groups, and to tackle urgently the
question of groups of Rwandan origin. Furthermore,
the demobilization of child soldiers should be a top
priority.

The humanitarian situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and throughout the region
remains an area of most serious concern, as reflected in
all recent reports of the Secretary-General. In order for
genuine improvement to be possible, all parties must
guarantee secure, rapid and unimpeded access for
humanitarian assistance. While welcoming the fact that
access to vulnerable populations is improving, we note
that faltering security remains a constant threat to
crucial humanitarian and rehabilitation efforts, as
illustrated by the deplorable attack on six workers of
the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC)
in April.

The difficult humanitarian conditions, which
particularly affect women and children, must be given
increased international attention and financial
assistance. The European Commission has decided to
provide 35 million euros in humanitarian assistance
and 120 million euros to finance poverty alleviation
and the promotion of human rights. The European
Union remains willing to contribute further to the
improvement of the humanitarian situation and to the
economic regeneration of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

