Mr. Sacirbey (Bosnia and Herzegovina): We wish
to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council this month. I know
that your delegation and you personally are most capably
handling the very grave responsibilities before the Council
this month. I also know that your delegation and you
yourself have some direct experience with our region, so
it is indeed fortunate for all of us that you are in this
position of responsibility.

I wish to thank you for the opportunity to bring the
matter of Bosnia and Herzegovina before the Security
Council. The resources being committed - military,
civilian and economic - to serve peace and rebuild
Bosnia and Herzegovina are having a gradual but steady
positive impact. The reaffirmation that indicted war
criminals will be brought before the Tribunal, evidenced
by recent arrests, has given people confidence in justice
and reconciliation. It has alleviated the sense of being
Victims of both human rights abuses and double
standards. It has given all, the innocent victim and the
victimizer, the expectation that those who planned and
executed genocide and crimes, the leaders, will be
brought to justice.

 

The process of rebuilding is also moving forward.
Frankly, we are all anxious that it proceed quicker. We
have an eager, willing and capable population that is
looking forward to restoring homes, jobs and lives to
normalcy. That in and of itself is a positive sign, and
Bosnians are doing their part with hard work and sacrifice,
despite very limited capital resources.

The High Representative faces the most complex and
demanding task, but even in the functioning of Bosnia's
public and governmental institutions we do see progress.
For this progress and assistance, we thank all represented
here who have committed their resources, their soldiers,
their personnel and even their goodwill for the sake of
peace and normalcy in our country. Truly, as much as
Bosnians may have felt abandoned by the international
community, by this Council, during the beginning of the
war, they are conscious and appreciative of the efforts
being committed, along with our own, to rebuild our
country.

So why are we still uncertain about the road to peace,
the quality of life, the return of refugees in Bosnia and the
region as a whole? Is it our destiny to be doomed to
uncertainty and upheaval?

Are we to blame our own recent war, the genocide
and murders, the fragility of peace and now even the events
in Kosovo on the fact that we are in the Balkans? Are we
doomed to ethnic hatreds and conflict in the Balkans?
Without commenting on whose destiny is preferable, neither
we in Bosnia nor any other people are predestined to a
particular behaviour or future. It is in neither our genes, our
geography nor our history.

All of us are compelled to suffer stereotypes, some
more damaging than others. What kind of prejudiced
stereotype will the people of the African States, or South-
East Asia, or the Arab world, or Latin America have placed
upon them? It may be more understandable for stereotypes
to be perpetuated in the cliches of popular culture, but not
in the highest decision-making institutions representing the
international community. We must be more sensitive and
Wiser.

So if we cannot blame it on the Balkans, where should
the responsibility lie? The people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, of all ethnicities, religions and backgrounds,
are overwhelmingly committed to peace and coexistence.
But then an elderly Serb couple is burned to death in the
home they recently returned to by extremist Croat criminal
elements. The Catholic prelate of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and his assistants are stoned and placed in deadly danger
by an organized Serb mob when they return to a Catholic
parish long "cleansed" of its parishioners.

Are these coincidences? Can refugees not go back
because their old neighbours - ordinary citizens - will
not allow them to return simply because the refugee
happens to be of a different background? No; there is still
an ongoing, organized criminal effort to keep the people
from going back to their homes and to prevent the
process of reconciliation and normalcy from taking hold.
Exactly at a time when the momentum is positive, the
enemies of peace and coexistence choose to launch their
sabotage and send us backwards.

This is not my personal assessment. It is shared by
the representatives of the Stabilization Force (SFOR), the
Office of the High Representative and others, including
Bosnians. And that is exactly why careless stereotypes are
so dangerous. They not only stigmatize, but they also
embolden those who wish to convince you that people
who have lived together for centuries have in fact not
done so and cannot live together now. They would use
your potential lack of familiarity, your fatigue with the
situation and the too-often carelessly expressed prejudices
to create self-fulfilling stereotypes and prophecies.

When they burn an elderly Serb couple to death,
they believe that you will become frustrated and lose
confidence in Bosnia. When they beat up a man of God,
they believe themselves to be immunized by your
association of this crime with a false reading of Bosnia's
history and its people.

I hope for all our sakes that these enemies of peace
and tolerance are not right in their reading of the
collective "you". However, it seems that the demagogues
and dictators of the region who had shown their stripes in
the attempt at genocide and "ethnic cleansing" in Bosnia
are repeating their strategy, including, now, in particular,
in Kosovo. Kosovo did not have to explode. A fuse was
simply lit to a bomb that had been in the process of
manufacture for some time.

The subject of Kosovo is not before the Council
today. Nonetheless, I bring it up because the handling of
the matter reflects a blame-it-on-the-history-and-people-
of-the-Balkans stereotype. More urgently, however, those
who light the fuse on Kosovo will be looking to play off
your fears and prejudices by bouncing its attention from
one manufactured conflict to another. They will try to sell
their constructive engagement in one situation at the

 

expense of another. Their commitment to constructive
engagement in one situation is merely currency for them, to
be turned quickly into an opportunity to create conflict in
another situation.

Who is to blame for the wars in Slovenia, Croatia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo and, maybe tomorrow,
somewhere else - Macedonia or beyond, or back in
Bosnia. The ordinary citizen - Serb, Croat, Bosnian,
Albanian or otherwise - is not to blame. It is a leadership
that preys in its neighbours, on its own people and on your
own stereotypes.

The common thread is not Balkan history. The
evidence is much nearer. When Srebrenica was overrun and
thousands were massacred, the weapons of the United
Nations mandated forces, including armoured personnel
carriers, were also plundered, as in several other situations
during attacks on United Nations forces in Bosnia. Now
there is compelling evidence that those weapons taken at
Srebrenica are now being used in Kosovo against the
Kosovo Albanians. Regardless of where the weapons may
have been taken in Bosnia, the fact that they end up being
used to "ethnically cleanse" in Kosovo should be enough
proof as to where the blame lies.

If we are not careful we all may become the victims
of a cliche, a stereotype. The United Nations is already
scapegoated in many political quarters. It is blamed for the
failures of collective will in Bosnia, for failure to prevent
genocide in Rwanda and so forth. Nevertheless, we in
Bosnia are sober as to the capacity and responsibility of
this institution. We seek to treat the role of this institution
honestly, and we again thank all for their efforts and
assistance in promoting peace and normalcy in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. All we ask is that the Council treat us fairly
as well and that it not be duped by the merchants of
nationalism and "ethnic cleansing" and by the peddlers of
stereotypes.

Let me conclude by reminding the Council of the
words of one of our most distinguished colleagues, the
former Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom,
Sir David Hannay, speaking on 30 May 1992 as sanctions
were imposed on the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
(Serbia and Montenegro) for its aggression against Bosnia.
He said,

"there is really no doubt at all where the principal
responsibility now lies: with the authorities, civil and
military, in Belgrade. And that cannot be ducked; it is
simply no good suggesting that they have nothing to
do with the events that are going on in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Multiple-rocket launchers are not
found in Serbian peasants' barns. They are provided
from the supplies of the Yugoslav national army
If the authorities in Belgrade really wanted us to
believe their protestations of innocence, I doubt if
they would be bombarding Dubrovnik today. They
must think we are very stupid people indeed."
[S/PV.3082, p. 43]

"They must think we are very stupid people indeed."
I humbly request the Council to consider the relevance of
these words and of their reference to the Council six
years later.

