Mr. Al-Khussaiby (Oman): More than four months
ago, during the month of July, there was a city called
Srebrenica with more than 8,000 inhabitants, mainly
Bosnian Muslims. Both the city and its inhabitants

 

vanished before the eyes of the international community in
one of the most brutal crimes in modern history. Substantial
evidence supports the conclusion that Bosnian Serb soldiers
are responsible for this crime of genocide.

This is another heavy price which has to be paid by
the Bosnians for their freedom and independence and for
having relied on the will of the international community to
protect them from the Serbian aggression that seems to
haunt them in every corner of their country.

For over four months, since the events in Srebrenica,
the United Nations and other humanitarian organizations,
including the International Committee of the Red Cross,
have been trying to gain access to the area, as well as to
other areas where specific accounts of violations of
humanitarian law are reported to have taken place. In fact,
despite the repeated calls by the Council on numerous
occasions, in both informal and formal meetings, the party
concerned failed to grant such access. To this day, the story
of Srebrenica and many other areas in the Republic of
Bosnia and Herzegovina - such as Zepa, Banja Luka,
Sanski Most, Bihac and Maglaj - remain a living
nightmare that needs to be addressed.
A few days ago the international community witnessed
a truly historic achievement in Paris with the official
signing of the Peace Agreement by all the warring parties.
While on the one hand we are of the opinion that efforts
should not be spared to give the needed momentum for this
process to work, we believe, on the other hand, that
investigating these crimes is a generically linked component
in making the Peace Agreement viable and credible to all
the parties. Crimes of this magnitude, including summary
executions, rapes, mass expulsions, arbitrary detentions,
forced labour and large-scale disappearances, attest to
nothing but the wickedness of one human against another
fellow human, which in our opinion should not be ignored
at all. In fact, justice should and must prevail in the end,
and those who have committed crimes against humanity
must be brought to justice and held responsible in respect
of such acts.

In fact, through the draft resolution before us,
members of the Council have the opportunity to express, in
a united voice and in the strongest possible terms, their
condemnation of all violations of international humanitarian
law and human rights committed in the territory of the
Republic of Bosnia, demanding that all concerned,
particularly the Serbs, comply fully with their obligations
in this regard. Furthermore, they will support the work of
the International criminal Tribunal by reiterating the
demand that all States and parties in the region of the
former Yugoslavia comply fully and in good faith with
the obligations contained in operative paragraph 4 of
resolution 827 (1993) and create the conditions essential
for the Tribunal to perform the task for which it has been
created, including the establishment of offices of the
Tribunal when it deems this necessary.

My delegation is aware that this draft resolution will
not bring back to life those thousands of people who were
killed in Srebrenica and Zepa and other areas.
Nevertheless, we are of the opinion this is the very
minimum the international community can do and should
do at this stage. We believe we owe it to the people of
Bosnia to investigate the fate of their relatives, something
that will serve as a living memory for generations to
come.

Ironically, even while we deliberate this issue here
today, detention camps still exist throughout the territory
of Bosnia, and atrocities continue to be committed. We
believe this should come to an end immediately and that
the parties concerned should fully live up to their
commitments in their entirety. Today, we appeal to
friends and all those in the international community
involved in overseeing implementation of the Peace
Agreement to make sure that the Serbs stop at once the
commission of acts against fellow human beings. We
hope that in the days to come we will see some concrete
steps in this regard. We also hope that the Implementation
Force (IFOR) will act according to its mandate, including
by apprehending all those indicted by the International
criminal Tribunal. With that hope, my delegation has
decided to vote in favour of the draft resolution before us.

Finally, I would like to associate my delegation with
those who spoke before us in saying that there should be
no selectivity in the implementation of Security Council
resolutions, be it in the former Yugoslavia or anywhere
else in the world.

