Mr. Carazo (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Madam President, we congratulate you and the
Permanent Mission of the Plurinational State of Bolivia
on your outstanding presidency of the Security Council
during the month of October.

Millions of human beings live day by day in pain,
suffering and despair as a result of armed conflict.
Costa Rica strongly deplores the escalation of the
conflicts in the Middle East. The situation in recent
years and months has deteriorated, and it has not been
possible to achieve peace and security in the region.
It is urgent to put an end to the humanitarian crisis
in some parts of the region and to seek an early and
peaceful solution thereto. That humanitarian crisis is
a tragedy of shocking proportions that represents an
affront to humanity. We therefore once again call on
the Security Council to fully discharge its mandate to
uphold international peace and security, as clearly set
out in the Charter of the United Nations.

With regard to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
Costa Rica strongly supports the two-State solution,
based on the 1967 borders and in line with the
agreements reached by the parties. We believe that
remains the only viable solution. The resolutions of the
Security Council are binding and must be implemented.
The implementation of resolution 2334 (2016) is key to
making progress towards achieving peace.

This year has been a painful reminder of the
devastating consequences of protracted conflicts. Costa
Rica expresses its grave concern and condemns the
escalation of tensions, clashes and, above all, deaths.
Acts of violence, incitement and provocations by both
sides must cease. They must meet their obligation to
reverse all those negative trends on the ground in order
to build trust and foster a climate conducive to peace.
The protection of the civilian population is imperative.

Costa Rica reiterates its condemnation of settlement
activities and land grabs, as well as announcements of
new construction. All attempts must cease, including
plans to demolish Khan Al-Ahmar and forcefully
displace the population. Such actions, as Costa Rica
sees it, are contrary to international law and undermine
the solution based on the peaceful coexistence of two

States. Each new settlement that is built in the occupied
territories is a new obstacle that stands in the way that
leads to peace.
Allow me to refer to the protracted situation in
Gaza, which has deteriorated rapidly in the past few
months. Poverty and unemployment have increased.
According to the report submitted to the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee for the Coordination of International
Assistance to Palestinians on 27 September, poverty
increased from 39 per cent in 2011 to 53 per cent in
2017. In the second quarter of 2018, the unemployment
rate in the Strip exceeded 53 per cent.

We are convinced that there is a close link between
the socioeconomic situation and the humanitarian
reality, which is aggravated by the unprecedented
funding crisis of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East. In
Gaza, the Agency provides access to primary health
care for 1.3 million people, access to education for more
than a quarter of a million children and food assistance
to almost 1 million refugees living in poverty.

It is therefore important to emphasize the
commendable work being done by the Agency, and
while my country is concerned about the severe
financial cuts to which it has been subject, the response
of the international community has been exemplary.
Costa Rica applauds the ministerial meeting held
in New York on 27 September, which sought to
mobilize political and financial support for the
Agency. Similarly, my country welcomes the support
of the World Bank, the United Nations Development
Programme and UN-Women, among others, which
are implementing economic assistance programmes to
promote employment opportunities focused mainly on
women and young people in Palestine.

I conclude by urging that we put into practice
the principles of multilateralism, which prioritize
solidarity, peace among rivals and the commitment
to achieve the interest of the entire international
community. The United Nations must play its role as the
epicentre of global governance, based on respect and
the joint search for solutions. At this critical juncture,
it is imperative to renew international and regional
efforts to help the parties achieve a just, comprehensive
and lasting peace based on the long-standing terms of
reference endorsed by the Council. Military options
are not solutions. War cannot be fought with more war.
Peace must be built with the use of tools that diplomacy,

multilateralism and peace education offer us to end that
humanitarian tragedy.

