Mr. Denisov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are pleased to welcome you, Sir, as
President of the Security Council. Your presence in this
Chamber, as well as the participation in today's meeting
of the Secretary-General and leaders and representatives
of a number of leading regional organizations,
convincingly demonstrates the importance of today's
discussion.

In the outcome document of the 2005 summit,
world leaders stated their commitment to ensuring
international security on the basis of a comprehensive,
collective approach and strict observance of the
Charter of the United Nations. An important element
for further efforts to enhance the effectiveness of the
world Organization, as the major multilateral
institution, is the gradual development of multifaceted
cooperation and coordination on the part of the United
Nations and the Security Council with regional and
other intergovernmental organizations, above all in the
sphere of peacekeeping. Such interaction, as is clearly
set forth in the outcome document, must continue to be
firmly based on the Charter, in particular, Chapter VIII.
No less important is the reaffirmation by world leaders
of the need for strict respect for basic principles and
criteria for international peacekeeping activities at all
stages of the processes of preventing and settling
conflicts, and also during post-conflict peacebuilding.

First and foremost, what we have in mind is the
immutability of the principle of the primary
responsibility of the Security Council for the
maintenance of international peace and security and its
exclusive prerogative to sanction the use of force by
the international community. The agenda of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
partners is becoming ever more multifaceted and larger
in scope.

In addition to peacekeeping and peacebuilding
tasks, we now have the fight against weapons of mass
destruction, the illegal spread of small arms and light
weapons, the settlement of other destabilizing
transborder problems and the fight against drug
trafficking and organized crime. In the area of
cooperation between the United Nations Security
Council and regional partners - and the list of these
organizations is well known - a great deal of positive
experience has been gained. That has to be built upon,
making use of it to solve increasingly complex
problems in the framework of the multifunctional
peacekeeping operations. We welcome precisely this
attitude, expressed today by representatives of the
relevant organizations, including the speaker who
directly preceded me, the Deputy Chair of the
Executive Committee of the Commonwealth for
Independent States (CIS), Mr. Kyrychenko.

The peacekeepers of the CIS, along with the
United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia, are
maintaining security and stability in the area of the
Georgian/Abkhazian conflict. This is not an easy task,
but there is no real alternative to interaction in this
format. Russia is determined to continue energetically
promoting enhanced trust and cooperation, first and
foremost in the peacekeeping sphere between the
United Nations and the CIS.

Of great potential is the cooperation being
established between the United Nations and the
Collective Security Treaty Organization. In the
framework of this organization intensive work is under
way to create its own peacekeeping potential, and that
includes involvement in United Nations peacekeeping
operations.

The Shanghai Cooperation Organization is playing
an important role in ensuring stability and security in the
Euro-Asian region. At its last summit, in Astana,
Kazakhstan, its members expressed willingness to
develop cooperation with the United Nations on a whole
series of timely tasks, including the fight against
international terrorism and illegal drug trafficking, as well
as promoting post-conflict settlement arrangements in
Afghanistan.

We are convinced that in developing the decisions
of the summit, regional partners and the world
Organization should continue to meet each other
halfway. We hope that the regional and subregional
organizations will offer their resources in a more active
way and help both in the prevention of conflicts and in
peacekeeping. For its part, the United Nations and the
Security Council should continue to pay unflagging
attention to strengthening coordination and cooperation
with these structures, with a reasonable division of
labour and respect for the authority of the Security
Council.
In this context, we note with satisfaction the
decision of the summit in favour of an official
agreement between the United Nations Secretariat and
the secretariats of the regional organizations. One of
the short-term priorities in the implementation of these
summit decisions is the establishment of a
Peacebuilding Commission, which is called upon to
help the Security Council and, to the extent possible,
other United Nations bodies in the speedy recovery of
countries emerging from crisis and establishing
guarantees to prevent conflicts from re-emerging. We
are certain that members of the United Nations will be
in a position to ensure the launching of the activities of
this Commission at the beginning of next year.

Russia consistently supports the holding of
regular high-level meetings between the United
Nations Secretary-General and the leadership of
regional organizations, and we note the agreements
achieved to increase such a practice, including by
holding such meetings on an annual basis.

We hope that adoption today of the Security
Council resolution at the initiative of Romania and, on
the whole, the outcome of today's discussion, will
allow us to make progress in the process of improving
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations. In that way we will be able, through our
joint efforts, to fully achieve the potential of the
collective security system set forth in the Charter of the
United Nations, the commitment to which was clearly
demonstrated by the participants in the 2005 summit.

