Mr. Shobokshi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, I would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council and to wish you every success.
We are convinced that, given your wisdom, qualities
and abilities, you will guide the work of the Council to
a successful conclusion. I should also like to thank
your predecessor, the Permanent Representative of
Denmark, for her wise and brilliant leadership of the
Council in the month of June.

I would also like to thank you, Sir, for convening
this public meeting of the Council to once again
consider the serious situation engulfing the occupied
Palestinian territories and Lebanon as a result of the
actions of the Israeli Government, its aggression, its
intransigence and its insistence on continuing a policy
that has led to much damage and destruction and has
produced many dead, wounded and displaced persons.

Yesterday we heard a briefing by the Secretary-
General that focused on the need to end the aggression.
We appreciate his efforts and those of his staff to bring
about peace and security. We agree with the briefing on
the need to have the international community assume
its role with courage and creativity in order to resolve
the Israeli-Palestinian issue and also settle the root
causes of the conflict in the region, namely, the lack of
comprehensive and just peace.

No one would doubt Israel's ability and skills at
slapping together a pretext to justify pursuing its
aggression and to cover its tracks, create chaos and
expose the region to greater disruption and tension.
This all-out war pursued by Israel against Lebanon
and, earlier, against Gaza cannot be justified by Israel's
pretext. It is regrettable that, despite what has taken
place in Lebanon - planned destruction, premeditated
killings and planned sabotage - the Security Council
has not yet found enough reasons to intervene, while
its responsibility is to maintain international peace and
security.

Today's international relations are in a very
dangerous state because of the primacy of the concept
of use of force over law and human values and custom.
That has taken us further from the rules of justice and
equity and has enshrined a double-standard policy in
political positions. It has also undermined the rules of
international law in an effort to erroneously justify the
legitimate right to self-defence that is set forth in the
United Nations Charter. This runs contrary to the
opinions of the International Court of Justice with
respect to the basis of the legitimate right to self-
defence and the conditions that justify such right. This
principle is enshrined in international law, but it has
been converted into an instrument to justify the
aggression pursued by the Government of Israel.

International disputes such as this one can be
resolved not by sending in armies or firing rockets or
bombing from the air, but instead by a commitment to
implement the provisions of international law and the
principles of justice and equity. It is urgent to end the
illusion and arrogance of military power, of barbarous
oppression, targeted killings and collective punishment
in violation of international law and humanitarian
norms and values.

History will not pardon the international
community for its failure to ensure justice for the
Palestinian people and the people of Lebanon, for
leaving any solutions to the conditions set by Israel and
for erroneous arguments and pretexts put forward, and
leaving the task to Israel to create peace as it sees it
and according to its positions - not peace that is based
on international law. This is not peace; it is surrender.
Failure to use the criteria of justice, the passivity of the
Council and its failure to assume its duties and
responsibilities have allowed for the ongoing Israeli
occupation and the expansion of Israeli settlements.
Those failures have also allowed for addressing the
Middle East question on the basis of Israeli interests.

All of this continues to be the very reason for the
failure of the peace process in the past and in the
present. The imbalances and biases with respect to the
Israeli State and the failure to implement the road map
set by the influential Powers and the Arab peace
initiative have killed the peace process in the past and
will kill it in future phases. Meetings and conferences,
statements and promises are all in vain if they are
aimed at just pretending to implement something
without addressing the root causes, namely, occupation
and repeated aggression by Israel against civilians and
the destruction of their property and livelihoods.

Saudi Arabia condemns the war pursued by Israel
and its premeditated and repeated destruction and its
unlimited violations of human rights, with the express
purpose of inflicting suffering on civilians without any
regard for international law or human considerations.
We issue a warning to the international
community of the seriousness of the situation in the
region and the fact that it is sliding towards a climate
of war and a new circle of violence whose results will
be difficult to predict, particularly given the failure of
international action and of Israel's aggressive policies.

Israel must bear responsibility for its barbaric
acts and must undertake to compensate Lebanon for
serious material damage caused by its aggression. This
barbaric war is an extension of policies of occupation
and hegemony as pursued by Israel in the region.

Saudi Arabia firmly supports the Government of
Lebanon and supports its efforts to uphold the interests
and the sovereignty and independence of Lebanon, as
well as its efforts to extend its authority throughout its
territory.

Our Kingdom also supports the Palestinian
Authority in its efforts to control the situation and to
uphold the unity of Palestine. Based on Saudi Arabia's
position of principle - solidarity with the legitimate
national regimes of brotherly Lebanon and of occupied
Palestine - we call upon the international community
to shoulder its legal and humanitarian responsibilities,
in order to put an end to the condemnable Israeli
aggression, to protect the Lebanese people and their
infrastructures and to support the efforts of the
legitimate Government of Lebanon that are aimed at
protecting the independence and sovereignty of
Lebanon and its people and at extending its authority
throughout the national territory.

We also call for an end to the blockade imposed
by Israel against the Palestinian people. We need to
support the efforts of the National Authority to achieve
their unity within the framework of national dialogue.

