Mr. Duclos (France) (spoke in French): My
delegation fully aligns itself with the statement that
will be made later by the representative of Finland on
behalf of the European Union. I would like to
commend Mr. Ibrahim Gambari for his briefing and
welcome the report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006)
(S/2006/670). France welcomes the determined action
by the Secretary-General and the Secretariat to ensure
the full implementation of that resolution.

With regard to the situation in Lebanon, France is
happy to note the first positive effects of resolution
1701 (2006). The cessation of hostilities has now
entered, as of yesterday, its second week. As the
Secretary-General has pointed out in his report, the two
parties have generally respected the agreed time of
Monday, 14 August, for the cessation of hostilities.

The Israeli military operation in the Bekaa valley
last Saturday was a source of considerable concern for
us. France calls on all parties to demonstrate the utmost
restraint and to respect the obligations incumbent upon
them under the terms of resolution 1701 (2006). It calls
upon them to continue and to complete, as soon as
possible, the process of the parallel deployment of the
Lebanese army and the withdrawal of the Israeli army.
The extension of the authority of the Lebanese
Government into the south is indeed a historic decision
which is to be welcomed and supported.

Now, the international community must strive to
ensure the achievement of several objectives: the
unconditional freeing of the Israeli prisoners; the
settlement of the sensitive issue of the Lebanese
detainees in Israel; the immediate return of displaced
persons to their homes and access by civilian
populations to humanitarian aid; the lifting of the
blockade against Lebanon; the respect by all of the

embargo on illegal arms; and the reinforcement of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
which must be diversified and made more robust so
that it can safely accomplish its missions.

France is making every effort through its contacts
with all the parties concerned to achieve, on the basis
of resolution 1701 (2006), a long-term solution to the
crisis in order to enhance the sovereignty, political
independence and territorial integrity of Lebanon, as
well as the security of Israel.

With regard to the Palestinian territories, France
continues to be extremely concerned by the
continuously worsening security situation and
humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip and the West
Bank. While the international community's attention
has been focused since mid-July on the Lebanese
crisis, France considers that the international
community should renew its involvement in the
settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, which
continues to be a major source of instability and
frustration in the region.

Of course, action by the international community
cannot be a substitute for determined measures by the
parties themselves, and those parties must respect their
obligations. The Palestinian Authority must
immediately take every necessary measure to put an
end to the firing of rockets and other acts of violence
against Israel and its citizens and to work for the
freeing of the kidnapped Israeli soldier. The Palestinian
Authority must also struggle, more than ever and with
the greatest determination, against terrorism. We
expect that the Hamas-led Government should finally
respect the three principles established by the Quartet:
to renounce violence, to recognize Israel and to accept
prior agreements. We reaffirm our support for President
Abbas and for all his efforts to strengthen the
Palestinian national consensus on the basis of the
objectives that he has been defending since his election
to the presidency of the Palestinian Authority.

Israel, for its part, must end its disproportionate
military operations against Palestinian towns and
refugee camps. Those operations have, over the past
few weeks, taken a very heavy toll in human terms,
particularly among civilians, and in terms of
considerable damage inflicted on basic infrastructure
and vital equipment, as well as on the institutions of
the Palestinian Authority.
In general terms, it is important that Israel refrain
from any measures that might undermine the
Palestinian Authority as an institution and as a future
negotiating partner. The recent arrests of the President
and the Secretary General of the parliament, as well as
of the Deputy Prime Minister, are, in this respect,
counterproductive. We once again call upon Israel to
free the members of the Government and the
Legislative Council and other Palestinian political
leaders whom it has imprisoned.

At this critical juncture for the Middle East, it is
essential that the international community work in a
determined way to relaunch the peace process. That
will require the updating the road map, in cooperation
with the regional parties concerned. The goal must be
to ensure that there is a negotiated political solution
leading to the creation of a viable and sovereign
Palestinian State, coexisting in peace and security with
Israel.

In this respect, France continues to be extremely
concerned about the continuing settlement process and
the building of the separation barrier within occupied
Palestinian territory. Both of those actions compromise
the geographic, economic and political viability of the
future State of Palestine.

In conclusion, I would like to recall something
that should be obvious to all: there is no military
solution to the conflicts in the Middle East. The deadly
conflicts that we have recently witnessed in Lebanon
and the Gaza Strip can lead only to further destruction,
greater hatred and increased radicalism. Only dialogue
and negotiation can enable the people of that region to
realize their legitimate aspirations for peace, prosperity
and security.

Diplomatic efforts are now under way by the
Secretary-General and a certain number of countries
that are in a position to facilitate the achievement of a
lasting solution to those two crises, which is essential
for the future of the region. France will continue to
work tirelessly for a comprehensive, just and lasting
settlement that is based on Security Council
resolutions, the terms of reference of the Madrid
Conference and the Arab Peace Initiative.
