Mr. Djedje (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): I
wish to thank you, Mr. President, for having convened
this open debate of the Security Council devoted to
children and armed conflict. The level of the debate
and the presence of the Deputy Prime Minister
demonstrate the firm commitment of the Government
of Viet Nam to that critical issue. I also commend the
work done by Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, to draw the international
community's attention to the impact of situations of
armed conflict on children.

The subject that we are discussing today was first
presented in detail to the international community in
1996, in Mrs. Graca Machel's report on the impact of
armed conflict on children. The firm and committed
reaction to that report led to the creation of the Office
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict and to the formulation
of a series of important Security Council resolutions
that established a process to enable the United Nations
and its Members to address this very serious problem.
We welcome the progress made by the Council,
including the monitoring and reporting mechanism and
the development of action plans to end the use of child
soldiers, and the important efforts made by the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.

The Government of C6te d'Ivoire fully
appreciates the deletion of the parties to the conflict in
Cote d'Ivoire from the list annexed to the report of the
Secretary-General on children and armed conflict.
Those parties have been delisted because they have
stopped recruiting children and have taken concerted
steps to identify and release children in order to permit
their reintegration. We welcome the fact that the
Working Group established by the Security Council has
taken note of the progress in Cote d'Ivoire, where
parties previously associated with the illegal
recruitment and use of child soldiers have put an end to
those practices.

Cote d'Ivoire would like to take this opportunity
to discuss a situation - one of which we are
sometimes unaware - that occurs following the
demobilization of children. Often, the reintegration of
children into their community is not as easy as one
would hope. Recidivism, or children's inability to
behave appropriately in their family or their
community, is a problem that deeply concerns us.

My Government welcomes the considerable work
carried out by UNICEF, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and their partners. However,
it is not possible to protect children without involving
the Governments of countries that face conflicts or that
are trying to rebuild after a conflict.

In that regard, the United Nations and the
Security Council must focus their efforts on promoting
national measures aimed at strengthening the
protection of children, at effectively implementing
programmes for the demobilization and reintegration of
minors, at creating social, economic and legal
conditions that will prevent recruitment and at
preventing other offences committed against children.

The rehabilitation and reintegration of all
children who have been associated with armed forces
or armed groups are essential. The international
community must thus continue to provide the resources
necessary to implement and promote national
rehabilitation and reintegration programmes in order to
ensure the long-term viability and success of such
interventions. Such programmes must also take account
of the particular concerns of girl combatants and girls
associated with armed groups. We call on partners to
include support for health and education as a priority in
their emergency programmes, so that education,
sanitation and health services and children's health
care continue in camps for refugees or displaced
persons during an armed conflict.

We hope that the comprehensive efforts made at
the level of the United Nations system and in
cooperation with interested States produce concrete
results that will improve the situation of children in
armed conflict.

As the Secretary-General indicated in his 2007
annual report on this subject (S/2007/757), the heart of
the process is the formulation of action plans by States
and non-State actors to put an end to the recruitment
and use of child soldiers. Such action plans have
proved to be effective ways to guide and measure the
progress made. However, I should like to emphasize
the following three points.
First, the Security Council must intensify its
efforts to prevent conflicts and safeguard peace, in
order to protect children by preventing or reducing the

causes of armed conflicts. However, when conflicts
erupt, the Council must strive to increase the
effectiveness of peacekeeping operations and to
improve the humanitarian situations in conflict areas.

Moreover, when we look at the issue of children
in armed conflict, we must constantly respect and
support the role of Governments, as stressed several
times in resolution 1612 (2005). Governments bear the
primary responsibility for protecting their children.
Other parties must seek the cooperation of the
Governments concerned so that they can together
remedy the violations committed against children in
armed conflicts.

The Security Council and its Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict must improve their
communication with the Governments concerned. They
must recognize and support the positive steps taken by
Governments to improve mutual trust. At the same
time, politicization of the issue of children must be
avoided. The protection of children should not be used
as a pretext for interference in a country's internal
affairs.

Finally, resolution 1612 (2005) must continue to
serve as a basis for improving and perfecting the
monitoring and reporting mechanism as well as the
Working Group's activities in general. It is paramount
that the Security Council address the issue of the scope
of the monitoring and reporting mechanism. Currently,
the mechanism is activated only in the event of
violations related to the recruitment and use of child
soldiers, and it is applied systematically only to
situations that are formally included on the Council's
agenda. In fact, the mechanism should be automatically
applied to all situations of armed conflict in which the
safety and rights of children are violated by armed
forces or armed groups.

In conclusion, I should like to urge the United
Nations not to resort systematically to sanctions when
dealing with the issue of children and armed conflict,
because situations differ from one another. As for
parties to conflicts, I urge them to fulfil their
obligations by respecting international humanitarian
law and protecting the rights of children.

Finally, with regard to development partners,
during the period of post-conflict reconstruction they
must give priority to reintegrating children into the
family, school and society and must ensure that the
resources provided are adequate and substantial.
