Mr. Skau (Sweden): Let me join others in thanking
Foreign Minister Kurz for his briefing this morning
and for his leadership as Chairperson-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE).

The European security order continues to be
seriously challenged. The OSCE, as the largest regional
security organization under Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations, has an indispensable role to play
in upholding the rules-based order in the region and in
sustaining peace. In the light of that, we welcome and
offer our full and active support for the Austrian OSCE
chairmanship and the efforts of Minister Kurz.

Based on commonly agreed principles and
commitments, as enshrined most notably in the Helsinki
Final Act and the Paris Charter, the OSCE offers a
unique platform for dialogue on European peace and
security. At present, the principle that States should
refrain in their international relations from the threat or
use of force against the territorial integrity or political
independence of any State is being violated. Breaches
of that core principle, which is enshrined in the United
Nations Charter as well as in the OSCE Acquis, are of
fundamental concern to all of us. European security,
like the security of other regions, depends on a rules-
based international order where the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of all States, large and small,
is respected.

As we also highlighted in yesterday's open debate
on conflicts in Europe, the comprehensive concept of
security remains a strength and an added value provided
by the OSCE and must be upheld (see S/PV.7886).
Respect for democracy, the rule of law, human rights
and fundamental freedoms remains a precondition for
our j oint security. It is therefore worrying that the OSCE
human-dimension and autonomous institutions - the
Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights,
the Representative on Freedom of the Media, and the
High Commissioner on National Minorities - are
under pressure. They are key assets across the conflict
cycle and are needed today more than ever. The OSCE
Chairmanship has an important role to play as the
guardian of those principles and commitments, and in
preserving the comprehensive concept of security and
those independent institutions.

Today, our fundamental principles continue to
be violated by Russia's ongoing aggression against
Ukraine, its illegal annexation of Crimea and Sevastopol
and its military actions in eastern Ukraine. Ukraine's
sovereignty and territorial integrity, its political
independence and right to freely choose its security
arrangements must be fully respected. We reaffirm
our strong support for the OSCE Special Monitoring
Mission to Ukraine, which much be given full, safe and
unhindered access throughout the country.

The so-called protracted conflicts in Georgia,
Moldova and Nagorno Karabakh also constitute long-
lasting violations of our common OSCE acquis. They
must be resolved in accordance with international law
and OSCE principles and commitments. The Chairs
of the Minsk Group have a special responsibility in
bringing those processes forward.

There is an obvious need for strong conventional
arms-control instruments and confidence-building
measures, which contribute to transparency and
predictability. In that context, we would especially like
to highlight this year's launch of a structured dialogue
in the OSCE on current and future challenges and risks
aimed at exploring possibilities in the military area for
building confidence and reducing risk.

We welcome the Chairmanship's intention to
mainstream a gender perspective into all its activities.
Gender aspects, including the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), must be an integral part of all
our security-related work, in Vienna as well as in the
field missions.

In conclusion, in a speech to the Security Council
open debate on conflict prevention and sustaining
peace on 10 January, Secretary-General Guterres
underlined the fundamental importance of restoring
trust among Member States so as to prevent and avoid
conflict (see S/PV.7857). We therefore welcome the
Austrian chairmanship's focus on building trust - a
trust that can be regained only through restored respect
for common principles and commitments, and through
deeds, not words.

