Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
At the outset, I wish to extend our warm welcome to
you, Mr. President, for coming to New York and
personally presiding over this open debate. I would
also like to thank you for your kind words addressed to
me as President during July.

Ambassador Camilo Reyes Rodriguez,
representative of Colombia to the United Nations
Office in Geneva, successfully chaired the United
Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects and also
facilitated the adoption by the Conference of the
Programme of Action. This month, thanks to your
country's efforts, we are able to have this open debate
today on the same issue. I would like to express our
appreciation to Colombia for its efforts and
contributions in this regard. I also want to take this
opportunity to thank the Secretary-General for the
statement he has just made.

In recent years, the excessive accumulation of
and illicit trafficking in small arms have exacerbated
wars and conflicts in certain countries and regions,
undermined post-conflict reconstruction and given rise
to serious humanitarian problems. This has drawn
widespread concern within the international
community. The Programme of Action adopted at the
Conference last month identifies in explicit terms
concrete measures to be taken to deal with this issue at
global, regional and national levels, and it marks a
good beginning for the international effort toward
solving the issue of illicit trade and trafficking in small
arms.

As the organ with the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security, the
Security Council frequently has to face the issue of
small arms in its work, especially when reviewing
regional hot-spot issues. In recent years, in its
discussions of issues such as disarmament,
demobilization, and reintegration (DDR) programmes,
the protection of civilians, women, and children in
armed conflict, and the prevention of armed conflict,
the Council has always paid special attention to the
issue of small arms. In 1999, the Council adopted a
presidential statement on this issue. All this can be
considered an important component of the international
effort towards an early resolution of the issue of small
arms.

The Chinese delegation supports the Security
Council continuing to give, within its mandate, the
necessary attention to the issue of small arms. In our
View, such attention should be more reflected in the
review of specific issues. Although the Council is not a
specialized organ that deals with the issue of small
arms, the work it does in this regard represents a
crucial part in the global effort for this purpose. The
Council should strengthen its cooperation and
coordination with other relevant United Nations bodies
on this issue, so that each can play its due part and
synergy can be achieved.

The problem of excessive accumulation of and
illicit trafficking in small arms is most serious and
salient on the African continent, with a few countries
there bearing the brunt of the impact. Therefore, we
believe that special attention must be paid to the issue
of small arms in that region. In reviewing conflicts in
the African region, the Security Council should listen
carefully to views of concerned parties on the issue of
small arms and step up its cooperation in this regard
with relevant regional organizations. In its efforts to
promote peace processes, carry out DDR programmes,
dispatch peacekeeping missions, adopt arms embargoes
and launch peace-building processes, full consideration
should always be given to the issue of small arms as an
important factor.

Firmly opposed to the illegal production of small
arms and supporting the efforts of the international
community against the illicit trade in small arms, China
has made its own contribution to the resolution of this
issue. Among other things, the Chinese delegation to
the Conference last month made a five-point
proposition to that end, which I would like to reiterate
as follows.

First, based on their specific national conditions,
countries should formulate and improve their
legislation and regulations on the production,
possession, transfer and stockpiling of small arms and
take practical measures to ensure strict enforcement.
Secondly, countries and regions should step up their
cooperation and coordination in combating the illicit
trade in small arms. Thirdly, the international
community should further support countries and
regions in their efforts to deal with the issue of small
arms, and the United Nations and other relevant
international organizations have an important role to
play in this regard. Fourthly, while seeking to end
tensions and conflicts in relevant countries and regions,
the international community should also make vigorous
efforts to help them develop their economies, eradicate
poverty and achieve sustainable development and
lasting peace and stability so as to address the problem
of small arms at its roots. Fifthly, the sovereignty of
States should be respected and their right to the legal
production, possession and transfer of small arms
should not be compromised.

These five points put forward by the Chinese
delegation are an outgrowth of our thorough
consideration and study of all aspects of the illicit trade
in small arms, as well as its underlying causes and
background. We are confident that, so long as the
international community works together, continuous
progress will be achieved in dealing with the issue of
small arms.

