Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank Under-Secretary-General Herve' Ladsous for
having launched this important meeting and for his
guidance ofthis discussion. I extend a warm welcome to
the Force Commanders. The clarity of their perspectives
works for an increased synergy between the Security
Council and the situation on the ground. I commend
them, especially in light of the great sacrifices they
make in heading the various peacekeeping operations.

Guatemala attaches fundamental importance to
United Nations peacekeeping operations, among other
reasons because we are a country that has benefited
directly from them. They fulfil a basic function of the
United Nations and constitute an indispensable tool
in the Organization's work, in which we take part as
a troop-contributing country in South America, Africa
and the Middle East. United Nations peacekeeping forces
continue to evolve conceptually and operationally, as
we have heard this morning. The increase in the number
of peacekeeping operations in recent years has placed
ever greater demands on United Nations resources,
posing unprecedented challenges. Clearly, addressing
them will require the attention and participation of all
parties - the Security Council, Member States and the
Secretariat.

We thank the Force Commanders in attendance
today for sharing their important thoughts with us.
Because we have troops and observers in all their
missions, Guatemala has direct knowledge ofthe quality
of their leadership and the depth of their commitment.
We would like to make a few brief observations.

First, we reiterate the important need for
peacekeeping operations to have clear, feasible and
verifiable mandates that are adapted to each specific
situation. Clearly, the primary responsibility for
meeting those conditions falls to the Council.

Secondly, we are right to demand results from the
heads of missions and from the troops in the field.
However, we must also ensure that we provide them
with the necessary tools to effectively carry out their
tasks.

Thirdly, we must address the issue of the large
gaps in capacity, resources and training, through better
coordination among the Security Council, the General
Assembly - through the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations and the Fifth Committee -the
Secretariat and the troop-contributing countries. In that
respect, the comments of Lieutenant General Prakash
of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo are
most useful.

Fourthly, we emphasize the importance of
attaching the utmost priority to improving the security
and protection of personnel deployed in the field,
in particular when dealing with crisis situations or a
complex political environment. For their part, host
Governments must respect the basic principles of
peacekeeping operations.

Fifthly, the four Force Commanders whom we
heard from today discussed both the advantages and
the challenges they face in dealing with multinational
troops, in particular in attempting to integrate a diverse
range of military strategies from various cultures
into a cohesive and integrated force. Like others, we
believe that troop-contributing countries themselves
can contribute to that coherence by preparing their
troops and officers before they are integrated into a
peacekeeping mission. For its part, the Guatemalan
Ministry of Defence has established a specialized
training school to train troops and officers of the
entire Central American region who are subsequently
deployed in peacekeeping operations.

Sixthly, we greatly appreciated the comments
made by Major General Fernando Rodrigues Goulart
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti,
which focused on the contribution made by the
military component to ensure the stabilization of the
host country and to support its institutions. In general
terms, the military component is the largest component
of a mission and frequently serves as the face of the
mission for the local population. Accordingly, it is
important to provide the necessary training in areas
such as cooperation between the military and civilians
and sensitive areas concerning respect for culture,
customs and traditions of the host country, as well as
conduct and discipline in relation to gender matters and
other related issues.

Finally, we would like to take this opportunity
provided by having all of the Force Commanders here in
the Council today in order to ask how we in the Council
can better integrate the opinions of the personnel
serving in the field and the feedback provided by Force
Commanders.

