Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): Today is a sad day.
The killings in Gaza during the past 15 days have been
taking place under the media spotlight. The collective
punishment of the citizens of Gaza is being recorded
live. Innocent, non-combatant and unarmed Palestinian
men, women and children are being mowed down. One
quarter of those killed are children, and three quarters
civilians. Death is coming to them from the sky, from
the water and from land. Their chastisement is complete
and definitive. Nobody can help them.

The world street is appalled and angry. It cannot
believe that neither the Security Council, nor the most
powerful nations on Earth nor influential regional
organizations cannot stop the carnage in Gaza.

It is not really war, because one side is mighty and
well-armed and the other side is ill-equipped and using
some projectiles. The Palestinians, who do not have a
standing army, are being pummelled by one of the most
modern and sophisticated military machines. There is
no proportionality. The asymmetry could not be more
glaring. And yet, military muscle offers no solution.
All sides must overcome their existential fears and
build trust. The parties must cease fire and move to the
negotiating chambers.

We understand the complexity of the situation
and the political and strategic rebalancing involved.
And yet, the human mind cannot reconcile itself to
the continuation of killings that could be stopped. The
Council has acted swiftly, and also decisively, from time
to time on Syria, Libya, Yemen, the Central African
Republic, Mali and Ukraine. People all around the
world wonder why on Gaza it has been able to produce
only a press statement or elements for the press.

The people of Gaza are in an open prison in the best
of circumstances. Now they are getting killed in their
prison. Violence begets violence, and peace engenders
peace. The relentless bloodshed must be stopped and
peace talks initiated. Both sides should cease fire and
give diplomatic efforts a chance to succeed. No initiative
for a ceasefire should be spurned, because a cessation of
hostilities will save lives instantly, although the recent
trauma will haunt the region for years. Missiles and
rockets should go silent. Let people start talking and
listening to each other. This spiral must be arrested.

Pakistan condemns the Israeli aggression. People
in Pakistan have expressed their solidarity with the
entrapped and embattled people of Gaza through
protests, rallies and resolutions. Prime Minister Nawaz
Sharif has said that Israeli atrocities amount to genocide
and has demanded that the world stop that aggression.
President Barack Obama has said, "we do not want to see
any more civilians killed". The international diplomacy
initiated by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, Secretary
of State John Kerry and the Egyptian leadership must be
intensified. One of the reasons for the recent escalation
of violence is the collapse of the peace process. We
endorse the Secretary-General's message to Israelis
and Palestinians: stop fighting, start talking and take
on the root causes of the conflict.

As we work for an end to the hostilities, efforts
must also be made to revive the peace talks. The Middle
East cannot have enduring peace without a two-State
solution. An independent, viable and geographically
contiguous Palestinian State, on the basis of the pre-
1967 borders, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital,
living side by side with Israel, is the only way to
guarantee peace and stability in the region.

We call on the Security Council to act by adopting
a resolution that would call for an immediate and
unconditional ceasefire, halt Israeli air, ground and
naval offensives, and remove Israeli forces from Gaza.
The Security Council should play its role in ending the
blockade of Gaza and opening its border and in the
release of Palestinian prisoners. As diplomatic efforts
continue, we call for humanitarian pauses to help
those who are badly wounded and those stranded in
temporary shelters. The children and women of Gaza
are crying for help. The Council must listen to their
wails and heed their cries.

