Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Many thanks, Sheikh Hamad bin Jassem bin Jabr Al-
Thani, for convening this open Council debate.
Argentina recognizes the deep commitment of the State
of Qatar to the Middle East peace process and wishes
to thank you for the efforts that you personally have
made this year in that regard.

My delegation thanks and congratulates the
Secretary-General, Kofi Annan, for introducing his
report on the developments in the situation in the
Middle East during his 10-year term of office. We
believe that the analysis provided by Mr. Annan is
particularly valuable and should receive careful
consideration by the Security Council and the
international community in general with an eye to the
future.

Argentina agrees with the Secretary-General's
analysis and with his main observations and
recommendations. In its capacity as a non-permanent
member of the Security Council, Argentina has on
various occasions closely followed the developments
described by Mr. Annan, particularly during what we
could call the height of the post-Oslo era, the
beginning of the second intifada and the current
difficult juncture. Based on our own experience during
those years, our conclusions are similar to those
presented to us by the Secretary-General. Thus, we
have repeatedly expressed them throughout our current
Council term, which ends this month.

Despite the dismal panorama presented by the
Middle East peace process - on which all speakers
have agreed - today we are more than ever convinced
that we must not allow the legitimate aspirations of the
peoples of the region to sink into oblivion. We know
that the primary responsibility for the current,
regrettable state of affairs lies with the parties that have
long been directly involved in this conflict.
Nevertheless, we cannot fail to point out that the
international community in general, and the Security
Council in particular, share part of that responsibility.
This body's inability to respond to - and put an end
to - the deepening crisis in the Middle East has been
particularly obvious, especially over the past two years
and, I would say, the past year.

The Israeli-Palestinian conflict is at the heart of
the Middle East peace process, and that is the aspect to
which we must attach the highest priority. In recent
years, the Quartet, through the Road Map, has been
entrusted with the task of leading the process, defining
what the outcome of the peace process should be and
the path that the parties should follow in order to bring
it about. In spite of the efforts undertaken since 2002,
the goal of two States living side by side in peace and
security has continued to be as elusive and as difficult
to achieve as ever, and progress has stalled in the first
stages.

That failure does not mean that the Quartet and
the Road Map are mechanisms that have lost their
usefulness or that they should be abandoned. However,
it is clear that, if the Quartet does not engage more
actively in monitoring the implementation of a revised
Road Map and does not play a more proactive role in
the peace process, it will become of little relevance.
We therefore call upon the members of the Quartet, the
main regional players and the Security Council to
reflect deeply on this matter and to reactivate their role
before it is too late.

As we have said before, the parties directly
involved are primarily responsible for the stalemate in
the peace process. In recent years, neither Israel nor the
Palestinian Authority has fulfilled its obligations, and
the exchange of mutual accusations has not contributed
to the fostering of a climate of trust and cooperation.

We need hardly recall that some Israeli practices,
including the expansion of settlements, the
construction of the separation barrier in the West Bank,
extrajudicial executions, the excessive use of force, the
arbitrary arrest of Palestinian officials and legislators
and the stifling of the economy of the Gaza Strip do
not contribute to fostering among the Palestinian
population a sense of confidence and optimism about
the future. Worse, they fuel extremism and encourage
the rejection of compromise. The humanitarian crisis in
Gaza has further exacerbated the already dire living
situation faced by the Palestinian people.

On the other hand, the inability or unwillingness
of the Palestinians to maintain peace and order in
Gaza, to prevent further rocket attacks against Israel, to
release the Israeli soldier Gilad Shalit, to reform its
institutions, to eradicate corruption - a failure that has
very significant political consequences - and to
combat violent extremism do not help to generate
confidence in Israel regarding the need to negotiate
with a Palestinian counterpart - a counterpart with

which it will, eventually, have to negotiate.
Regrettably, the current attitude of the Hamas
Government not to comply with international
requirements further complicates the situation.

In spite of that disheartening picture, we believe
that there are some positive events that have the
potential to change the dynamic. One is the Gaza
ceasefire, which we believe should be extended to the
West Bank and accompanied by a number of additional
measures, such as the deployment of international
observers on the basis of agreement with both parties.
Talks should also be resumed between Prime Minister
Olmert and President Abbas on the possible
establishment of a mechanism for the protection of
civilians that is acceptable to both parties.

In this context, we also support the proposal to
convene an international conference with a similar
format to that used at the 1991 Madrid Conference,
with a view to relaunching the peace process on all of
its tracks.

Although we have focused on the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict, we also attach a great deal of
importance to the quest for a resolution on the Israeli-
Lebanese and Israeli-Syrian tracks. With regard to the
situation between Israel and Lebanon, we reaffirm our
commitment to the full implementation of resolution
1701 (2006) and other Council resolutions. With
respect to the situation between Israel and Syria, a
fundamental element of the search for comprehensive
peace is the end of the Israeli occupation of the Golan
Heights and the return of that territory to Syria, in
accordance with Security Council resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973).

In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm once again
Argentina's profound commitment to a just and lasting
peace in the Middle East that benefits all the peoples of
the region, based on the relevant Security Council
resolutions, the Madrid terms of reference, including
the principle of land for peace, and the Arab Peace
Initiative.

