Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): My
delegation wishes to express its gratitude to South
Africa and to the Non-Aligned Movement for having
taken the initiative to hold this very timely open debate
on the situation in Iraq.

My delegation listened with interest to the
statements made by preceding speakers and shares the
general concern at the mounting tension created by the
problem of disarming Iraq.

As a country associated with the European Union,
Bulgaria supports the statement made yesterday by the
representative of Denmark on behalf of the European
Union.

As the Secretary-General recalled in the
statement he made at the outset of the debate - a
statement that my country endorses - it is now more
than ever necessary to maintain the credibility of the
United Nations. For Bulgaria, maintaining the central
role of the Security Council in resolving the Iraqi
problem is of crucial importance. My country is
convinced that the United Nations and the Security
Council are in a position to resolve the crisis through
diplomatic means in keeping with the Charter of the
United Nations and the principles of international law.

President Bush's speech before the General
Assembly on 12 September 2002, as well as his
subsequent public statements and those of other
American leaders, attest to the fact that the United
States has made the fundamental choice to use the
mechanism of the Security Council, which cannot be
circumvented, to resolve the problem of disarming
Iraq. Bulgaria, which attaches great importance to the
principle of multilateralism as a regulating principle for
international relations, is encouraged by this choice on
the part of the United States.

My country is convinced that the range of
diplomatic means for a peaceful solution of the crisis
has not yet been exhausted.

The Bulgarian delegation is grateful to the
Secretary-General for his constructive role in the
dialogue with Iraq. His political experience, wisdom,
humanity and moral prestige are valuable assets for the
United Nations and the Security Council at this crucial
moment in the history of our Organization, at a time
when its credibility is being sorely tested.

Bulgaria is grateful to the Executive Chairman of
the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and
Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC), Mr. Hans Blix,
for having made his skills and professionalism
available to the Council. His independent judgement is
not to be doubted. Bulgaria reiterates its full
confidence in him and wishes to assure him, as well as
Mr. ElBaradei, the head of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA), of its full support.

The time has come objectively to assess the often
turbulent relations that have existed between Iraq and
the Security Council since 1991. It must be
acknowledged that, had Iraq abided by resolution 687
(1991) in 1991, the sanctions would have been lifted at
that time. However, that was not what happened. The
cat-and-mouse game between the Iraqi authorities and
the inspectors mandated by the Security Council has
benefited no one, least of all international peace and
security, which have been put at risk on more than one
occasion.

Bulgaria is categorical that only a frank and
honest dialogue between the Security Council and Iraq
can alleviate existing tensions. My country calls on
Iraq fully to cooperate with the Security Council and to
abide fully, unconditionally and without delay by the
Council's resolutions.

Among Iraq's obligations under the relevant
Security Council resolutions, those relating to the
destruction of weapons of mass destruction are an
undeniable priority for the international community.
Our debate has once again made this clear.

Yesterday the representative of Iraq said - as did
the Iraqi Minister for Foreign Affairs in the General
Assembly almost a month ago - that Iraq had no
weapons of mass destruction. Let us take the Iraqi
authorities at their word. If that is the case, nothing
should stop them from providing immediate,
unconditional and unimpeded access to UNMOVIC
and IAEA inspectors, to all sites that the latter deem
necessary and to all organizations and individuals that
the inspectors might wish to question, under the
conditions that they deem necessary for the fulfilment
of their task.

One very important aspect of the Iraqi
question- a human aspect - is Iraq's non-
compliance with the provisions of the relevant Security
Council resolutions regarding the return of Kuwaiti and
third-country nationals, Kuwait property and the
Kuwaiti national archives, as well as the resumption of
Iraq's participation in the work of the Tripartite
Commission, under the auspices of the International
Committee of the Red Cross. Bulgaria takes this
opportunity to reiterate its appeal to Iraq to comply
with these resolutions.

Given the difficult history of relations between
Iraq and the Security Council, it is clear that
UNMOVIC will not be able to complete its work
without a stronger and clearer mandate. This mandate
can emanate only from a new Security Council
resolution. My country is prepared to work for the
adoption of such a resolution as soon as possible.

Bulgaria is firmly convinced that a peaceful
solution to the problem of disarming Iraq is possible.
The road to peace is certainly narrow; it is not easy and
has obstacles of all kinds, but it does exist. At the end
of the road is the lifting of sanctions against Iraq and
the lasting normalization of the situation in that
country and throughout the region.

Aware of its obligations under Article 24 of the
Charter of the United Nations as an elected member of
the Security Council, my country will make a
constructive contribution to the settlement of the
problem of the disarmament of Iraq. Bulgaria is
prepared to work together with the other members of
the Council to find a solution to this problem that is in
keeping with the Charter of the United Nations and the
principles of international law. We all have heard the
appeal of the Secretary-General, who reminded us that
only unity in the Security Council can enable us to
send a strong and clear message to Iraq so that it will
fully comply with the relevant Council resolutions. My
country unreservedly supports this appeal. Bulgaria
believes that in the current situation, the unity of the
Council is at the heart of its approach and of its action.

