Mr. Rovensky (Czech Republic): The Czech Republic
has always considered the relationship between Croats and
Serbs within Croatia, as well as between Croatia and the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, to be a critical one for the
entire region. The siege of Vukovar, the shelling of
Dubrovnik, the "ethnic cleansing" of Eastern Slavonia and,
a couple of years later, of Sectors North and South
punctured the monotony of even the bad news coming from
the region.

The Erdut-Zagreb Basic Agreement between the
Government of Croatia and the Serb authorities in Eastern
Slavonia punctures the monotony again - this time with
hope. It subscribes to the basic principles that have been
repeatedly underlined in this Council's deliberations in the
past years: solving problems through negotiations; respect
for human rights; the repudiation of "ethnic cleansing"; and
commitment to the territorial integrity of Croatia within its
internationally recognized borders.

The cornerstone of the Basic Agreement is the setting
up of a Transitional Administration in Sector East for one
year, possibly two. However, my delegation has noted with
some concern the generality of many of the provisions of
the Basic Agreement. We have come to understand that the
two parties managed to agree on the general language but
were irreconcilably divided when it came to the details.
They are willing, we understand, to pass the "hot potato" of
details over to the Council and to abide by whatever details
the Council might use to fill the rather vast voids in the
shell of the overall Agreement.

They are thus eager to pass the responsibility for the
content of their Agreement to this Council, even while we
in the Council have always argued that the prime
responsibility for shaping their future must reside, in just
about all situations, with the parties in conflict themselves.
We recognize the request to establish a Transitional
Administration for Sector East and will consider it
expeditiously, relying on the Secretary-General's
assistance. We will return to the details of this
Administration on another day.

Meanwhile, we trust that both parties will refrain
from any military adventures, a thought which, on this
particular day, seems to be so far from our minds. But
then, military minds have repeatedly demonstrated that
they are moved by a different logic.

