Mr. Nambiar (India): We congratulate you on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
the month of March and express our appreciation to
you for convening this open debate on an issue that has
continued to engage the anxious attention of the
Council, as it has of the entire world community. My
delegation addressed this issue a fortnight ago in the
Council. Therefore, I shall be brief today.

We are grateful to the Mr. Hans Blix and Mr.
Mohamed ElBaradei, the heads of the United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
(UNMOVIC) and the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA), respectively, for their briefings on
7 March on the progress of inspections since their last
report to the Council. The reports do indicate progress
in cooperation extended by Iraq to UNMOVIC and
IAEA.

We recognize the growing atmosphere of
foreboding tension within the Council as it comes to
grips with how to proceed with the matter in the
immediate future. As the discussions enter a critical
phase, it is important to underline that our focus should
be on the need to secure the disarmament of Iraq
without resorting to armed force as far as possible.
That this requires full, active and immediate
compliance by Iraq with resolution 1441 (2002) and
earlier resolutions is obvious. But it also requires a
strong unity of purpose on the part of the Security
Council so that the credibility of the United Nations is
not weakened.

We believe that the universe of discourse should
remain the implementation of the relevant resolutions
of the Council. Iraq must cooperate actively with the
inspection process and comply fully with those
resolutions. Of course, the international community has
to strike a balance between the objective of achieving
Iraq's full compliance with United Nations resolutions
and the means adopted to reach that goal. This balance
can best be achieved through a collective decision of
the international community through the United
Nations. There is a need to persevere in this direction
by establishing clear thresholds, if necessary. If giving
more time and laying down clearer criteria would help
the process of United Nations-based decision-making,
that should be given a chance.

India has consistently advocated a peaceful
resolution of the Iraq issue. We are as conscious as any
other delegation of the incalculable costs in human and
material terms that a war would impose on the region
and beyond. We maintain that force should be resorted
to only as the very last, unavoidable option, and only
as authorized by the Security Council. We have also
called for steps to ensure that any measures taken by
the Council would not have an adverse impact on the
humanitarian situation, which is already extremely
difficult. The Council should also bear in mind the
alleviation of the situation of the Iraqi people. Finally,
the measures taken by the Security Council should
ensure the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Iraq.

As we stated on 17 October 2002, what the
Council does at this juncture could well represent a
defining moment in the way the relations among States
are ordered. At that time we called for the active
exploration, under United Nations auspices, of possible
alternatives to avoid recourse to military action or the
use of force. We stressed the need to safeguard the
interests of the countries of the region as well as of
those who have vital stakes in the region. These
considerations remain as valid today, since very little
has changed in the situation.

If the actions of the Council are to be seen to
possess legitimacy, they must issue from a body that is
united and that acts responsibly to ensure compliance
by the regime in Iraq, ensures stability in the
immediate neighbourhood and safeguards international
peace and security in the region as a whole.

