Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): I thank you, Sir, for
having convened this important debate. I would like
to welcome the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, Mr. Nicholas
Haysom, and thank him for his inaugural briefing. I
also thank the Executive Director ofthe United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, Mr. Yury Fedotov, for his
very informative briefing. I recognize the presence
of Ambassador Tanin, Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan, thank him for his statement.

The peaceful resolution of the post-election
political crisis in Afghanistan marks a very significant
development in the political process of the country. We
commend the United Nations, the United States and
former President Hamid Karzai for their mediation
efforts, which led to the agreement between President
Ghani and Mr. Abdullah to form a National Unity
Government. We welcome that agreement and note
that it has led to a considerable reduction of tensions
in Afghanistan. It has also fostered an atmosphere of
optimism about the country's future. We urge both
leaders to build a scaffold around this remarkable
achievement by expediting the formation of the Cabinet
to execute President Ghani's reform agenda.

With regard to the reform agenda, we welcome
its focus on governance, the rule of law, regional
engagement, national reconciliation and the fight
against corruption. We believe that placing appropriate
priority on national reconciliation is indeed a valid step
in the right direction. We take positive note ofthe efforts
of President Ghani to facilitate peace talks, especially
with religious leaders. His invitation to the Taliban and
other militant groups to join the inter-Afghan dialogue
is a strident effort towards reconciliation. We urge all
Afghans to embrace dialogue as the path to lasting
peace and stability in the country.

The security situation in Afghanistan remains
volatile. The recent wave of attacks against civilians
carried out by the Taliban and other terrorist groups
serves to underscore the challenges that the country
continues to face in terms of security. We condemn
in the strongest terms all acts of violence against
civilian populations. We pay special tribute to the
Afghan Security Forces for their demonstrated ability
to clear and recover contested areas from insurgents.
International assistance to Afghanistan will remain
crucial in sustaining the ability of the Afghan security
forces to fight the terrorists, insurgents and other
criminal elements destabilizing the country.

We note the pledge by Afghanistan's NATO allies
and partners to support the country's security forces
with approximately $5.1 billion per annum until the
end of 2017. It is our hope that this assistance will
provide the much-needed support to help Afghanistan
prepare to assume full financial responsibility for its
security forces by 2024, as envisaged under the NATO-
Afghanistan Enduring Partnership.

Turning to regional cooperation, we believe that
this is critical to resolving the crisis in Afghanistan and
surmounting the challenges confronting neighbouring
States in the region. President Ghani has demonstrated
the critical importance he attaches to cooperation with
his neighbours through various engagements at the
bilateral and multilateral levels. We take note of the
outcome of the fourth Ministerial Conference of the
Istanbul Process on Afghanistan, held in October in
Beijing. The meeting provided a platform for addressing
issues, including terrorism, drug-trafficking, poverty
and violent extremism, that threaten the peace and
security of the region.

The meeting between President Ghani and Prime
Minister Sharif of Pakistan was also significant. It
presented an opportunity for both leaders to deliberate
on the security challenges confronting both countries.
We urge them to strengthen their engagement to enable
them to find lasting solutions to the cross-border threats
to their sovereignty and territorial integrity.

In terms of counter-narcotics, we welcome the
engagement of Mr. Fedotov with the Afghan authorities.
The Secretary-General's report (S/2014/876) indicates
that, while progress has been made by local authorities
in fighting drug-trafficking, considerable challenges
still remain. One of those challenges is the increase
in the area under opium cultivation, as a consequence
of which opium production in 2014 may increase by
17 per cent. Nigeria believes that an integrated counter-
narcotics approach is necessary to check the production
of opium. With the crop generating as much is
$850 million in revenues, it is clear that it poses a grave
threat as a source of terrorist financing in Afghanistan,
and indeed beyond. Concerted national, regional and
international action to address this challenge is vital
and must be stayed and sustained in that direction.

