Mr. Biaboroh-Iboro (Congo) (spoke in French):
My delegation would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for having organized this public debate on the situation
in the Middle East, which is currently experiencing the
horrors of war. There is nothing routine about this
monthly meeting, given that it is taking place against
the backdrop of open warfare in both Gaza and
Lebanon.

My delegation would like to thank Mr. Nambiar
for the briefing he has given us regarding the mission
to the region carried out by the high-level team. I
should also like to thank Mr. Egeland for the
information he has provided to us about the
humanitarian crisis.

It is undeniable that the situation in the Middle
East in recent days is greatly alarming. It is also urgent
that an effective response from the international
community be provided to relieve the suffering of
civilians, particularly women and children, hostages
and victims of acts of war of unprecedented violence
both in Lebanon and Palestine and in Israel.

We already had an opportunity in this Chamber to
say what we think about this situation. Today, the time
has come to seek appropriate solutions. The destructive
violence must rapidly give way to a peaceful
settlement and to an end of fighting, which is a
precondition for a peaceful solution but is above all a
necessary condition to relieve the unspeakable plight of
the civilians in that region.
The Security Council, fortified by the primary
responsibility that falls to it within the framework of
maintaining international peace and security, must
clearly and firmly call upon the protagonists to the
conflict to immediately cease hostilities. That is the
least that we can do today.

My delegation believes that it is unacceptable,
indeed inconceivable, that the Council would maintain
a prolonged silence, given the increased deterioration
of a situation with dramatic consequences for the life
of civilian populations. It is unacceptable that we
would indulge in speculations on the outcome of an
armed conflict because experience tells us, particularly
in this region, that no military victory will produce a
sustainable resolution of the complicated issues facing
the States and entities of the Middle East.

More than ever, we must heed the moving appeals
of leaders and populations in the region and not
abandon them to their own fate. We must contribute to
easing their suffering, particularly by establishing
conditions by which they can move about and have
access to emergency assistance via humanitarian
corridors in Lebanon.

Yes, we are duty-bound, in order not to be
complicit, to respond to the distress of innocent
populations who are trapped by a pattern of war and
extremism. My delegation calls upon all parties to the
conflict to comply with their highest obligation to
protect civilians against attack, in accordance with the
principles of international humanitarian law.

Yes, we must also, with a view to a lasting
settlement, give diplomacy a chance to seek a just,
comprehensive and lasting solution to the conflict in
the Middle East, for which the instruments have
already been created and a road map established. In
this respect, my delegation greatly encourages the
many and varying initiatives that are emerging and that
need to be channelled.

Already, our delegation welcomes the personal
involvement of the Secretary-General and welcomes
the avenues for a settlement explored by the high-level
team that he sent to that region. The initial conclusions
that were presented to us yesterday are, to our mind, a
good basis for a settlement of the crisis in that they
give priority to the need for an immediate cessation of
hostilities, which is a precondition to political
negotiations and diplomatic efforts on all of the
problems set out, which need to be considered
concomitantly.

That is an approach which would make it possible
to reduce tensions and open the door to a lasting
settlement of the crisis in the Middle East based on
relevant Security Council resolutions, the Quartet road
map and the principles of international law.

