Mr. Islam (Bangladesh): I am delivering this
statement on behalf of my Ambassador, who has been
held up by a previously scheduled pressing
engagement.

The Security Council returns once more to the
important issue of children and armed conflict. The
delegation of Bangladesh welcomes this opportunity to
participate in the debate. I thank the Secretary-General
for his comprehensive and analytical report on children
and armed conflict (S/2007/757). We agree with his
action-oriented recommendations and urge their
appropriate implementation.

We commend the United Nations for its system-
wide response to the needs of war-affected children.
The Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Coomaraswamy, deserves our particular praise for
her dedicated efforts in this regard.

We are encouraged to see that the measures taken
by the Security Council Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict have had some positive impact in
ameliorating the condition of children affected by
armed conflict around the globe. The monitoring and
reporting mechanism of the Council is also
praiseworthy. In this context, we appreciate the
compliance by certain countries and parties to conflicts
with the recommendations of the Working Group, and
we urge others to follow suit. However, ensuring
compliance by non-State actors and armed groups
continues to be a big challenge; we must try and
address it in a more resolute manner.

We support the idea of using child protection
advisers to provide prompt advocacy and response for
the protection of children in order to mainstream child
protection in United Nations peacekeeping operations.
We call upon relevant parties to conflicts to develop
and implement concrete, time-bound action plans, in
close collaboration with United Nations peacekeeping
operations, in order to halt and prevent violations and
abuses against children and their recruitment and use in
armed conflict.

It is encouraging to note that, as indicated in the
Secretary-General's report, strengthening the United
Nations institutional framework, the strict monitoring
and enforcement mechanism and the code of conduct
have resulted in marked progress in preventing and
reducing incidents of sexual exploitation and abuse of
children by peacekeepers and other United Nations
personnel. We believe that other ongoing efforts in this
regard, such as strengthening the accountability of
uniformed contingent personnel and integrating victim
support and assistance, particularly for children, in the
relevant programmes, will further improve the
situation.

The vulnerable situation of children in post-
conflict societies needs special attention. Long after
the guns have fallen silent, children remain traumatized
and permanently scarred by the brutality of war. For
peace to be sustained, these children must be more
effectively rehabilitated and reintegrated into their
communities. The Peacebuilding Commission should
have this issue permanently on its agenda while
working in any country-specific configuration.

Since recruitment of children by armed groups is
closely linked with internal displacement and refugee
issues, there should be cross-regional initiatives and
cooperation among neighbouring States, in addition to
United Nations efforts, to address the problem in a
holistic manner. We are also concerned at the
increasing number of children in detention for their
alleged association with armed groups. We believe that
those children should be given the protections of law
admissible under juvenile justice systems.

It is well documented that children are the ones
who suffer the most under unregulated sanction
regimes. The Council has a duty to ensure that
sanctions do not affect the innocent. Issues of children
under foreign occupation also need to be appropriately
addressed.
There is no doubt that children are the most
hapless victims of conflict. Violence is often ingrained
in their psyche and often becomes the only solution
known to them in seeking redress. The root causes of
conflict should therefore be addressed in their proper
perspective. To prevent today's victims from becoming
tomorrow's perpetrators, the values of a culture of
peace must be inculcated in every child. United Nations
efforts should promote a culture of peace through peace
education programmes and other non-violent
approaches to conflict prevention and resolution.

Denied the protection of traditional institutions
like the family, stripped of the treasure and innocence
of childhood and faced with societal breakdown and
the erosion of values and of the rule of law, children
affected by armed conflict suffer lasting adverse
consequences for their development. Girl children are
particularly vulnerable to sexual exploitation and
violence. We urge the Security Council to mobilize a
more coordinated, committed and strengthened
international response to further advance the agenda in
order to better protect our children from war. As a State
party to the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child on the Involvement of Children in
Armed Conflict, Bangladesh remains committed to our
collective responsibility to ensure a better life for our
children - free from poverty, exploitation and
violence.

