Mr. Trullols Yabra (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We also thank the Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process for his briefing.

The Dominican Republic remains its previously
expressed deep concern about the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict and its enormous consequences for the civilian
population. The continuing conflict trends in the
occupied Palestinian territory, as well as the ongoing
deterioration of the humanitarian and socioeconomic
situation, heightens the level of uncertainty about
the future of the Israeli-Palestinian peace process. In
the same vein, we join the concern expressed by the
Secretary-General about the possible annexation by
Israel of the Jordan Valley and the northern Dead
Sea, which would constitute a serious violation of
international law and could spell disaster for the goal of
resuming negotiations between the parties.
The Security Council adopted resolution 2334
(2016), which calls on the parties to put an end to
territorial claims, respect sovereignty and liberate
occupied territories. However, we continue to see
demolitions and seizures of Palestinian property
structures by the Israeli authorities.

The Dominican Republic believes that it is crucial
to redouble efforts aimed at conciliation between
the parties, with the support of the international
community, through meaningful and just dialogue
about the many obstacles that threaten the inalienable
right of the Palestinian people to national independence
and sovereignty. Similarly, we also believe that it is
crucial to respect Israel's right to live in peace, within
safe and recognized borders, free from threats or acts of
violence. The firing of rockets and mortars at civilians
is an inhumane act. Hamas and other groups must put
an immediate end to that practice.

The Dominican Republic deplores the grave
humanitarian situation on the Gaza Strip and calls upon
the international community to respond effectively to
the urgent needs of the affected population. Palestinian
refugees face many health challenges, due to poor
sanitation and inadequate infrastructure, limited access
to medications, the lack of nutrition and deficiencies in
hygiene. Malnutrition occurs in all Palestinian refugee
camps, regardless of their location, but is particularly
problematic in Gaza. We acknowledge the work and
challenges of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, which
requires adequate funding for its critical work.

The Dominican Republic continues to defend the
existing international consensus that the only way
forward for Palestinians and Israelis is to negotiate a
two-State solution on the basis of the 1967 lines. We
encourage all parties to put an end to actions that
undermine support for the two-State solution and
ultimately hinder peace.

In conclusion, we reiterate the importance of
creating an environment conducive to the advancement
of peace, which will pave the way for a comprehensive
process of negotiations aimed at resolving all final
status issues, including Jerusalem.

