Mr. Adorn (cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special Envoy
ofthe Secretary-General for Yemen, Mr. Mark Lowcock,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, and Mr. David Beasley,
Executive Director of the World Food Programme, for
their detailed and particularly moving briefings on the
latest developments in the political and humanitarian
situation in Yemen. They have our full support.

Four years since the beginning of the conflict
in Yemen, the quest for peace and stability in the
country seems remote due to the many security and
humanitarian challenges and, above all, the lack of
willingness ofthe belligerents to translate into concrete
action commitments freely entered into in order to
overcome the serious crisis facing the country. The lack
of progress in implementing the Stockholm Agreement
of 13 December 2018 with a view to definitively
resolving the issue of the control of Al-Hudaydah port
is a perfect illustration of that.

Today it is undeniable that the international
community's efforts to resolve the crisis in Yemen
peacefully are hampered by the climate of mistrust
between the Government and the Houthi rebels. The
many artificial obstacles that they are putting in the
way ofimplementing their commitments can also delay
the full and comprehensive implementation of the
Stockholm Agreement. That climate of mutual mistrust
is counterproductive and contributes to the ongoing
deterioration of the security situation in a country
where 10 million people are facing the world's worst
humanitarian crisis, according to the United Nations
specialized agencies.

However, a successful process to restore lasting
peace in Yemen clearly depends not only on the ongoing
and multidimensional engagement of the United
Nations but also, above all, on the cooperation in good
faith of all stakeholders with all United Nations actors
on the ground. My country therefore reiterates its full
support to Special Envoy Martin Griffiths, as well as
its ongoing support for the United Nations efforts. That
is also why we urge the Yemeni parties to maintain a
constructive dialogue with the Special Envoy in order to
jointly address all issues related to the implementation
of the relevant Security Council resolutions and the
Stockholm Agreement.

It is therefore absolutely crucial to continue the
partial redeployment of military forces. It is especially
urgent to ensure the withdrawal of the Houthis from the
ports ofAl-Hudaydah, Saleef and Ras Isa, in accordance
with the first phase of the ceasefire agreement signed
in Stockholm. As highlighted by Mr. Martin Griffiths
and Lieutenant General Michael Lollesgaard, those
redeployments should allow the United Nations to
dispatch teams from the United Nations Development
Programme and the United Nations Verification and
Inspection Mechanism so as to help the port authorities
increase the port capacities and undertake inspections
in line with the Al-Hudaydah agreement.

Cote d'Ivoire therefore calls on the parties to the
conflict to fully respect the ceasefire in Al-Hudaydah
city and to help complete the mutual redeployment of
forces outside the ports of Al-Hudaydah, Saleef and
Ras Isa. We also urge them to implement the statement
of understanding on the city of Taiz for the opening
of humanitarian corridors and to promote the effective
implementation of the agreement on the exchange of
15,000 prisoners with a View to strengthening trust
between the parties.

My country also notes with deep concern the
warning signals from specialized agencies, pointing
to the continuing deterioration of the humanitarian
situation and the resurgence of endemic diseases in
Yemen as a result of the ongoing ceasefire violations.
In a context where United Nations agencies report that
there are more than 3.3 million displaced persons and
more than 24 million in a situation of humanitarian
emergency, Cote d'Ivoire can only strongly condemn
obstacles to the delivery of humanitarian assistance.
We therefore call on the Yemeni parties to cooperate
with the humanitarian agencies in full respect for the
spirit and letter of international humanitarian law and
international human rights law.

In that regard, my country welcomes access for the
World Food Programme (WFP) to the warehouses of
the Red Sea Mills, where approximately 51,000 tons of
cereals intended for 3.5 million people had been blocked
for months. We can now hope that that food reaches
those in need, in particular women and children. We
also urge the Council to support the WFP initiatives to
bridge its budget deficit of $700 million for the period
from April to September.
Cote d'Ivoire is also deeply concerned about reports
of the recruitment of child soldiers in the Yemeni
conflict, which is facilitated in particular by the fact
that more than 2 million children are out of school and
the irregular payment of teachers' salaries.

Moreover, the recent drone attacks on airport
infrastructure in Saudi Arabia are another matter of
concern for my country. Those attacks, claimed by the
Houthi rebels, represent a factor in and a preliminary
sign ofa possible regionalization of the Yemeni conflict
with potential consequences for regional stability. C6te
d'Ivoire therefore calls for the international community,
including regional actors, to step up their efforts
towards a rapid settlement of the Yemeni conflict.

As my country has often underlined in the
Council, peace is a long-term process that requires
both the ongoing commitment of the United Nations,
in particular the Security Council, which is entrusted
with the noble mission of maintaining international
peace and security. It must above all be supported
by the unwavering will of all parties to a conflict to
work towards the peaceful resolution of their dispute,
however complex it is. At a time when the conflict in
Yemen is regrettably entering its fifth year of stalemate,
the Government and the rebels must acknowledge that
there is no military option and that only dialogue will
enable bold compromises for a peaceful and lasting way
out of the crisis.

