Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): We thank
you, Sir, for personally presiding over this extremely
important Security Council meeting. We also thank
Ambassador Jagdish Koonjul for having been at the
starting point of our debate by creating the ad hoc
Working Group, which he is leading with all of his
talent.

As you have invited us to do, Sir, I shall try to
respond to some of the comments made by the
preceding speakers. Basically, I shall endeavour, on
behalf of France, to address the most delicate subjects
that have been raised. Indeed, that is how our
discussion can be of greatest interest.

My first observation is that more and more
African leaders are themselves taking charge of the
search for solutions to African crises. This is an
extremely positive development, which we must
welcome. To cite a few examples, as Ambassador Baali
reminded us, Algeria has played a decisive role in the
search for a solution to the border conflict between
Ethiopia and Eritrea. The countries of the Great Lakes
region, through the Lusaka Agreement, have charted
the course towards a solution to the crisis in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The countries of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), for their part, have long sought a solution
to the crisis in Sierra Leone. Therefore, the role of the
Security Council is increasingly to accompany the
African countries themselves in implementing the
solutions that they themselves develop. This is a very
positive point.

Nonetheless, it is a point that I believe requires
careful consideration as to the modalities of such
cooperation. I believe that the Security Council cannot
only be a provider of services that would respond,
toeing the line, to orders from African heads of State,
who in a way would unilaterally set the rules of the
game. A true partnership is necessary from the very
start, in other words from the time that agreements are
negotiated, at least if African leaders want to entrust all
or part of the implementation of their plans to the
Security Council.

To cite an example, we have just conducted our
third mission to the Great Lakes region. The Lusaka
Agreement, as written, calls upon the Security Council
forcibly to disarm the ex-FAR and Interahamwe
groups. We received the Agreement; we read it; and we
immediately said: mission impossible. Furthermore,
how could United Nations Blue Helmets succeed in
doing what the Rwandan army has not managed to do
on the soil of the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
the past three years? Thus, afterwards, we had lengthy
discussions with our Lusaka Agreement partners to say
yes, of course, to disarmament and repatriation of ex-
FAR and Interahamwe, but on a voluntary rather than a
forced, imposed basis.

I cite that example to show how desirable it is for
the African leaders, when they commit themselves to
conflict resolution and wish to give responsibilities to
the Security Council, to involve the Council in
advance, when they see fit to do so, and, before
adopting a plan, to make sure that what they are asking
of the United Nations and the Security Council is
something that the Council can indeed do.

My second comment is that some speakers
expressed regret that agreements between the regional
or subregional organizations and the Security Council
are not always perfect from the outset. The
representative of Egypt gave the example of ECOWAS
and of Sierra Leone. I personally believe that it is quite
normal for us to have views that sometimes differ,
simply because the leaders of the region are in direct
contact with the realities, and are sometimes very
closely related to some of those involved in a conflict.
For our part, we look at the situation from outside, and
we send often large numbers of troops - 17,000, for
example, to Sierra Leone. So it is normal for us to have
this discussion. But what I would like to emphasize to
those who are listening to us is to what extent this
discussion throughout the successful management of
the Sierra Leone crisis was, in the end, extremely
productive. We started from quite different
perspectives, and little by little we managed, here too,
to build a partnership, which has enabled us, I believe I
can say, to succeed together. The elections that have
just taken place in Sierra Leone bear eloquent witness
to this.

The third comment is on a delicate question, that
of sanctions, which Ibrahima Fall referred to. What
strikes me is that, basically the African leaders are
increasingly asking us to adopt sanctions against some
of their own who are not complying with commitments
that they themselves have undertaken.

We saw this in our recent mission to the Great
Lakes region, where we had an extremely interesting
debate between the 15 members of the Security
Council and all the Foreign Ministers and Defence
Ministers of the signatories of the Lusaka Agreement.
They unanimously asked us to adopt sanctions against
those of their own who were not keeping their
commitments. In particular, they asked us to withdraw
troops from the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo. Sir
Jeremy Greenstock, who is right here, told them:
"Well, we are not very fond of adopting sanctions", to
which the other side replied: "Yes, but we are asking
you to adopt these sanctions." The final communique,
which I invite you to read, exactly reflects that debate.

The comment I would like to share with you this
morning is that here again what we need to develop is a
real partnership. When the African leaders ask us to
adopt sanctions, I think they must know that if we do
that it is first of all up to them, the regional countries,
to see to it that the sanctions are properly implemented.
We have been able to verify the extent to which
sanctions can succeed. The most recent case is that of
Angola, where without question the sanctions adopted
by the Security Council played an important, perhaps
even decisive, role. This is simply because all of the
countries of the region played the game perfectly and
cooperated with the Council.

So, if we adopt sanctions upon the request of the
signatories of the Lusaka Agreement, those sanctions
could succeed only if all the countries of the region
participated in their implementation. This applies to
Burundi as well, where we have been having a
dialogue - which is to continue in the coming
week - concerning the rebel groups that refuse to end
the fighting and join the peace process.

These initial comments relate to conflict
management once conflicts erupt. We all agree that it is
better to prevent than to correct, and all the speakers
have emphasized the extent to which prevention is
necessary. This is often a very difficult subject, because
most African crises are in fact internal crises. Here, we
come up against Article 2, paragraph 7 ofthe Charter if
we give it a close reading.

At what point should we move past the question
of non-interference in internal affairs in order to
embark on the prevention of a crisis that we all see
coming? Here again, I believe that the Organization of
African Unity (OAU) and the subregional
organizations can point the way.

I find it striking to observe, for example in the
crisis in Madagascar that was raised by Ibrahima Fall
and mentioned by others as well, how the OAU, when
confronted by a grave crisis, albeit an internal one,
unhesitatingly committed itself to making a full
contribution to the quest for a peaceful solution. I
believe that our Council, which hesitates to follow the
OAU, should not have this hesitation. When the OAU
believes that it should play its role because the very
future of a country is at stake, the Council should be
prepared to work side by side with the OAU in its
initiative, as long as the OAU wishes that.

There is a last point that I would like to raise, a
follow-up to the preceding point, and that is the
electoral processes. Unfortunately, it is often electoral
processes which lead to crises. That is just the case in
Madagascar, but there are other recent examples that
could be mentioned in that region of Africa which can
plunge us into situations that are then difficult to
manage.

Here I believe that the Security Council does not
have a direct role. But since we are all in this
brainstorming sort of meeting, I believe it would be
good for us to reflect together on certain rules of the
game that might be accepted by all. What I mean is that
the United Nations Secretariat, which has long
experience in this area and which has established very
clear rules of the game, should work with the OAU so
that when a country requests that an electoral process
be observed, there would be some sort of United
Nations-OAU partnership to observe it.

When we say "observe", that does not mean being
present just on election day. It means being present, as
the United Nations requests, during the preceding
months so that the preparations for the elections can be
blameless. It means being present during the elections
themselves, and when the results are announced it
would be appropriate that a single spokesperson
represent the United Nations and the OAU, to avoid the
cacophony of often diverging announcements.

The Security Council does not need to intervene
directly on this subject, but since it has been raised, I
think the Council, which on occasion deals with the
grave consequences of difficult elections, can make
recommendations about possible courses of action. I
think this is an additional reason for cooperation
between the OAU and the United Nations.

These are the few comments that I wish to make
on behalf of France on the subjects that seem to me to
be the most delicate among all of those raised by the
preceding speakers in this extremely rich and positive
discussion.

