Mr. De Mistura (spoke in Spanish): It is a pleasure,
Mr. President, to see you presiding over today's meeting.

(spoke in English)

I would like to start by giving a summary of what is
our own analysis based on the latest developments and
of some of the possible future steps ahead. As usual in
Syria, we have a mixed picture, and that is what I would
like to refer to.

There have been some interesting technical steps
taken in advance of the seventh round of intra-Syrian
talks, which, as Council members know very well by
now, will take place from 10 to 14 July. In addition,
there are currently serious efforts under way to deliver
further agreements, in particular an implementation
agreement regarding the de-escalation zones, before an
Astana meeting that is planned for 4 and 5 July. But
there have also been some worrying developments that
we cannot ignore and upon which I will elaborate. We
are at the time of testing whether or not the political
will exists for real de-escalation and more meaningful
political talks and for moving beyond preparatory talks.

Throughout this period, the United Nations has
been quite active, convening joint technical meetings
with opposition experts seeking to support the efforts
of the Astana guarantors on de-escalation, consulting
widely, including in Moscow and Paris, and with many
others, laying the basis for a new round of Geneva
talks, and holding consultations with our colleagues in
the European Union. I would like to map this out for the
Council and look to where we can go next.

In the latest round of intra- Syrian talks in Geneva, I
announced the establishment of a technical consultative
process, which Council members might remember. It
was the additional layer that we believe could be very
helpful in actually abolishing layers by accelerating
the real talks. This technical consultative process was
meant to develop relevant options on constitutional
and legal issues that would need to be considered and
resolved anyway in relation to any proposal or position
put forward in the formal sessions. This was designed
in fact to help the formal talks make progress more
expeditiously due to better preparation by ensuring that
any negotiated transitional political process would enjoy
solid technical, constitutional and legal foundations.

I can offer an example. Some time ago, as Council
members will remember, we had a moment of truth in
Afghanistan. This was many years ago. I was around
then and some Council members here today were, too.
There was a feeling that nothing was moving forward
until a certain point, when there was a rush for a
conference in Bonn. Much of the preparatory work,
which sometimes appears to be tedious or inconclusive,
I have been told by those who were part of the Bonn
conference, was immediately put into action and
utilized as homework prepared for the conference. In
a certain way, we are doing something similar, doing
our homework as we wait for the real, major Geneva
conference, God willing.

We made it clear that the consultative process
created was technical. It is also true and well known
that everything we do is political, but the particular
emphasis in this case was on the words "technical",
"experts" and "non-binding in nature". It was and is
not designed to act as a negotiating forum to take on
the political responsibility of the formal sessions or to
take on itself the Syrian people's right to determine the
constitutional future of the State of Syria, but it is a
serious process because it does prepare for all of that.

Council members will recall that both the
Government and the three opposition invitees in the
intra-Syrian talks in Geneva all agreed last time,
pursuant to resolution 2254 (2015), to participate in
separate consultations and the consultative process.
We were able to do so separately for at least two days,
but since then we have seen a potentially significant
new development. On 15 and 16 June, a few days ago,
opposition experts from the high-level negotiations
committee and the Cairo and the Moscow platforms
jointly convened and sat down together in the same
room in Geneva at the behest of the United Nations,
within the framework of the consultative process. That
was the first time ajoint set of United Nations meetings
with the opposition invitees in one room had taken
place - not only according to protocol but in a context
of substantive discussions among them and us, which
lasted the entire day. We believe that we must build on
that.

The opposition experts worked to develop joint
technical options with regard to the schedule process for
drafting a new Constitution and its popular approval.
They also discussed the principles involved, covering
the substance of what are known as the living 12 points,
which we had put forward in the fourth round of talks.
The experts also discussed those issues in the context
of a negotiated, political transition process within the
framework of relevant Security Council resolutions.

While such expert meetings are by nature
exploratory and non-binding, the joint meeting brought
to light welcome similarities and common technical
and perhaps even political understanding of various
issues and could potentially be the beginning of a
greater technical coordination among the three groups.
We hope that the Security Council will help us support
the three groups in that regard so as to show unity. The
participants felt that additional work could yield even
more productive results. My Office has accordingly
invited them to participate next week in a further set of
joint meetings within the framework of the consultative
process on constitutional and legal issues ahead of the
seventh round of formal intra-Syrian talks to take place
in July.

Members will recall that the Government of
Syria ~ which was, by the way, the first to commit
to the technical process - communicated to me that
it would participate in expert meetings within the
framework of the technical consultations process
during formal sessions of the intra-Syrian talks, but not
outside those formal occasions. I therefore look forward
to experts from my team continuing during the seventh
round the engagement that began with experts from
the Government during the sixth round. Of course,
the United Nations remains ready to engage with the
Government experts at any mutually convenient time,
including before and after formal talks.

In my formal invitation to the forthcoming round of
the intra-Syrian talks, I encouraged invitees to prepare
actively. I therefore look forward to their engaging
in an intensified set of discussions on issues across
all four baskets: Governance issues, constitutional
issues, electoral issues and counter-terrorism, security-
governance and medium-term confidence-building
issues. I hope that it will be possible to accelerate
the peace talks. I am giving consideration, in fact, to
sharing some of my own thinking on certain issues so
as to stimulate discussions among the parties.

If the environment is propitious, I am also ready
to facilitate direct talks between the Government and
the opposition and hopefully unify the opposition in
those talks, either at the formal or technical level. That
is something that, on more than one occasion, all sides
have stated that they want, and I hope that conditions
are being established that could enable such a scenario.
I also believe that it is important to aim for a further
round of talks near the end of August or the beginning
of September in advance of the seventy-second session
of the General Assembly in September.

Both during and between the upcoming rounds
of formal talks and expert meetings, my team will
continue to closely engage with the members of the
Syrian Women's Advisory Board and civil society
support groups and listen to their own suggestions and
practical advice. In particular, my team and I continue
to strive to engage and give priority to more women's
organizations, including those working across and
inside Syria during and between rounds of intra-Syrian
talks. In that context, I should note that, following the
last round of intra-Syrian talks, we initiated our civil
society role, which allowed us to consult with more
than 50 civil society organizations and experts from all
walks of life in various areas of expertise from both
within and outside Syria. The more that we engage with
such interlocutors, the more we are convinced that civil
society will be critical to preserving and regenerating
the social cohesion of a country that for too long has
been torn apart by war.

As we advance the overall political effort unfolding
under the auspices of the United Nations in Geneva, the
efforts of the three guarantors of the Astana process
continue to finalize modalities for the implementation
of the memorandum of understanding on the four
de-escalation zones that they concluded on 4 May.
As mentioned, a meeting of the guarantors is planned
to take place in Astana on 4 and 5 July. I plan to be
present at that meeting. With every week that passes,
as we know, without a final arrangement to finalize
those zones, the fragility of the ceasefire regime and
the risk posed by that fragility increase. I am aware of
the genuine efforts currently being undertaken to try
to end and overcome the remaining obstacles, as was
witnessed by my own team of experts from my own
Office during the recently held technical-level meeting
of the joint working group on de-escalation in Moscow.

The United Nations team continues to stand ready
to provide technical advice whenever and wherever
needed because we need success in Astana, just as
Astana desperately needs success in the Geneva
political process so as to consolidate what we are all
trying to do. Let us therefore give de-escalation a fair
chance to succeed because that is what people are
asking so as to further decrease the violence and enable
confidence-building. I also expressed the hope that
the discussions aimed at finding a suitable formula for
addressing the difficult situations that have emerged
in the southern part of Syria will also yield positive
results.

As we plan for the Geneva intra-Syrian talks and
as the Astana guarantors work towards de-escalation,
let us recall what has been achieved and some of the
challenges that remain on the ground. Since the three
guarantor States signed the de-escalation memorandum
in Astana on 4 May, the level of violence has clearly
decreased. Hundreds of Syrian lives continue to be
spared every week, and many towns have returned to
some degree of normalcy. That is a good general trend,
but we do not see that same good trend everywhere. In
some areas, the fighting and violence have continued
and, in fact, intensified.

On the other hand, we must recognize that
regrettably, the general significant improvement
of the security situation has not yielded equally
significant progress in providing humanitarian access
to areas where needs are greatest. The support of the
International Syria Support Group (ISSG) co-chairs
and of other members of the ISSG has been helpful and
efforts continue. However, let us be honest - much
more needs to be done and urgently to enable safe,
unimpeded and sustained humanitarian access to all
Syrians, wherever they are, in particular hard-to-reach
areas.

Let me also stress the importance ofmoving forward
on the issues of detainees, abductees, missing people
and on the important issue of humanitarian demining.
In that regard, I would like to thank the United Nations
Mine Action Service for its continuing engagement.

We note that the fight against terrorists appears
to be proceeding with Da'esh under pressure and in
retreat in various locations in Syria. At the same time,
incidents between the international coalition to counter
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant/Da'esh and forces
of the Government of Syria and its allies, including
the downing of a Syrian military plane, have taken
place. As I see it, we hope that the ideal trajectory
over the coming two weeks could be - indeed, would
be - progress in Astana on 4 and 5 July; a further
set ofjoint technical aspect meetings with opposition
groups during that same week; and continuing
discussion and dialogue among the main international
stakeholders, including at the Group of 20 Summit in
Hamburg on 7 and 8 July, at which the issue of Syria
will most certainly be discussed. That is all in support
of the Astana de-escalation efforts and the intra-Syrian
Geneva-based political process.

I hope that a combination of all those elements will
help shape an environment that is conducive to the next
round of intra-Syrian talks in Geneva in the coming
months and bring us one step closer on the journey to
our shared goal of implementing the relevant Security
Council resolutions and, in particular resolution 2254
(2015). All political efforts of the United Nations are
directed towards that end and, with the guidance of the
Secretary-General, we continue to count on the strong
support of all members of the Security Council, as a
whole.

