Prince Zeid Ra'ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Jordan wishes to express its deep
concern regarding the unfolding developments in
Ukraine, in particular in the Crimean region. We call
on all parties to exercise calm and self-restraint and
not to further escalate the situation by taking military
measures or by threatening the use of force.

Jordan reaffirms the need to respect the sovereignty
of Ukraine, its territorial integrity and its political
independence. We reaffirm the prohibition of the use
of force on its territory, or any part thereof, and of
the occupation thereof, including the Crimean region.
Jordan calls on all States concerned to respect the terms
of their agreements and treaties with Ukraine. In this
regard, we reaffirm the need to adhere to the provisions
of the Budapest Memorandum of 1994 and the Treaty
on Friendship, Cooperation and Partnership between
Ukraine and the Russian Federation of 1997.

Russia and Ukraine must embark on serious and
effective dialogue. This dialogue should lead to the
return of the Crimean region to Ukrainian control as
soon as possible. We call on Ukraine to take immediate
steps to resolve the causes of tension, both internally and
externally, and to respect human rights, in particular
of minority groups, and to revoke any measures that
have been taken which may undermine such rights.
At the same time, we stress the need to refrain from
interference in the internal affairs of Ukraine so that
the country may decide its political future for itself.

The Security Council must assume its responsibilities
regarding the situation currently prevailing in Ukraine.
We support the mediation efforts of the Secretary-
General and Mr. Serry, and their contacts with the

various parties in this regard.

We wish to receive further clarification from
the parties concerned regarding the situation on the
ground, and in the Crimean region in particular. This
would help the Security Council to address the situation
accordingly. We note the need for the Security Council
to investigate the crisis in the Crimean region, to look
into mediation and dispute settlement mechanisms that
could be used in the light of the information provided,
and to assess whether an active act of aggression is
being committed on Ukrainian territory.

In that regard, we would refer to General Assembly
resolution 3314 (XXIX), which considers the use of
armed force by a State on the territory of another State
that is outside the scope of agreement between the two
countries to be an act of aggression. The same applies
to the deployment of irregular armed groups in order to
perform military acts in another State.

We welcome the efforts already taken and to be
taken within the framework of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) to deal
with the current crisis and the establishment by the
OSCE chairmanship of a contact group and a fact-
finding mission. We call on the United Nations and
OSCE to coordinate their efforts in order to remove the
causes of tension and achieve a peaceful solution that
preserves Ukraine's territorial integrity and enables a
return to stability and calm in the country.

