The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of Angola.

I welcome the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Haiti and Head of United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) to this
debate, and I commend the work of Ms. Sandra Honore
and the staff of MINUSTAH for their meaningful
contribution to peace and stability in Haiti.

It is an honour for Angola to preside over this
debate on Haiti at a time of renewed hope, as attested
by the latest political developments with the signing
of the political agreement on 5 February by the
country's executive and legislative branches, followed
by the handover of power. The election by the National
Assembly in February of Mr. J ocelerme Privert as Haiti's
provisional President marked a crucial development in
the country's political life by permitting institutional
and political continuity until the completion of the
outstanding third electoral round on 24 April, which
will, we hope, permit the inauguration of the new
President on 14 May. We welcome and congratulate
Mr. Jocelerme Privert and Prime Minister Fritz Jean,
and wish them all the best with the appointment of
a new Cabinet, the revitalization of the Provisional
Electoral Council and the further strengthening of the
inter-Haitian dialogue by involving all national actors
across the Haitian political spectrum.

Even though the overall political and security
environment was primarily influenced by the electoral
process, a surge of protests took place, both peacefully
and violently. The overall level of criminality remains
stagnant despite the withdrawal of the military from
the Cite Soleil and Port-au-Prince departments, which
registered the highest crime and gang-related violence
in the country. The country's recent developments are
in sharp contrast to the tense political situation of a year
ago when we visited Haiti, when the political deadlock
forced the paralysis of Parliament for several months,
further compounded by its failure to hold the third
electoral round in December 2015, thereby creating a
volatile political climate marred by violent protests and
political unrest, which MINUSTAH played a critical
role in mitigating.

We note with satisfaction the joint work of the
Government of Haiti, MINUSTAH, the United Nations
Development Programme, the United Nations Office
for Project Services and other international partners
throughout the electoral process in providing technical
and logistical support, including the training of
electoral staff, outreach and civic education campaigns,
which have had a meaningful impact on the Provisional
Electoral Council's work.

We also commend the ongoing partnership between
MINUSTAH, the Haitian National Police and other
institutions related to law enforcement. Such long-
term partnerships have made a decisive contribution
to the creation of a more secure environment during
the unpredictable transition period, with an overall
reduction in violence and improvement in humanitarian
conditions, while paving the way for the successful
implementation of the 2012-2016 national police
development plan.

We look forward to the Secretary-General's
recommendations on the future of MINUSTAH before
its mandate ends. MINUSTAH's presence will enable
the consolidation of achievements in key areas of
governance, such as the ability of various municipalities
to implement administrative and financial procedures;
recruit, train and accredit key personnel; and develop
and standardize tools and procedures for financial
management and transparency. We would like to
reiterate our total support for the Mission in its efforts
to achieve its priorities, including in the area of security
sector reform, which will ultimately ensure a climate
of stability, a prerequisite for the expansion of direct
foreign investment, and which, after several decades of
economic stagnation, will enable the national economy
to grow.

We take positive note of the current work between
MINUSTAH and the United Nations country team on
a road map for the Mission's gradual disengagement,
particularly from those tasks that can be assumed by
the Government or its partners. The joint transition
plan is also aimed at identifying areas in which further
support from international partners, including the
United Nations, is needed. That is crucial to ensuring
lasting peace in a Caribbean country that has been the
victim of several man-made and natural disasters in the
past decade, including the devastating earthquake of
2010. Along with the entire international community,
in the coming months Angola hopes to see further
improvements in the political climate, the accession
of a new, democratically elected President and the
establishment of an enduring environment conducive
to socioeconomic development f all of them decisive
indicators of MINUSTAH's performance and success
after 12 years in the country.

Similarly, we look forward to the results of the
strategic assessment upon the completion of the
interrupted electoral process, as stipulated in resolution
2243 (2015) and reinforced in the 5 February agreement
between Haiti's political stakeholders. We stand firm
with Haiti and its political actors, the Security Council
and the international community in ensuring that
MINUSTAH's withdrawal from the country is carefully

planned and a favourable environment is in place when
the Haitians take charge of their country's destiny.

Finally, we call on all actors across the Haitian
political spectrum to continue working to strengthen
the rule of law, create conditions conducive to social
and economic development and ensure justice and the
protection of the human rights of all Haitians.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Haiti.

