Mr. Huntley (Saint Lucia): I have the honour to
present a statement today on behalf of the 14 States
members of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM),
that is, Antigua and Barbuda, the Bahamas, Barbados,
Belize, Dominica, Grenada, Guyana, Haiti, Jamaica,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Suriname and Trinidad and Tobago.

The heads of Government of the Caribbean
Community, at the end of their fourteenth Inter-
Sessional Meeting, which was held in Port-of-Spain,
Trinidad and Tobago, on 14 and 15 February 2003,
issued the following statement on the situation with
regard to Iraq.

"We, the heads of Government of the
Caribbean Community, having considered the
situation developing over Iraq, wish to express
our profound concern at the escalation of global
tensions and their grave implications for the
preservation of international peace and security.
We are deeply troubled over the humanitarian
tragedy that an outbreak of war will bring about
and the disastrous effects which it will have on
global economic stability.

"We emphasize that no State should have
the right to foster the development of weapons of
mass destruction in any form, including chemical
and biological agents. We recall that the Security
Council had compelled Iraq to cease the
development and production of weapons of mass
destruction and has obligated it to give total
access to the United Nations weapons inspectors
to verify its compliance with Security Council
resolutions.

"We appeal to Iraq to cooperate fully with
all the requirements of UNMOVIC and the IAEA
inspectors, and to fulfil its commitments to the
United Nations and the international community
in this regard. We are convinced that Iraq's full
and transparent implementation of Security
Council resolution 1441 (2002) will contribute to
the easing of tensions and will strengthen the
capacity of the United Nations to bring about a
peaceful resolution of the situation.

"We reiterate that the United Nations,
through its Security Council, has been charged
with the responsibility for maintaining
international peace and security. We are,
therefore, deeply disturbed at the prospect of the
use of military force in Iraq without the
endorsement of the United Nations Security
Council and in the absence of a final conclusion
by the United Nations weapons inspectors that
Iraq is in material breach of Security Council
resolution 1441 (2002).

"We are in total support of the position
taken by the United Nations Secretary-General
that 'this is an issue not for any one State alone,
but for the international community as a whole'.
In this connection, we stress that any unilateral
action taken outside a United Nations Security
Council mandate will undermine the integrity of
the United Nations and considerably weaken the
multilateral system and its machinery for
preserving peace and security.

"We are firmly opposed to the use of armed
force at a time when it is clear that diplomatic
efforts have not yet been exhausted and when the
UNMOVIC and IAEA inspectors are reporting
some progress and requesting more time to
complete their work. We believe that it is
essential for all States to support the work of the

inspectors and to create the conditions to allow
them to fulfil their mandate.

"We urge the Government of the United
States and its military allies on this issue to
exercise restraint in their approach to this
complex international crisis. We wish to express
our particular anxiety at the consequences a war
will have not only for the region of the Middle
East but for the entire world, and at the
disproportionate burden that would be borne by
small developing States, including those in the
Caribbean, which are ill-prepared to cope with
the impact of a global recession provoked by
volatile oil prices, severe dislocation to their vital
tourism and financial services sectors and falling
levels of investment.

"We the Heads of Government of the
Caribbean Community reaffirm the commitment
of the Caribbean Community to a just world order
based on respect for the rule of law and social
justice, and guaranteeing peace, security and
sustainable development for all. We remain
committed to international efforts to combat
terrorism. We also remain convinced that
diplomacy and dialogue present the most
enlightened approach to building understanding
and to resolving conflicts in a modern and
interdependent world."

We thank the Council for the opportunity to
present this statement.

