Mr. Bishnoi (India): We thank you, Mr. President,
for providing this opportunity to Member States to
share their views on this important subject. We also

thank your delegation for the very useful concept note
(S/2014/144, annex).

In one of the many religions that we have in India,
God himself is depicted as a child. The child is indeed
divine. Notwithstanding that divinity, child soldiers
have been used in wars since time immemorial. In
contemporary times, it was drummer boys who led
Napoleon's initial attack in the battle of Waterloo on
18 June 1815, only to be shredded to pieces by gunfire
from the other side. Large numbers of women and
children were also wilfully killed in concentration
camps and by indiscriminate air raids in the Second
World War.
We have heard from Mr. Alhaji Babah Sawaneh of
Sierra Leone today. There was a battle associated with
the United Nations peacekeeping force in that country.
On 10 September 2000, the British special forces
launched Operation Barras to rescue British soldiers
who had been captured by the West Side Boys. While
the operation was successful, it led to casualties.

Looking at the theatre in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo today, we find an extensive use of child
soldiers by various armed groups. The United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has itself noted with concern
allegations that 30 to 40 per cent of the Nduma Defence
ofCongo elements may be below 18 years ofage. Despite
this evidence, the Security Council has authorized
the creation of an Intervention Brigade to carry out
targeted offensive operations. The rules of engagement
are, however, silent on engagement with child soldiers.
The traumatizing nature of such engagement will also
have to be considered.

We share the view contained in the concept note that
those who exploit children should be held accountable.
We also agree that the most effective way of doing so is

through capacity-building for Member States. Action for
that should originate from the issue's consideration by
the General Assembly and Peacebuilding Commission.
National efforts on the ground should be supported
by political missions. Civilian protection advisers
embedded in peacekeeping missions would themselves
only be able to perform a limited role.

The political will to address the problem needs to
go beyond the theatre of war. We need to address the
economic and social marginalization of the poorest
nations, which is driving hundreds of millions into the
kind of childhood that could well make them part of
tomorrow's problem rather than tomorrow's solutions.
It is that understanding that explains the importance
that our delegation attaches to an ambitious post-
2015 development agenda that has built-in means of
implementation and the required enabling environment
for its achievement.

