Mr. Arias (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me at the outset to join others who have spoken before
me in congratulating you, Mr. President, as well as the
delegation of Slovakia, for the initiative to hold this
debate on security sector reform (SSR), a subject of
great importance for the work of the United Nations in
general, and specifically for that of the Security
Council.

When we talk about the security sector we are
referring to a whole panoply of State institutions that
provide support for the rule of law: the armed forces,
the police, the judicial system and the intelligence
services, among others. Although security sector
reform is primarily the responsibility of individual
States, the goal of ensuring that each State reforms its
security sector to support democratic institutions,
guarantee the rule of law and protect human rights has
pride of place on the international agenda.

We believe that security sector reform should be
considered in the context of the widely recognized link
that exists between security, development and human
rights. A dysfunctional security sector may itself be a
source of instability that creates obstacles for both
development and the enjoyment of human rights. As
each of those issues is intimately affected by the
historical, political and cultural reality of each country,
all security sector reform projects must conform to
those realities.

The Republic of Panama believes that security is
a public service, given that the State has a
responsibility to protect its people. A democratic State
has the duty and responsibility to provide security as a
service that conforms to the same standards of quality
and transparency that regulate other public services and
institutions. In that connection, State protection of
democratic institutions and national integrity
constitutes the manner through which sustainable
human development can be guaranteed.

The United Nations has been playing an
important role in the area of security sector reform,
although in a disjointed way due to the functional
competencies of its various organs and agencies. That
role includes initiatives ranging from disarmament and
non-proliferation to the demobilization and
reintegration of irregular forces, as well as combating
trafficking in human beings, the circulation of small
arms and light weapons and illicit drugs. Its work
covers a wide array of policies, such as strengthening
judicial systems.

Given that wide spectrum of closely interlinked
activities, we believe that the thematic and operational
approach of the United Nations requires an integrated
and coordinated focus, as well as clearly defined goals
and priorities. There is therefore a need to promote
concrete measures that will ensure coherent and
holistic management of the issue on the part of the
various entities of the Organization.

Everyone agrees that one of the functions of the
Security Council is to prevent situations that might
jeopardize international peace and security. It is all the
more critical, when resolving conflict situations, that
we look at reforming the security sector in post-
conflict situations, and it is critical to live up to the
responsibility of resolving situations of conflict. It is
somewhat more complex when dealing with the
process of reforming the security sector of a State in
the so-called post-conflict stage.

It is in this phase where the Security Council, as
well as the Peacebuilding Commission, the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and the
Secretariat, will have important responsibilities to
carry out. It is also in this phase that all the distinct
organs of the United Nations will have to act as
successive and coordinated parts of a whole in carrying
out the objectives and priorities previously established.
Only thus will we be able to help each country to
reform and tailor its security sector with a view to
fulfilling the responsibility to protect the individual
human being.

In this context, we deem that the United Nations
must call for and promote the participation of regional
organizations, as stated in Chapter VIII of the Charter,
as well as civil society organizations, so that they
might play a more active role in this domain.

Panama is a donor country of peace and security
at the regional and international level; hence, the great
importance we attach to their maintenance and
preservation as a universal public good, and in our
particular situation as a provider of services, it even
becomes a strategic good. This is why the Government
of Panama considers that the debate on the issue of
security sector reform must be oriented towards
generating a broad-ranging consensus, based on respect
for the principles and norms of international law and
the United Nations Charter.

