Mr. Ayebare: At the outset, Madam President,
allow me to thank you for convening this important
debate of the Security Council, which comes at a time
of growing awareness of the critical role of regional
organizations in responding to the changing dynamics
in the nature of conflicts and security threats. I would
also like to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
for his briefing and for his commitment to supporting
the African Union (AU) partnership with the United
Nations.

The quest for peace and security remains the most
pressing among the many challenges facing Africa.
Over the past two decades, the continent has witnessed
a new set of threats, which include governance-related
intra-State conflicts and violence, terrorism and
transnational crime, piracy on both the East and West
coasts of Africa, border disputes and the effects of
climate change, as well as environmental degradation.
To address those challenges, sustained efforts have been
made to strengthen the capacities of the African Union
to respond to the ever-changing nature of the threats we
face. With the entry into force of the Protocol Relating
to the Establishment of the Peace and Security Council
of the African Union in 2003, the response to conflicts
and threats has been greatly enhanced. Cooperation

between the Security Council and the Peace and
Security Council is of crucial importance in that regard.

In addition to the Peace and Security Council, other
pillars of the African Peace and Security Architecture
are already in place, including the Panel of the Wise,
the Continental Early Warning System, the African
Standby Force and the African Peace Fund. I am happy
to report that four pillars of the African Peace and
Security Architecture are already in place. Efforts to
operationalize the African Standby Force are ongoing,
and we expect that to be completed by the end of the
year. An exercise code-named Amani Africa II is
expected to take place in South Africa from 19 October
to 7 November to validate the full operational capacity
and rapid deployment capacity of the Standby Force.

The lessons learned from the peace operations
in Mali and the Central African Republic led to the
establishment of the African Capacity for Immediate
Response to Crises (ACIRC), which will significantly
strengthen both the speed and robustness of our
response to emergency situations. By January 2014,
ACIRC had been declared ready for operation. Member
States of the AU handed over the authorization of its
operation to the African Union Peace and Security
Council. The operationalization of ACIRC will not in
any way undermine the full operationalization of the
African Standby Force.

Between 2013 and 2015, an average of 30,000 to
40,000 uniformed personnel were serving annually
in African-led peace support operations. In addition,
Africa contributed personnel to United Nations
peacekeeping missions, increasing from 10,000
personnel in 2003 to over 35,000 in 2014, the majority
of whom have been deployed on the African continent.

Since 2002, the AU has deployed a number of
peace support operations in response to conflict
situations on the continent, notably in Burundi, Darfur,
Mali, the Central African Republic and Somalia. The
stabilization efforts carried out by those missions and
the sacrifices made by their personnel have greatly
paved the way for, and facilitated the task of, the United
Nations missions that eventually took over. In the case
of Somalia, our engagement in support of the Somali
Federal Government gave hope to the Somali people,
as the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
continues to expand and consolidate liberated areas.
Let me take this opportunity to extend our gratitude
to our partners, including the United Nations, the
European Union and others, in ensuring AMISOM's
effectiveness.

Let me mention cooperation with the regional
economic communities and regional mechanisms in
consolidating peace and security in Africa. Since the
signing of the memorandum of understanding among
the regional organizations and the African Union in
2008, a lot has been achieved in the coordination of
peacekeeping operations and prevention initiatives,
such as joint election observation, diplomatic missions
and secretariat-secretariat cooperation.

However, experience in recent years has amply
shown that one of the greatest constraints faced by
the African Union and its regional mechanisms is the
matter of flexible, sustainable and predictable sources
of funding for their peace efforts. It is therefore crucial
that an appropriate solution be urgently found to that
question, bearing in mind that the Security Council
has the primary responsibility in the maintenance of
international peace and security. The AU is striving to
have its member States increase their contributions so
that outside support, including from the United Nations
and our partners, is truly complementary.

In that context, the African Union welcomes the
report of the High-level Panel on Peace Operations
(see S/2015/446), chaired by Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta
of Timor-Leste, and looks forward to its formal and
in-depth consideration by both the General Assembly
and the Security Council during the Assembly's
upcoming seventieth session.

