Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We appreciate the convening of this meeting and the
valuable briefing by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for West Africa and the Sahel,
Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, on the important work
that is being carried out by the United Nations Office
for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS).

As the Special Representative has stated, despite
the fact that some progress has been made in the
consolidation of democracy and the rule of law, the
continuing insecurity and political tensions in the
region are deplorable, as is the tragic humanitarian
situation, particularly in the Sahel region and the Lake
Chad basin, which is the result ofthe actions of terrorist
groups, transnational crime, clashes over the control of
natural resources and a limited State presence, among
other factors.

Peru is convinced that those challenges require a
multidimensional, long-term and integrated approach
that addresses the root causes of the conflict. In that
context, we would like to highlight three areas in which
UNOWAS is called upon to play a central role in the
coming months.

First, with respect to electoral monitoring and
preventive action, we emphasize the functions of
monitoring andearlywarningwithrespectto thepolitical
situation in the region, which are complemented by
mediation and good offices, capacities that we believe
must continue to be strengthened and enhanced. In that
context, we look forward to the role that UNOWAS
will be playing in the upcoming elections in Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Benin, Nigeria and Senegal, based on
the model of transparent and inclusive processes with
the full participation of women and young people.

Secondly, with regard to regional cooperation,
we would highlight the comparative advantage that
UNOWAS has to articulate a regional vision and
action to combat common scourges such as terrorism,
violent extremism and organized crime. We welcome
the fact that such action is complemented by effective
coordination with the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States and other
subregional organizations and United Nations offices.
We would underline also the advisory function provided
by UNOWAS concerning the necessary reforms in
the security sector, disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes for ex-combatants, and the
promotion of local dialogue.

Thirdly, with respect to the field of development
promotion, we know that building a sustainable
peace implies a synergy among peace, justice and
development that allows for the construction of robust,
transparent institutions. Only in that way can the deep
causes of the conflict be effectively addressed in line
with the Sustainable Development Goals. From that
perspective, we welcome the priority that UNOWAS
attaches to the promotion of sustainable and safe
development in the region. We highlight its particular
interest in intercommunal conflicts arising as a result
of climate change and the preparation of intersectoral
studies on this subject. We also highlight its leadership
in the implementation of the United Nations integrated
strategy for the Sahel, in accordance with the provisions
of resolution 2391 (2017).

I would like to conclude by expressing our strong
support for the role of UNOWAS and by encouraging
the international community to continue to cooperate
closely with the regional Office and the Special
Representative in their efforts to achieve sustainable
peace in West Africa and the Sahel.

