Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): The United Kingdom
remains concerned by the negative trends on the ground
in Israel and the occupied Palestinian territories. We
continue to be deeply concerned by ongoing Israeli
settlement advancements in the West Bank, including
East Jerusalem, in violation of international law. We
urge Israel to fulfil its obligations as an occupying
Power under the Fourth Geneva Convention.

I would also reiterate here the United Kingdom's
position that annexation of any part of the West Bank
would be destructive to peace efforts and could not
pass unchallenged. Annexation of territory by force is
prohibited under international law.

We are troubled by the increase in settler violence.
Many recent incidents, including assaults on Palestinian
farmers, setting fire to olive trees and the stealing
of produce have coincided with the Palestinian olive
harvest, which began earlier this month. The Israeli
authorities have a responsibility to provide appropriate
protection to the Palestinian civilian population.

We are also extremely concerned at the fact that
the number of structures demolished this year has
increased by almost 40 per cent compared with the
same period last year. We condemn the demolition
of Palestinian property and evictions of Palestinians
from their homes. Ongoing and periodic tensions on
Al-Haram Al-Sharif, or Temple Mount, are a further
source of concern. We recognize that Jerusalem holds
huge significance and holiness for Jews, Muslims and
Christians, and reiterate the fundamental necessity of
maintaining the status quo at the holy sites.

Turning to Gaza, the reduction in violence at the
border fence is welcome, and we urge continued calm.
Indiscriminate attacks against civilians are unacceptable
and unjustifiable. Hamas and other terrorist groups
must cease all actions that are Violent or provocative.
The United Kingdom fully supports Israel's right to
defend its citizens from such acts of terror.

1 would also like to echo the concern relayed by the
Special Coordinator that Hamas is putting children at
risk of violence at the demonstrations at the Gaza fence.
Children should never be the target of violence. They
must never be put at the risk of violence or encouraged
to participate in violence. It is totally unacceptable that
Hamas and its operatives have been cynically exploiting
the protests for their own benefit. Hamas must cease all
actions that proactively encourage violence or that put
civilian lives at risk.

The United Kingdom underlines the damage that
Israeli restrictions are doing to the living standards of
ordinary Palestinians in Gaza. We call on Israel, the
Palestinian Authority and Egypt to work together to
ensure a durable solution.

In more positive developments, we welcome the
agreement between Israel and the Palestinian Authority
on the transfer of tax revenues. We urge Israel and the
Palestinian Authority to continue to work together to
meet their obligations under the Oslo Accords. We
continue to urge the Palestinian Authority to make
reforms to prisoner payments, ensuring that they are
needs-based, transparent and affordable.

We welcome the work of the Palestinian leadership
towards genuine and democratic national elections for
all Palestinians.

We need a viable Israeli-Palestinian peace
agreement that addresses the legitimate concerns of both
parties, which means we need genuine and committed
engagement from both Israelis and Palestinians,
including the end of actions that undermine trust and
threaten the viability of the two-State solution.

