Mr. Stanczyk (Poland): First of all, let me
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council in January. I also
wish to extend my congratulations to the new members
of the Council: Bulgaria, Cameroon, Guinea, Mexico
and the Syrian Arab Republic.

Let me also thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this debate on an issue of utmost importance
to all Member States of the United Nations. Almost
four months have elapsed since the adoption of
Security Council resolution 1373 (2001), and it is
indeed time to take stock of actions taken in the
struggle against terrorism on the basis of Council
decisions.

Poland has already associated itself with the
statement made on behalf of the European Union by
the representative of Spain. However, we would like to
add some remarks from a regional perspective, as
Poland hosted, on 6 November last year, the Warsaw
Conference on Combating Terrorism.

The Conference, convened at the initiative of the
President of the Republic of Poland, Mr. Aleksander
Kwasniewski, brought together heads of State from
Central, Eastern and South-Eastern Europe, in order to
enhance regional cooperation in the area of combating
terrorism and to identify areas of particular
significance for the struggle against this scourge.

The following countries participated in the
Conference: the Republic of Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the Republic of Bulgaria, the Republic of
Croatia, the Czech Republic, the Republic of Estonia,
the Republic of Hungary, the Republic of Latvia, the
Republic of Lithuania, the Republic of Moldova,
Romania, the Slovak Republic, the Republic of
Slovenia, Ukraine, the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and the
Republic of Poland. Representatives of the Republic of
Belarus, the Russian Federation, Turkey, the United
States of America, the European Union, the United
Nations, the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
participated as observers.

The Conference resulted in the adoption of a
Declaration and an Action Plan, which determined the
steps to be undertaken by the participants and which
were published as a Security Council document under
the symbol S/2001/1142. The heads of State were
unanimous in their condemnation of the terrorist
attacks of 11 September, considering them an assault
on the basic freedoms and security of all the people of
the world and stressing that the fight against
international terrorism is not a confrontation between
different religions or cultures. Moreover, the
participants pledged their full support for anti-terrorist
action being taken within the framework of the United
Nations, calling upon all States to implement fully the
provisions of Security Council resolution 1373 (2001),
and to ratify the existing international conventions
relating to terrorism. They also stressed their
conviction that it is through common and coordinated
action that terrorist organizations and those who
support, finance, train and harbour them will be
brought to justice.

Particular stress was put on the need to increase
the capacity of the participating States to effectively
respond to the challenges posed by terrorism. The
strengthening of internal legislation and institutions
responsible for combating terrorism was identified as
one of the main priorities in this field. It is the primary
responsibility of each country to prevent and suppress
international terrorism within its jurisdiction, and
international efforts can only be successful when every
State has effective operational mechanisms to that end.

Increasing cooperation in areas of information
exchange and intelligence sharing is another sphere
where mutual efforts should bring fruitful results. The
participants of the Warsaw Conference have thus
pledged to strengthen their collaboration in this respect
by sharing their experience and knowledge with respect
to those suspected of involvement in international
terrorism. Sharing of knowledge in the area of anti-
terrorist training has also been envisaged as part of the
process, with the possibility of establishing a training
centre for this purpose. Cooperation between border
and immigration services, as well as the police, is yet
another sphere in which the participants in the
Conference decided to increase their cooperation, as
the ability to identify terrorist threats at early stages,
before they can develop into networks and larger
operations, is considered critical for the successful
implementation of the common plan of action against
terrorism. The need to strengthen the control of arms
exports and the importance of non-proliferation
regimes were likewise emphasized.

While highlighting the need to undertake
practical steps for the prevention and suppression of
terrorism, the participants agreed that a sustainable
effort in this respect is required. It should address not
only the symptoms of this scourge, but also its causes.
One of the objectives that could be pursued is the
promotion of tolerance and multiculturalism by
upholding our common values and enriching curricula
at all levels of education.

To sustain the struggle against terrorism and to
achieve our common goal of eliminating this scourge, a
stable and strong commitment will be required from all
States. It is the intention of the States participating in
the Warsaw Conference that it not be a one-time event
but rather a process through which they will be better
able to deal with the common threat of terrorism. These
regional efforts are aimed at complementing and
reinforcing the global effort in which the United
Nations plays a fundamental role.

I would also like to avail myself of this occasion
to express our appreciation to the Chairman of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, His Excellency Sir
Jeremy Greenstock, for the excellent leadership that he
has provided in its work.

It has been encouraging to learn that resolution
1373 (2001) has elicited an unparalleled response from
Member States. It is a clear sign of the commitment of
the United Nations members to the struggle against
international terrorism. We believe that this process
will make us all better prepared to cope with the
challenges ahead, and it will strengthen or put in place
the tools necessary for effective action at all levels of
international cooperation. It is also a learning process,
and we all stand to benefit from the experience gained.
Furthermore, in the sphere of combating terrorism,
Poland will spare no efforts to fulfil its obligations
under the Charter and to contribute to the achievement
of the goals set out by this Organization.

