Ms. Rice (United States of America): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening and chairing this
important meeting, and for focusing our attention on
the threat to international peace and security caused by
terrorism.

Today's meeting could not be more timely. We
meet today one year after the death of Osama bin
Laden. His death was an important milestone in the
fight against Al-Qaida and other terrorist groups, but it
did not remove the scourge of terrorism from our world.
The resilience of terrorist networks means that our
collective fight against terrorism must continue.
Today's meeting underscores the Security Council's
unwavering commitment to countering terrorism and
reminds us of the work we have left to do.

Though Al-Qaida has experienced major setbacks,
its affiliates and other violent extremist groups
continue to operate and pose significant threats.
Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula has expanded its
reach in Yemen and looks to launch attacks abroad.
Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM) is exploiting
and sowing instability in the Sahel, particularly in Mali.
Al-Shabaab, which publicly pledged allegiance to
Al-Qaida early this year, continues to destabilize the
Horn of Africa and deny vital humanitarian relief to
those in need.

In Nigeria, elements of Boko Haram have
perpetrated widespread attacks, including against
United Nations personnel. In New Delhi, Tblisi and
elsewhere, we have seen new and recurring acts of
violence against diplomats. Terrorist threats continue to
emanate from and affect every region of the world. The
United States joins others in condemning terrorist acts
everywhere they occur.

Terrorist groups continue to evolve and adapt.
Some have also become criminal enterprises in their
own right. AQIM, for example, has created an
environment of fear and instability by adopting
kidnapping for ransom to finance its terrorist
operations. Kidnapping for ransom is a growing threat
to international peace and security and will pose
significant challenges to the international community
in the years ahead.

To counter the ongoing threat posed by terrorists,
President Obama has adopted a strategic,
comprehensive approach that combines every tool of
American power - civilian, military and economic,
together with the power of our values - with the
concerted effort of allies, partners and multilateral
institutions. Only by addressing the drivers of
radicalization, and doing so together, can we prevent
local threats from becoming regional and global ones
requiring a much more costly response. Therefore we
are taking determined action worldwide to stop
material support for terrorists, counter violent
extremism, reduce recruitment and radicalization, and
empower our partners to do so as well.

Last week, the United States chaired a thematic
debate in this Chamber on securing borders against
illicit trafficking and movement (see S/PV.6760). The
Council adopted presidential statement S/PRST/2012/ 16,
requesting the Secretary-General to prepare a
comprehensive assessment of the various United
Nations structures and activities, and to consider how
the United Nations system can respond more
effectively to Member States' requests for assistance.
The United States seeks to help countries build
enduring civilian institutions, underpinned by human
rights and the rule of law, which can effectively combat
terrorism as well as the drivers of violent extremism.
The recently launched Global Counter-Terrorism
Forum, aimed at promoting the implementation of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, is
catalysing those efforts. The United States is
committed to strengthening partnerships at the United
Nations and other multilateral organizations to combat
terrorism. The development of the United Nations
counter-terrorism framework over the past decade has
been significant. The United Nations has played an
important role in building consensus around a global
counter-terrorism strategy and delivering technical
assistance to bolster civilian counter-terrorism
capacities worldwide.

We encourage the United Nations to build upon
its valuable contributions, which include the recent
establishment of the United Nations Counter-Terrorism
Centre within the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force. We welcome the Secretary-General's
initiative to appoint a United Nations counter-terrorism
coordinator and further unify the United Nations
counter-terrorism architecture to ensure that expertise
and resources are deployed as efficiently as possible.

Civil society, particularly victims and victims
associations, has played a powerful role in counter-
terrorism prevention efforts. We encourage relevant
parts of the United Nations system, including the
Counter-Terrorism Committee and the Counter-
Terrorism Implementation Task Force, to intensify their
engagement with and support for civil society
worldwide in the coming years.

The United States strongly supports all of these
United Nations efforts and looks forward to continuing
to work together in common cause within the Council
and the broader international community to prevent
and combat terrorism wherever and in whatever form it
occurs.

