Ms. Kane: During the reporting period, efforts to
advance the political process have continued through
direct bilateral negotiations. There have been major
episodes of violence, especially in and around Gaza,
and continued creation of facts on the ground in the
West Bank. Gaza has also witnessed heightened
humanitarian distress, while conditions in the West
Bank, including East Jerusalem, have not significantly
improved despite continuing efforts.

The bilateral negotiations between the parties,
key to the Annapolis process, consist of regular
meetings at three levels: between President Abbas and
Prime Minister Olmert, between their negotiating
teams, and between technical experts. Confidentiality
is being maintained. We continue to urge progress
towards the shared goal of a peace treaty this year.

During the reporting period, 69 Palestinians,
including 15 children, were killed in Israel Defense
Forces (IDF) operations and 95 were injured. Six
Israelis were killed by Palestinian militants and 27
were injured.

At least 70 rockets and mortars were fired at
Israel or at crossing points in the reporting period.
Hamas and other militant organizations also staged a
2

number of attacks against crossing points between
Gaza and Israel, which are the only outlets for
international humanitarian assistance. A terrorist attack
on 9 April on the Nahal Oz fuel depot by Palestinian
militants killed two Israeli civilians involved in
supplying fuel. On 19 April, Hamas militants
conducted an attack using armoured vehicles and
explosives against the Kerem Shalom crossing,
injuring 13 Israeli soldiers.

Israeli air and ground operations against militants
in Gaza intensified following the 9 April attack. There
were several instances in which Palestinian civilians
were killed in those operations. On 16 April, 12
Palestinian civilians, including children and a news
cameraman, were killed in Israeli action against
militants following the killing of three Israeli soldiers.

The Secretary-General continues to condemn
rocket or other attacks by militants against civilians
and the crossings. Not only do those attacks threaten
Israeli civilians; they also cause unacceptable suffering
to the civilian population of Gaza and threaten to lead
to a wider escalation.

The Secretary-General also condemns civilian
casualties in IDF operations against militants. We
reiterate the Secretary-General's repeated calls for a
cessation of all acts of violence and for all parties to
comply with international humanitarian and human
rights law. Measures of collective punishment should
not be continued.

We are deeply alarmed at the prospects of a
further intensification of violence, given the terrible
implications for civilians and the threat such conflict
would pose to the security of all parties - the
Palestinians, Israel and Egypt. We support and
encourage Egypt to continue its efforts to achieve calm
in Gaza leading to a reopening of crossings, as well as
its ongoing efforts to ensure security along the border.
We urge all parties to work with Egypt with a sense of
urgency and responsibility, and we urge all States in
the region with influence to work for calm.

Special Coordinator Serry was in Gaza today,
where he conveyed the United Nations concern over
the deteriorating humanitarian and security situation.

Prior to the 9 April attack on the Nahal Oz fuel
terminal, approximately 65 per cent of the fuel needs of
the Gaza power plant were being met by imports.
Because of the attack, Nahal Oz was closed from 9 to
21 April, except for two days. The Government of
08-31494
Israel is now re-examining security mechanisms to
ensure the secure delivery of commercial fuel into
Gaza. Had Nahal Oz not been able to reopen today, the
power plant would have shut down and most areas of
Gaza would have experienced increased electricity cuts.

Equally critical are the low levels of fuel to meet
transportation needs due to the continued closure of
Nahal Oz. Even before the 9 April attack, import levels
of diesel and petrol had been significantly reduced,
with no petrol imported since 18 March and no diesel
since 2 April. Vehicular traffic has effectively been
brought to a standstill. The impact of the low import
levels of petrol and diesel has been exacerbated by the
refusal of the Palestinian Petrol Stations Association to
distribute the supply that does exist, in protest against
the low levels of imports.

The lack of fuel has also impacted adversely on
water and sanitation. Some 15 to 20 per cent of the
population now receives water for three to five hours
every four days, impacting daily hygiene. Sixty
thousand cubic meters of raw and partially treated
sewage continue to be dumped daily into the
Mediterranean Sea. Student and teacher absences at
schools and universities have reached a level as high as
20 per cent, due to the lack of fuel for transport. All
classes at Gaza's four main universities were suspended
last week. Most fishing vessels are grounded, which
will lead to the loss of the sardine season.

Humanitarian agencies are also severely affected.
The fuel supplies of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) will be exhausted on 24 April and, in an
effort to save fuel, UNRWA has prioritized food
distribution, solid waste removal and sewage projects.
It has stopped all monitoring activities and, as of
14 April, roughly half of the 1,240 vocational students
usually transported by contractors have not been able
to attend their classes. As of tomorrow, unless petrol is
allowed in, UNRWA will discontinue its food
assistance to 650,000 refugees, as well as its garbage
collection services benefiting 500,000 Gazans. Another
500,000 Gazans are already living in 12 municipalities
without any solid waste management capacity, largely
due to the lack of fuel.

Import trucks were allowed through Sufa crossing
on 22 April after an attack by Palestinian militants on
the Kerem Shalom crossing on 17 April led to its
closure. The United Nations has been informed by the
Government of Israel that the reopening of a secured
08-31494
Kerem Shalom will take several weeks. Prior to
17 April, the level of truck imports into Gaza had
almost doubled in March, but still remained at one
third of that of May 2007. Only food, cattle, medical
and cleaning supplies are entering on an ongoing basis.
Shortages of daily necessities fluctuate, bringing
corresponding price increases in accordance with
supply and demand. No materials are entering for
United Nations humanitarian infrastructure projects.
Despite assurances, UNRWA has also not received
approval for the import of materials needed for the
annual summer games which the Agency facilitates for
250,000 children.

The Rafah crossing was opened briefly on
14 April for the transfer of 24 cancer and cardiac
patients to Egypt for medical treatment.

Meanwhile, Palestinian Authority institutions in
Gaza continued to come under the direct control of
Hamas, and independent Palestinian human rights
groups report concerns over alleged violations of
human rights, including denial of legal access to
Palestinian detainees. No agreement has been reached
on securing the release of captured Israeli soldier Gilad
Shalit or of Palestinian prisoners. The International
Committee of the Red Cross has still not been provided
access to Corporal Shalit.

On 30 March, following a trilateral meeting
between United States Secretary of State Rice,
Palestinian Prime Minister Fayyad and Israeli Defence
Minister Barak, the Government of Israel announced a
number of measures to ease conditions in the West
Bank. Those measures include, among others, the
opening of additional Palestinian Authority police
stations across the West Bank; approval for delivery of
equipment to the Palestinian security forces; an
additional 5,000 permits for Palestinian construction
workers in Israel; and approval of measures to
facilitate the passage of regional and international
business figures to the Palestine investment conference
in Bethlehem. We welcome that announcement, note
that some progress has been made and strongly
encourage full implementation.

The Government of Israel also announced its
intention to remove obstacles in the West Bank and
subsequently reported that it had removed 61 obstacles.
United Nations staff on the ground, through their
extensive fieldwork, have found that 44 obstacles have
been removed, that six have not been removed, and that
there is no evidence of the other 11 having previously
3
existed or of their removal. Of the 44 removed, five
were significant obstacles to movement - the other 39
did not appear on the list of 580 previously existing
obstacles identified in the database managed by the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
We welcome these removals, but strongly urge further
and more substantive progress to ease restrictions, as
envisaged in the 2005 Agreement on Movement and
Access, as it is vital to Palestinian economic revival.

Tenders and construction permits for hundreds of
housing units in Israeli settlements in occupied
Palestinian territory were announced this month.
Construction continued in many settlements and on
infrastructure such as roads for settler use. The
Secretary-General has repeatedly made public his
concern that all settlement activity in East Jerusalem or
elsewhere in the West Bank is contrary to international
law, Security Council resolutions and Israel's
obligations under phase one of the Road Map. We are
also concerned that Palestinian institutions in East
Jerusalem remain closed by Israeli order.

Construction work on the barrier continued
within occupied Palestinian territory, in deviation from
the Green Line and contrary to the advisory opinion of
the International Court of Justice.

Restrictions on United Nations operations
continued to increase in the West Bank, with the
installation of Israeli civilian police at checkpoints,
causing significant delays and security concerns to
United Nations staff crossing from the West Bank into
Jerusalem.

Twenty incidents of violence between settlers and
Palestinians were reported in March in the southern
West Bank alone, with two Palestinians reported killed.

Palestinian security forces in the West Bank have
pursued militants and criminal elements during the
reporting period. Some militants were granted amnesty
following the end of a term of probation, pursuant to
Palestinian Authority-Israel understandings. A newly
trained battalion of Palestinian security forces is
expected to be deployed in the period ahead. Efforts to
increase national security planning, reform and train
security services and strengthen all aspects of the rule
of law will need to continue, with support provided by
international partners. An international conference to
strengthen support in that area is planned for Berlin in
June.
Quartet Representative Tony Blair continued to
push for concrete measures to improve economic
conditions for the Palestinian population. A Palestine
investment conference, to be convened by Palestinian
Prime Minister Fayyad from 21 to 23 May in
Bethlehem and supported by Mr. Blair, is aimed at
encouraging new investment in Palestinian business.

The full draft of the Palestinian Reform and
Development Plan is nearly complete. Apart from
ongoing projects, the Palestinian Authority has just
distributed a preliminary list of new projects to
facilitate the implementation of the Plan's priorities.

The Palestinian Cabinet approved the 2008
budget on 31 March. The Palestinian Authority is
currently able to fund its recurrent costs, including for
June, but will face a deficit of over $600 million in the
second half of 2008. That deficit is due to insufficient
budget support commitments, the weakening dollar and
the Palestinian Authority's decision to repay public and
private sector arrears faster than originally planned. We
note the historic levels of financial support being
provided by the European Union, the United States and
other donors, and we urge others, including partners in
the region who have not yet done so, to meet their
Paris pledges as soon as possible. It should be borne in
mind that just under half of the Palestinian Authority
budget is spent in Gaza.

The League of Arab States held its annual summit
in Damascus on 29 and 30 March. We note the
expressions of concern over developments on the
ground and welcome the reaffirmation of the Arab
Peace Initiative, which remains a central element in the
search for peace in the region. We encourage Arab
support for President Abbas's efforts to negotiate a
peace treaty with Israel, for Prime Minister Fayyad's
efforts to build the institutions of a future Palestinian
State, and for Palestinian unity. We continue to believe
in the critical importance of close consultation with
Arab countries on all issues.

The situation in the occupied Syrian Golan has
remained quiet over the reporting period, although
settlement activity continued.

Lebanon remains in the grip of an intense
political crisis, which has so far prevented the election
of a new President, a position that has remained vacant
since 24 November 2007. The parliamentary session to
elect a President, scheduled for 22 April, did not take
place, and Speaker Berri has not yet set a date for a
new session.
The Lebanese Government decided that Lebanon
would not attend the annual Arab League Summit held
in Damascus on 29 and 30 March. In a televised
message on 28 March addressed to Arab leaders, Prime
Minister Siniora explained that his country was not
attending the Summit because it considered Syria
responsible for complicating the current political crisis
in Lebanon and obstructing the implementation of the
League of Arab States initiative.

On 22 April, a meeting of foreign ministers and
representatives of Egypt, France, Germany, Italy,
Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, the
United Arab Emirates, the United Kingdom, the United
States, the League of Arab States and the European
Union and the Secretary-General of the United Nations
took place in Kuwait. The participants adopted a
statement that, inter alia, expressed dismay at the
ongoing political stalemate in Lebanon; called for
immediate presidential elections; expressed support for
the League of Arab States plan and called for a
redefinition and normalization of ties between Lebanon
and the Syrian Arab Republic.

With regard to the security situation, on 20 April,
a shootout in the city of Zahle between opposing
Christian factions left two dead and two injured from
the Phalange party, and also injured a passer-by. The
Lebanese army was quickly deployed and managed to
restore calm. However, the situation in the area
remains tense.

In the south, the situation in the area of operation
of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL) was mostly quiet, but tense. In early April,
the Israeli Defense Forces carried out a five-day large-
scale home front exercise. The Lebanese Armed Forces
were on high alert during that period. No incidents
occurred.

During the night of 30 to 31 March, a UNIFIL
patrol was blocked for a few minutes by two vehicles
in the vicinity of Jibal al-Butm, denying UNIFIL its
freedom of movement in the area of operations. The
five occupants of the vehicles were armed with assault
rifles. The patrol challenged the individuals, who left
the area before a positive identification could be made.
This was the first such incident since the end of the
2006 war in which UNIFIL came across armed
elements in its area of operations. UNIFIL and the
Lebanese Armed Forces have since introduced
additional coordinated measures, including patrols and
checkpoints, to ensure that unauthorized armed
08-31494
personnel are not present and to prevent the transfer of
weapons into the area between the Litani River and the
Blue Line.

I also reiterate the obligations of the parties to
ensure the safety, security and freedom of movement of
UNIFIL and to extend their full cooperation to the
mission in the implementation of its mandate.

UNIFIL has recorded a steep increase in the
number of Israeli air violations, which occur on a daily
basis. They rose from 282 in February to 692 in March
and reached 476 during the first half of April. The
overflights constitute violations of Lebanese
sovereignty and the Blue Line and continue to
undermine the credibility of UNIFIL and the Lebanese
Armed Forces.

Israelis and Palestinians are in the most intensive
set of negotiations on final status issues since the
breakdown of the political process nearly eight years
ago. The significance of this should not be
underestimated, but neither should the grave risks to
the process be overlooked.

Quartet principals will meet in London on 2 May
to review all aspects of the process launched at
Annapolis and the situation on the ground. The
Secretary-General will chair that meeting, which will
take place in the margins of a meeting of the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee the same day. The Liaison
Committee convenes to assess progress in Palestinian
institutional and economic development since the last
meeting here in New York last September.

The Secretary-General and Special Coordinator
Serry are working with the parties and regional
partners and in the Quartet to support the political
process, to encourage action to meet commitments and
improve conditions on the ground, and to address the
grave humanitarian, political and security situation in
and around Gaza.

The United Nations continues to work to secure,
through negotiations, the full implementation of
Security Council resolutions and a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East.

