Lieutenant General Ngondi: With regard to the
impact of the security and operational environment on
mandate implementation by peacekeeping missions,
the environment for the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) is shaped by
five main aspects.

The first aspect is the fact that the Government of
the Sudan is robust in exercising its sovereign authority
in its territory, and that keeps the armed groups in
check. However, while the relationship between the
mission and the Government is cordial, the latter
often restricts UNAMID's freedom of movement and
the inflow of resources and services, contrary to the
provisions of the status of forces agreement.

Secondly, the existence of armed groups, inside
and outside the territory, that are non-signatories to
the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur also shape the
environment. The leadership of those groups needs to
be persuaded to embrace dialogue.

Thirdly, the intercommunal conflicts over natural
resources, mainly between herders and farming
communities, are another aspect. Land ownership
remains at the heart of the Darfur conflict, and a durable
solution for peaceful coexistence among different
communities can be found only through embracing
dialogue as the first step.

Fourthly, banditry and criminality exist owing
to poverty, underdevelopment and the absence or
inadequacy of law-and-order enforcement capacity. The
remedy lies in capacity-building for public institutions
and humanitarian and civil society organizations in
order to deliver basic services.

Lastly, the proliferation of weapons exacerbates
banditry and criminal activities. The ongoing arms-
collection campaign by the Government has reduced
banditry and criminal activities remarkably. However,
the exercise is perceived to be discriminatory.
UNAMID encourages the Government to collect illegal
arms uniformly.

I will now address specific concerns raised in
the concept note of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations Force Commanders and Heads of Military
Components Conference.

The first is whether the mandate is robust
enough. It is opined that the mandate of UNAMID,
being a peacekeeping mission, is sufficiently robust
to achieve its objectives. The mission has all the
relevant components and uses an integrated approach
in its conduct of operations, in addition to religiously
implementing the action plan proposed in the Santos
Cruz report.

The second is whether the mandate is
understandable and implementable. The mandate of
UNAMID is anchored on four main pillars: namely,
the protection of civilians, the delivery of humanitarian
aid, mediation between the Government of the Sudan
and non-signatories to the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur and, lastly, assistance in community resolution
mechanisms. Those pillars are simple, understandable
and implementable, as long as there is commitment and
political will on the part of all parties to the conflict,
including the interest groups.

That last concerns the support needed from the
Security Council to help the mission fulfil its mandate.

First, it is recommended that a transition strategy
be embedded in the mandate renewal. Lessons learned
from missions in Liberia and Cote d'Ivoire show that
a good transition guarantees that gains made are not
made in vain.

Secondly, the Government of the Sudan may be
persuaded to adhere to the provisions of the status
of force agreement and allow UNAMID freedom
of movement and unhindered flights in the area
of operations.

Lastly, the leadership of the armed groups needs to
be persuaded to embrace dialogue.

In conclusion, peacekeeping missions remain
important political tools for finding durable solutions
to conflicts. Challenges, hazards and security threats
emerging in the security and operational environment
should be mitigated in order to allow the fulfilment
of the mandates, as intimated in Santos Cruz report.
UNAMID remains grateful for the support accorded
by the Council, to Headquarters and other partners
in its endeavour to implement its mandate in Darfur,
the Sudan.

