Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia reiterates in the strongest
terms its categorical condemnation of the use of
chemical weapons and the weaponization of chemical
agents as an unjustifiable and criminal act, wherever,
whenever and by whomever they are committed, as
such use constitutes a serious crime under international
law and a threat to international peace and security.
There is no justification for their use regardless of the
circumstances and of who uses them. We therefore
reaffirm the need to maintain the unity of the Security
Council so as to ensure that those who have used
chemical weapons are held accountable and brought to
justice so that their actions do not go unpunished.

In that regard, we reiterate our support for the
work being carried out by the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and its Fact-finding
Mission so that, in line with their mandates, they
can carry out the work entrusted to them in the most
methodical, technical and trustworthy manner possible
with the support of an independent, impartial, complete
and conclusive investigation. We firmly reiterate that
the work of an investigative mechanism is essential to
ensuring accountability for such terrible acts. To that
end, it must be independent, impartial and representative
so that a transparent, impartial, complete, reliable and
conclusive investigation can be carried out, and, for
that to happen, we face the great challenge and the
responsibility of not politicizing or instrumentalizing
the Security Council.

My delegation voted against the draft resolution
(S/2018/321) presented by the United States of America,
first of all, because we regret that once again a draft
resolution was put to the vote with the knowledge that
it would not be adopted by the Security Council, and,
moreover, because there has already been a series of
threats of the use of force accompanied by threats of
unilateral action, which, of course, runs directly counter
to the Charter of the United Nations. Bolivia once
again makes clear its firm rejection of taking unilateral
actions, because any unilateral military action that
does not enjoy the approval of the Security Council is
entirely illegal and contravenes the principles explicitly
set forth in the Charter. In addition, any unilateral
military action would violate the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Arab Republic of Syria, and
would affect the stability of the political process and
the agreements on which progress has been made under
the auspices of the United Nations.

