Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): I would also like to
begin by thanking Ms. Norma Chan for the support we
have received and that numerous Austrian Permanent
Representatives, Austrian colleagues, and Austrian
colleagues in the Secretariat have received from her
during the years. I can only echo what my colleague
from Viet Nam has said - that we are particularly sad
to see her leave just one month before her support
would have been most dearly needed. Let me also
place on record that we particularly enjoyed and were
happy to have her in Vienna during the three years that
we were privileged to have her there.

On the subject of today, I would like to welcome
the presence and the statement of the Foreign Minister
of Afghanistan. I would also like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Kai Eide,
for his briefing, his commitment and the work he is
doing there under very difficult circumstances in a very
impressive fashion.

Austria shares the View that in spite of the many
shortcomings of the elections held in August, it was a
great achievement that those first entirely Afghan-led
elections took place at all. The elections were preceded
by a real campaign focusing on political agendas and
allowing genuine competition among the candidates.
The fact that millions of Afghans chose to vote in spite
of the intimidation by insurgents is impressive and
encouraging.

However, the fact that the voting process was
marred by serious electoral fraud is of concern. All
incidents must be addressed in order to ensure the
credibility of the electoral process. Austria thus fully
supports the work of the Electoral Complaints
Commission.

Once the electoral process has been completed, it
will be important for the new President to be certified
promptly in order to permit the early formation of an
effective and inclusive Government that can tackle the
many challenges that lie ahead. We fully share the
Secretary-General's View that the future Afghan
Government will need to build a new relationship of
trust with its people. Good governance, the rule of law
and respect for human rights should form the general
basis of the work of the new Government.
Improvement in these areas, including the fight against
corruption and drug trafficking, will be decisive.

The lessons learned from the election process
should guide the preparations for the parliamentary
elections to be held in 2010. Findings of the experts
from the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) will certainly be useful in this context.
The same goes for the recommendations of the
European Union election observation mission, which
played a useful role in the observation of the August
elections.

I would also like to underline the important
overall contribution of the European Union in the
framework of efforts in Afghanistan, in particular
through assistance in the field of security sector
reform, development and the election process. I am
sure that the Member State holding the presidency of
the European Union will be happy to present the efforts
and the position of the Union in greater detail when the
Security Council next debates the situation in
Afghanistan.
Undoubtedly, one of the biggest challenges now
is improving the security situation for the people of
Afghanistan. Incidents involving improvised explosive
devices and complex attacks by insurgents on civilians
and on humanitarian personnel are extremely worrying.
We have to convey the clear message that those
responsible for intimidation or violence directed
against humanitarian workers will be held to account.
Minimizing the alarming toll in civilian casualties must
be our number-one objective. We welcome the new
approach of the International Security Assistance Force
that gives the protection of the Afghan population the
highest priority and includes closer operational
partnership with the Afghan national security forces.

We are also aware of the important efforts made
by the current Government of Afghanistan to improve
the human rights situation. There are major problems
to be tackled, as documented in the recent joint report
by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
on violence against women. In this context we wish to
welcome and acknowledge the adoption in July of the
new law on the elimination of violence against women.
We hope that this law will take precedence over the
Shia Personal Status law, which from our point of view
does not comply with international human rights
standards and the international commitments of
Afghanistan.

On the issue of narcotics, the Special
Representative has already referred to the positive
developments achieved during the past year. We are
happy to see that the trilateral initiative of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime "Rainbow
strategy" has entered into the operational phase.

Austria also welcomes the ongoing engagement
of the OSCE with Afghanistan and would be happy to
see UNAMA continue to engage and cooperate with
the OSCE field missions in the region wherever
possible.

Looking to the future, we welcome the proposal
to hold an international conference on Afghanistan to
renew the Afghanistan Compact. This process must
lead to what one might call a real civilian surge based
on the principles of capacity-building and increased
responsibility and ownership on the part of the Afghan
Government.
In conclusion, let me acknowledge the important
work that UNAMA and other United Nations bodies
are doing in Afghanistan. Austria fully supports the
planned expansion and strengthening of UNAMA. We
would also value and welcome the benchmarks and
indicators of progress annexed to the Secretary-
General's report. They provide the Security Council
with a useful tool for measuring progress. We welcome
in particular the inclusion of specific indicators with
regard to the protection of civilians and are certainly
happy that the Secretary-General looks to refining
these benchmarks further in consultation with the
Afghan Government and the international community.

