The President (spoke in Arabic): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

In that connection, as President, I shall now make
an introductory statement concerning peacekeeping
operations.

The delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic, after
the necessary consultations with the other members of
the Council, has decided to devote today's wrap-up
meeting to the theme of United Nations peacekeeping
operations. Our delegation took that approach for many
reasons, most important among them the current
developments in United Nations peacekeeping
operations. We are confident that past and present
United Nations peacekeeping operations constitute one
of the main elements of the maintenance of
international peace and security.

We wanted to give the opportunity to the Council
members to make their views known on the numerous
positive aspects of peacekeeping operations. We also
wanted to give them the opportunity to comment on
how to create conditions in which we can try to remove
all the obstacles facing peacekeeping operations, and
on ways to overcome those obstacles.

One of our main objectives was to address the
issue of the protection of United Nations missions and
peacekeeping operations in various parts of the world.
This comes in the wake of the criminal act that took
place in Baghdad on 19 August, claiming the lives of a
number of the best people working for peacekeeping
operations, and injuring many others. This was a great
loss to the United Nations in particular, and to the
international community in general.

My delegation circulated a paper to all members
of the Council, prepared along with our partners who
wanted to tackle this question. But the paper also
presents our View on the subject under consideration.
As members will notice, we have affirmed that the
Security Council must run the transitional stages of
peacekeeping operations in an effective manner,
whether in Africa or on other continents. We also
stated that, when adopting a decision to establish a new
operation, the Council must take into account all of its
operational aspects.

The Council must also take into account the
protection of the operations. Furthermore, in order for
the operation to fulfil its mandate, the necessary
military power must be provided. We also talked about
giving the Secretary-General the necessary flexibility
with regard to initiating peacekeeping operations and
have also made it clear that countries must be ready to
launch operations anywhere, including in Africa.

Finally, we spoke of securing the civilian
elements that are necessary to support permanent
peace, especially in humanitarian assistance and in the
disarmament and demobilization of all combatants.

The Syrian Arab Republic pays tribute to all
those who have worked with our international
Organization and supported its peacemaking efforts.
There have been sad moments, such as the 1948
assassination in Jerusalem of Count Folke Bernadette,
United Nations mediator in Palestine, and the criminal
act in Baghdad last week. Such events have resulted in
men and women of United Nations peacekeeping
operations paying the dearest price, their own blood, in
order to maintain peace and security in the world.

Syria believes that we must continue our debate
into the next stage so that humanity can finally enjoy
peace in every part of the world and so that we can
attain the purposes of the United Nations Charter.

I would like now to inform the members of the Council
that this will be my last meeting as President and as
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic. As
members may know, I have been transferred to the
Syrian Mission to Geneva as Permanent Representative
of Syria to the United Nations in Geneva, the European
headquarters. On this occasion I would like to extend
my thanks to all of my colleagues and friends in the
Council. I thank them for their continuous cooperation
with me on all issues related to the maintenance of
international peace and security in accordance with the
principles and purposes of the United Nations.

I extend my thanks also to all members of the
Secretariat, including the interpreters and the others
who facilitate our work during our meetings. I will
never forget them, and would like to thank them
especially for cooperating with me during my seven
years at the United Nations here in New York.

