Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Egypt
continues to firmly condemn North Korea's development
of nuclear weapons and launching of ballistic missiles
in violation of the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council, as they pose a threat to international and
regional peace and security. Accordingly, that stance
is based on Egypt's firm commitment to maintaining
the credibility of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons regime and that of the Security
Council. Egypt also favours the United Nations system
dealing with threats to the non-proliferation regime
decisively and seriously, without discrimination or
double standards.

Egypt also recognizes that the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea's repeated violations of the relevant
Council resolutions pose a threat to international
peace and security. They also dangerously threaten the
stability of North-East Asia and the national security of
countries that enjoy friendly relations with Egypt, such
as Japan and the Republic of Korea. Egypt calls on the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea to immediately
cease all violations and actions that run counter to the
relevant resolutions. We call on North Korea to refrain
from any escalation that might lead to more tension
and instability, thereby threatening international and
regional peace and security.

Egypt reiterates the need for the Security
Council and all United Nations bodies to assume their
responsibilities in that regard. Through efforts aimed
at reaching a sustainable and peaceful settlement to
the very alarming situation on the Korean peninsula,
such a settlement should include the total elimination
of all nuclear weapons and achieving sustainable
peace between the two Koreas in accordance with the
provisions of the relevant resolutions, including the
revitalization of the Six-Party Talks and negotiations,
so as to break the vicious cycle generated by the
continued violations of Security Council resolutions by
North Korea.

In conclusion, I would like to express our high
appreciation to the outstanding efforts that you have
made, Sir, together with the members of the Italian
delegation, as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006), during Italy's
membership on the Security Council. Those efforts
have had an obvious impact on facilitating the work of
that important Committee, which plays a critical role in
following up on the relevant resolutions concerning the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea, and helping
Member States take the appropriate measures. Your
efforts have been successful despite the technical
complexities related to the implementation of an
unprecedented international sanctions regime. I would
like to take this opportunity to thank you, Mr. President,
for presenting your report today on the activities of the
Committee over the past 90 days. It underscores the
clear dynamism of the Committee, to which we accord
great importance in the light of Egypt's commitment
to the scrupulously implementation of the relevant
Security Council resolutions.

