Mr. Arias (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I should like to thank the Under-Secretary-
General, Mr. Lynn Pascoe, for his briefing and to thank
the representatives of Palestine and Israel for their
presentations. We must acknowledge that the
information that they have given us today is alarming
and disturbing.

As we stated at last month's meeting on the
Middle East, Panama was optimistic about the holding
of the Annapolis Conference as a new beginning in the
peace process. However, the recent high-level meetings
between Israel and the Palestinian Authority have been
taking place in an atmosphere not conducive to a peace
agreement. In a supposed reaction to the rocket attacks
from Gaza against its territory, Israel has responded in
an unprecedented and excessive manner, in
contravention of every norm of international law, and
has instituted a humanitarian blockade against the
population that threatens the lives of innocent civilians
and destabilizes the region still further. That is
hampering and jeopardizing the continuity and
productivity of the negotiations and threatening the
understanding that the parties reached together in
Annapolis.

Amid all this, the Security Council remains
removed from the issue, as demonstrated by last
week's long and fruitless negotiations to agree on a
statement regarding the humanitarian situation in the
Gaza Strip. As a result, a solution to the Arab-Israeli

conflict, although it must be an agreement between the
parties, requires more than ever before the leadership
of the international community. It, and particularly the
members of the Quartet, must find innovative ways to
urge the parties to make the difficult decisions
necessary for a final peace agreement between them.

I wish to take this opportunity to comment on
references made by both the representative of the
United Kingdom and the representative of South Africa
regarding the purposes and contents of these meetings.

In Panama's opinion, the Security Council is not
the principal forum for Member States to express their
Views on various issues affecting the international
community. That forum is the General Assembly.
Unfortunately, in many instances, it does not meet the
responsibilities assigned to it. The Security Council is
charged with maintaining international peace and
security. The purpose of these public meetings should
be to allow Member States to convey to the Council
their vision of how to ensure peace and security.

Having attended 13 debates on the situation on
the Middle East, I very much regret to say that I do not
feel that these meetings have made an effective
contribution to ensuring that the Council can act to
maintain peace and security in the region. The
Council's lamentable failure in recent days to agree on
a presidential statement on the tragic humanitarian
situation in the Gaza Strip is clear proof of this
situation.

Moreover, the protagonists in the peace process
must also address the new dimensions that the conflict
has taken on in recent years. For example, we must
accept that there will not be comprehensive and lasting
peace between Israelis and Palestinians unless there is
Palestinian unity first and an end to extremist positions
and terrorist bombings, regardless of their motives or
where they emanate.

With regard to Lebanon, it is obvious that only an
agreed solution between the Government and the
opposition, free of external interference, can bring a
peaceful end to the political stalemate in the country.
That should be the goal of all the parties affected by
that regrettable situation.

