Mr. Kabentayev (Kazakhstan): I thank the
presidency of Malaysia for drawing attention to
the need to protect children from violence, abuse,
detention and, in particular, forced disappearance and
abduction during armed conflicts, all of which assumed
unprecedented and alarming proportions last year. My
delegation commends the Security Council and its
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict for
their attention to and progress in reducing the number
of war crimes against children.

As the horror and frequency of such crimes intensify,
however, with ever larger numbers of children becoming
victims, it is imperative that we respond more speedily
than we have done so far, both to new, emerging crises
and to protracted, worsening conflicts. Kazakhstan is
a staunch supporter of and committed to the rigorous
implementation of international humanitarian, human-
rights and criminal law, and would therefore like to
present the following points for consideration.

First, the issue of children in armed conflict needs
to be better integrated into the Council's country-
specific work, and a child-protection mandate must
be incorporated into all peacekeeping missions, with
an officer delegated for that purpose. Such a directive
can be effective only if troops, police and civilian
personnel on the ground receive adequate orientation,
as well as prior training in their home countries before
deployment. Our efforts would have better results if
there were greater coordination between the Security
Council, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
and the regional structures and United Nations country
teams on the ground.

All Member States should endorse and implement
UNICEF's "Children, Not Soldiers" campaign, for,
as Human Rights Watch estimates, nearly 300,000
children are serving as child soldiers for Government
forces and rebel groups in armed conflicts around the
world. Statistics also indicate that as many as 70 per
cent of the soldiers in some armed groups are children,
with girls also recruited, though mainly as sex slaves.
The abduction of children should therefore be added as a
new trigger for inclusion in the annexes to the Secretary-
General's reports, along with the other four triggers:
recruitment, sexual violence, killing and maiming
and attacks on schools and hospitals. Furthermore, all
perpetrators must be brought to justice through stricter
enforcement of the Rome Statutes when countries are
unwilling or unable to protect children. Countries that
are powerless need regional and international support
and capacity-building on several fronts, including the
military, the promotion of good governance and the
rule of law.

My delegation applauds the work of the Watchlist
on Children and Armed Conflict and other human
rights defenders of children and endorses the proposals
they have made, i.e., recommending that the Secretary-
General include in the annexes to his report those
actors in a conflict who engage in abductions of
children, and that all parties to a conflict should treat
children as Victims, ensuring first of all their full
treatment, rehabilitation and reintegration into society.
Furthermore, every effort should be made to prevent
attacks on educational institutions and end the military
use of schools; that requires calling on conflicting
parties to uphold the Oslo Safe Schools Declaration.
There must also be a greater concerted effort to hold
security-sector actors in conflict zones accountable for
effectively protecting children and to ensure that the
United Nations national action plans are adopted.

In conclusion, Kazakhstan, in upholding the rights
and dignity of the child, will join the international
community in supporting the safe and secure protection

of children, who are the most vulnerable group of all in
armed conflicts.

