Mr. VotO-Bernales (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to welcome the presence among us of
Mr. Djibrill Bassole, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Burkina Faso, in his capacity as representative of the
Facilitator of the peace process in Cote d'Ivoire.
Through him, I would also like to congratulate
President Blaise Compaore for his important
contribution to peacebuilding in C6te d'Ivoire. I would
also like to welcome the presence among us of Jean-
Marie Bockel, Secretary of State for Cooperation and
la Francophony of France, as well as to thank
Mr. Abou Moussa for his introduction of the report
(S/2007/593) of the Secretary-General.

The signing of the Ouagadougou Agreement was
a milestone in the process of peaceably transforming
Ivorian society. Nevertheless, seven months after that
event, we are concerned to note the significant
slackening in the initial momentum to implement the
Agreement - given that timelines have been extended
considerably and we do not yet know when the process
will be completed. We are aware of the overall problem
of the capacity of national institutions to manage the
process and of their need for international support in
the areas of logistics and capacity building. In that
regard, we would like the underscore the need for
support for the Integrated Command Centre and the
mixed units. However, we believe that those
difficulties should not be an insurmountable obstacle to
continuing the peace process.

We are pleased that, despite delays in
implementation, the parties in Cote d'Ivoire still have
the political will to continue to make progress, as
attested to once again following the reprehensible
attack against Prime Minister Guillaume Soro. The
signals sent out in that connection to Ivorian society
point to unwavering commitment to peace and to unity
and resolve in the face of violence.

We would like to underscore the valuable support
of the financing provided by the international
community in the implementation of the Agreement
and post-conflict recovery. That positive element
provides additional momentum and serves to
underscore the responsibility of the Government of
Cote d'Ivoire to respond to national and international
expectations vis-a-vis the meeting of timelines.

Some of the specific tasks to be accomplished
urgently include the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of former combatants, the dismantling of
militias, the merging and restructuring of defence and
security forces, the re-establishment of State
administration throughout the country, the
identification of the population and voter registration.
The process as a whole should be geared towards the
holding of elections as the final component of
peacebuilding. In that regard, it is necessary both to
establish an exact timeframe for the holding of
elections and to emphasize the importance of certifying
each stage to ensuring absolute credibility of the
process.

My delegation therefore calls on the Facilitator to
continue his efforts to speed up the peace process. We
also call on regional organizations in Africa, and
especially on the Economic Community of West
African States, to continue their close cooperation with
the United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire
(UNOCI) in implementing the Ouagadougou
Agreement. Furthermore, we call on the international
community as a whole to provide support in the areas
of logistical support and capacity building, especially
for the Integrated Command Centre and the mixed
units.

Special attention should also be paid to the issue
of human rights in C6te d'Ivoire, where there are still
violations by elements of the Forces nouvelles, who
have been intimidating civilians and subjecting them to
arbitrary detention and arrest. We are also concerned
about reports of trafficking in human beings, especially
children, for prostitution and forced labour.

Given the current situation, my delegation
believes that it is important to maintain the present
troop levels in UNOCI. We look forward to a new
report from the Secretary-General on the basis of
which we can consider the steps to be taken in the
future.

