Mr. Muita (Kenya): At the outset, Sir, let me
express my appreciation to you and the entire
delegation of Mexico for organizing and presiding over
this important debate. I also wish to thank Mr. Lynn
Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
for his statement. My delegation fully associates itself
with the statement made by the representative of Cuba
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

Kenya welcomes the report of the Secretary-
General, contained in document S/2009/l89. The
Secretary-General's report highlights the enormous
challenges that we collectively face in providing
professional mediation assistance to parties in conflict.
It also offers very useful recommendations on
strengthening the role of mediation as a cost-effective
method of resolving disputes. My delegation fully
supports his recommendations.

The special focus of today's debate on enhancing
mediation and the settlement of disputes is timely. We
recognize that the cost of such conflicts, in both human
and resource terms, has been huge and negative. In
addition, the absence of peace and security inhibits
development and creates an enormous financial burden.
Nevertheless, my delegation is encouraged by this
debate because it underscores the fact that mediation is
now receiving increased attention as an integral part of
the global conflict resolution process.

There is no denying that, over the years, the
United Nations has increasingly played an important
role in mediating inter- and intra-State conflicts.
However, we acknowledge that this increased role has
not been matched with the necessary resources to build
local, national and regional capacities. It is my hope
that more resources will be allocated to ensure timely
responses when problems are less complicated and the
parties involved fewer. In that way, the chances of
success would be increased tremendously. We hope
that the reinforcement of the Department of Political
Affairs, particularly through the creation of the
Mediation Support Unit, will provide the opportunity
to explore that area further.

Kenya's other area of concern is the role of
women in mediation. We recognize that women's
contribution to society is crucial and yet, more often
than not, they have little or no say in the resolution of
conflicts that severely and negatively impact on them.

It is therefore crucial that we address the structural and
institutional impediments to women's equal and full
involvement in the mediation process. My delegation
would therefore like to see more women appointed to
senior positions, both at United Nations headquarters
and in field missions. We believe that this will
contribute to spurring the efforts to integrate women's
issues into the mainstream of agenda-setting and
decision-making at all levels in the peace process. The
implementation of resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820
(2008) will contribute greatly towards achieving that
objective.

At the regional level, Kenya has actively
participated in the mediation of conflicts and the search
for the peaceful settlement of various disputes,
particularly in the Horn of Africa, through the various
peace initiatives of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development, as well as in the Great Lakes region, in
collaboration with the United Nations and other
development partners. The holistic approach adopted
under the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region, in which problems are addressed in a broader
and coordinated manner, is a unique example that may
benefit other regions.

In conclusion, it is the considered view of my
delegation that, as the very successful mediation efforts
in my own country last year would tend to indicate, the
international community should not wait for a painful
stalemate to develop before offering mediation.
Otherwise, we may lose the opportunity to resolve the
conflict at an early stage. The United Nations
peacekeeping budget is enormous, and there is no
doubt that it would be greatly reduced if more
resources were expended in pre-emptive mediation and
the settlement of disputes mechanisms.

