Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Our delegation thanks the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA),
Mr. Abou Moussa, for his briefing regarding the latest
developments. We also thank the Secretary-General for
his recent report (S/2013/297).

We support the efforts of UNOCA to support
initiatives aimed at resolving the numerous and varied
challenges facing the countries of the Central African
region. We would like to address our particular concerns
with regard to the developments in the Central African
Republic, which have undoubtedly affected the entire
subregion. We therefore hope that UNOCA can continue
coordinating the efforts of the United Nations system
with those of subregional bodies, such as the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS) and
the African Union, seeking to re-establish order in
the country. Naturally, in this case as in others, we
commend the cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and subregional African bodies.

We commend the efforts made by UNOCA to tackle
the insecurity created by piracy and criminal activities
in the Gulf of Guinea. We believe it is vitally important
that there be cooperation as promoted by UNOCA to
support the preparations for the holding in June of a
summit of Heads of State and Government on piracy
in the Gulf of Guinea. We hope that the summit will
be successful in tackling this threat to security in the
subregion.

UNOCA must also work for the various States of
Central Africa to respond the problem of the illegal
exploitation of natural resources, especially the illegal
poaching of elephants, which has been reported in
Cameroon, the Central African Republic, Chad and
Gabon - a topic mentioned by Mr. Moussa in his
briefing and taken up by the representative of France.

Our delegation believes it is important for UNOCA
to continue coordinating specific peacebuilding
efforts in the subregion, especially in the areas of
institution-building, electoral processes, mediation
and good offices for conflict prevention. There are
conflict situations that must be tackled, such as those
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Great
Lakes region, which I will not address now since the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is on the agenda for
this afternoon. However, it is worth mentioning that
efforts must be made in other States that need to be
brought out of conflict by peacebuilding processes. We
do not want to see a recurrence of the situation that
affected the Central African Republic. We hope that
the next ministerial meeting of the United Nations
Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions in
Central Africa will succeed in producing proposals for
improving security in the Central African subregion.

With regard to the threat that the Lord's Resistance
Army (LRA) continues to pose, we reiterate our
concern at the severe impact that that armed group and
its criminal activities continue to have in the region, in
particular in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
Central African Republic, South Sudan and Uganda.
We condemn the atrocities which that group continues
to commit. While we take note of the fact that reports
show a decrease in its activities, we believe that efforts
must be redoubled to eliminate once and for all the
threat posed by its very existence.

We reiterate our support to the United Nations
regional strategy for the LRA (S/2012/481, annex).
We commend the progress that has been made in its
implementation, including the finalization of operational
documents to launch the African Union Regional Task
Force against the LRA. We hope that countries will
enable the contributions and troop deployment that are
still needed to complete the Force. We welcome the
finalization of the priority implementation plan for the
regional strategy, and we hope that it will serve as a
guide for concrete actions to be taken to alleviate the
suffering of the population in LRA-affected areas.

We call for efforts to be redoubled in executing the
arrest warrants issued by the International Criminal
Court for Joseph Kony and LRA commanders for
war crimes and crimes against humanity, including
assassinations, rapes and the recruitment of children
through kidnapping. We encourage all States to
cooperate with the Court to execute those warrants and
bring those responsible for these atrocities to justice.

In closing, we express our support for the
presidential statement to be adopted today.

