Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome the participation in today's
meeting of the Serbian Prime Minister, Mr. Ivica Dacie.
We share his views.

We listened closely to Mr. Thaci. He was obviously
lacking certain elements of self-criticism.

We are grateful to Mr. Zarif for presenting the
Secretary-General's report (S/2013/631) and briefing
us on the activities of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).

Russia supports the efforts of Belgrade to reach a
settlement to the Kosovo problem through dialogue,
and we note with understanding the compromise
decisions that were acceptable to the Serbian sides.
In particular, we hope that the emerging community
of Serb municipalities in Kosovo would be granted
genuine executive authority for the effective protection
of the interests of citizens residing in their territory.

We believe that resolution 1244 (1999) remains
fully in effect and is still the universally binding,
international legal basis for a settlement of the Kosovo
issue. The international community, above all the
United Nations, must stay focused on the situation
in the province. UNMIK plays a key role among all
elements of the international presence, particularly in
northern Kosovo, where tensions persist. The Security
Council has authorized UNMIK to tackle its mandated
tasks, notwithstanding any obstacles in its path. To
do so, the Mission requires appropriate personnel and
financial resources.

One very important stage in the implementation of
the arrangements agreed between Belgrade and Pristina
on 19 April was the holding of municipal elections in
the province. The conduct of the electoral process was
far from smooth, however. Cases of violence and voter
intimidation during the elections of 3 November have
once again highlighted the fragility and volatility ofthe
situation. We condemn those acts.

We are also concerned about the killing ofa customs
officer of the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX). We call on all of those responsible
for law and order in the province to carry out a thorough
investigation of the crime and its underlying causes.
The perpetrators must be brought to justice.

The plight of the Serb minority in Kosovo remains
disturbing. There has been no progress in efforts to
return refugees or internally displaced persons (IDPs).
People are afraid to go to Kosovo because of ethnically
motivated threats of violence and the absence of
security guarantees from local authorities. Moreover,
an analysis of the situation shows that the Kosovo
Albanian authorities have, with the acquiescence of the
international presence, effectively paralysed the return
to the province of more than 200,000 Serbian refugees
and IDPs, denying their property rights and violating
internationally recognized fundamental human
rights. We are convinced that there can be no national
reconciliation in the province until those people return
to their homes.

In the annex to the report of the Secretary-General,
EULEX addresses the difficult situation involving
organized crime in Kosovo. However, once again
it avoids virtually any mention of progress in the
investigation of allegations of illegal organ harvesting,
identified by Council of Europe Special Rapporteur
Dick Marty. In too few words, the report testifies to
the absence of any progress in that important high-
profile case. A full investigation is required and the
perpetrators, regardless of their identity, must be
brought to justice.

In that light, it is strange to hear calls from Pristina
for the drawdown of EULEX, particularly the office
responsible for the aforementioned investigation. We
recall that EULEX was deployed with the consent of
the Security Council. With that approval, it received
several mandates from UNMIK that the European
Union Mission was unable to cope with unilaterally.
As resolution 1244 (1999) remains fully in effect, those
powers are assigned to UNMIK under international law
and cannot be transferred to a third party, particularly
not to Pristina's institutions.

We are troubled by reports of Al-Qaida affiliated
groups operating in the province. We believe that
both UNMIK and EULEX should be addressing that
problem.

