Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I should like to congratulate Chile on its
accession to the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. I wish you full success, Sir, in fulfilling
your mandate.

We commend Chad for the way in which it
discharged its duties as President of the Council last
month.

Kuwait aligns itself with the statements made by
the representative of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia on
behalf of of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
and by the representative of the Islamic Republic of
Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

More than six decades have elapsed with the
question of Palestine on the United Nations agenda.
It has been repeatedly debated and many resolutions
have been adopted thereon. However, the situation
remains unresolved and the relevant decisions have
gone unimplemented because the occupying Power,
Israel, is intransigeant and openly refuses to implement
the resolutions of international legitimacy, while
the international community has proved regrettably
powerless to compel the occupying Power to implement
its resolutions.

The rejection on 30 December 2014 of the Arab
draft resolution (S/2014/9l6), which reaffirmed the
resolutions of international legitimacy demanding
an end to the occupation, gave Israel a green light to
pursue its practices by entrenching the occupation.
Indeed, it undermined any opportunity to achieve a
genuine peace that would restore the legitimate rights
of the Palestinian people, including their rights to
independence, sovereignty and a dignifed existence,
which are the most fundamental of basic rights.

The illegitimate and illegal Israel practices in
the occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem, continue unabated. They have exacerbated
the suffering of the Palestinian people, who are
experiencing extremely trying economic and social
conditions, particularly in the Gaza Strip, which has
been regularly subject to aggression, including air
raids and tank attacks, leading to ever-growing human
and material losses. The pursuit of such attacks and
aggressions and the maintenance of the inhumane siege
imposed on Gaza are the inevitable outcome of the
Security Council's failure to take any step to deter Israel
and compel it to end its repeated attacks and to respect
its international commitments as the occupying Power,
in accordance with the Fourth Geneva Convention
of 1949.
Israel is also perpetrating the most heinous of
practices and flagrantly violating human rights and
international humanitarian law. Houses and other
property are being expropriated and demolished;
thousands of civilians are being arrested and detained;
and illegal settlement activities continue in the occupied
Palestinian territories. New settlements are being built
while old ones are expanded and Palestinian landowners
dispersed. In that context, we call on the Security
Council to shoulder its Charter responsibilities for the
maintenance of international peace and security and to
take the steps necessary to relaunch the peace process.

Some days ago, Israel, the occupying Power, refused
to transfer Palestinian tax revenues to the Palestinian
Authority, in clear violation of its obligations, in
response to Palestine's legitimate quest to accede to
a number of international treaties and agreements,
including the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court. While we welcome the declaration issued at the
Conference of High Contracting Parties to the Fourth
Geneva Convention, held in Geneva last month, we
stress the importance of its implementation and of
launching an investigation into all Israel's violations
of international humanitarian law and bringing the
perpetrators to justice.

A just, lasting and comprehensive peace will not
be achieved by resuming sterile, direct and open-
ended negotiations or by remaining silent vis-a-vis
grave policies that represent a major obstacle to any
genuine opportunity to end the occupation. The desired
peace must be based on the resolutions of international
legitimacy, the principle of land for peace, the road map
and the Arab Peace Initiative. The Security Council is
bound by the Charter of the United Nations to assume
its responsibilities to that end.

Concerning the situation in Syria, we believe that
there is a definite need for a political settlement to the
crisis based on the Geneva communique of30 June 2012

(S/2012/522, annex), calling for a transitional authority
with full executive powers to meet the legitimate
aspirations of the Syrian people. In that regard, we
support the efforts of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
and his Special Envoy for Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura.
We express our deep concern over the unprecedented
humanitarian tragedy being endured by more than
12 million Syrians in the gravest humanitarian crisis
since the Second World War.

On the basis of its moral and humanitarian
responsibility vis-a-vis the suffering of our brother
Syrians, the State of Kuwait will host the third donors
conference to confront the humanitarian crisis. We
call on Member States to participate in the conference
and to be generous in the face of the overwhelming
humanitarian needs, which the United Nations
estimates to amount to $8.4 billion. Coordination will
be undertaken with the Organization in the coming
weeks to set the date for the conference.

In conclusion, Kuwait reiterates its call on Israel
to implement resolution 497 (1981), calling for its
withdrawal from the occupied Syrian Golan and
return to the lines of 4 June 1967. We also reiterate
our commitment to standing by the Government of
Lebanon. We support all steps to maintain the security,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon and
call on Israel to end all violations of that country's
sovereignty, pursuant to resolution 1701 (2006).

