Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for his briefing, as well
as Mr. Stephen O'Brien. They have described for us
in great detail the seriousness of the situation in the
Middle East region in general.

This is a debate in which one could speak about
the critical situation in Syria, one could speak about
the efforts that Jordan and Lebanon have been making
to address the refugee crisis, one could speak about
the critical situation in Yemen, or one could speak
about Mosul, to which Mr. O'Brien has just referred.
However, since we have the representative of Palestine
and the representative of Israel at this table today, as is
customary, and since the Security Council can address
the various aforementioned issues on a separate basis,
I am now going to focus essentially on the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict.

After receiving all the information we received
a few days ago in the Arria Formula meeting on the
settlements, it would be difficult to have any doubt
that the two-State solution is in serious danger of
disappearing as a viable option, and if the two-State
solution disappears, it would benefit neither Palestine
nor Israel. What is true is that all members of the
Security Council have heard and repeated that phrase
over and over again for too long. Not surprisingly, last
Friday one of the speakers, Mr. Hagai El-Ad, recalled
that as far back as six years ago, Vice-President Biden
described the status quo as unsustainable. But even
if we have been repeating that the status quo is not
sustainable so for such a long time, it is notjust rhetoric.
There are some things that need to be repeated, and I
am doing so again today.

First, with regard to the settlements, as we already
said on Friday, we believe that Israel should stop the
construction of the settlements and the demolition of
Palestinian structures. These activities are illegal under
international law and constitute an obstacle to peace.
We also believe that the expansion of settlements is
counterproductive to the Israel's own interests, because,
by continuing on this path, the reality on the ground
will end up leading to a one-State solution, which would
not seem to be the best way to ensure Israel's security,
which is also absolutely necessary.

Secondly, the settlements are not the only obstacle to
peace. Terrorism is also an obstacle, in addition to being
unjustifiable in every case and in all circumstances. I
would like to express our condolences to the families
of the victims of the attack on 9 October in Jerusalem,
for which we express our strongest condemnation. We
also condemn the messages of incitement to violence,
which we have again heard in recent days. The parties
must halt the incitement to violence and refrain from
the disproportionate use of force.

Thirdly, we also must not forget that the
intra-Palestinian division has as well been an obstacle to
peace. We hope that the municipal elections in Palestine
can finally take place, as they represent a very valuable
opportunity to advance the process of reconciliation
among Palestinians, which is of the utmost importance
to advance towards peace.

Fourthly, I was greatly moved by the data
Mr. O'Brien provided, much of which was not new to
me. I will not reiterate it all. But I do wish to recall that
70 per cent of the population in the Gaza Strip does
not have regular access to running water, and 40 per
cent of those who are ill cannot leave Gaza to obtain
treatment. Another 60 per cent of young people in Gaza
are unemployed, which means there is no future for
Gaza nor for Palestine. Without a hopeful future for
the Palestinian people, Israel's security also cannot
be guaranteed. What we all want to see is a two-State
solution whereby they can live in peace.

The question that naturally arises, which all
participants raised in the Arria Formula meeting, is
what the Security Council can do to try to prevent
that from unravelling. I will not beat around the bush.
Again and again, through the months, the Council has
debated the question of Palestine and has observed
the danger that the two-State solution may no longer
be viable. Yet again, Spain has stressed that it believes
that the Council has a role to play on the question and a
responsibility to fulfil. We continue to believe that and
will continue to do so.
But we should also keep in mind that it is crucial for
a possible Security Council statement to be vested with
true value added. For that reason, it is also essential
for us to carefully consider the right moment and mode
of action. In short, once again, we fully agree that it
is urgent and extremely important to reverse current
trends and to find ways to unblock the peace process.
This seems impossible without the international
community's agreement and the understanding that
the international community cannot impose a solution
on the parties. Peace can ultimately be achieved only
through direct negotiations between the parties. In that
context, the Council must act. In order to do that, it
must seriously take into account the various initiatives
presented in recent months, while consistently finding
ways to strengthen them and ensuring that they leverage
their potential complementarity.

In conclusion, we particularly reiterate our support
to France in its efforts to organize an international
conference. We have always endorsed that initiative, and
we also support other initiatives under way, including
the work of the Quartet and the initiatives of Russia
and Egypt. We also reiterate the importance the Arab
Peace Initiative has to jump-start the peace process. In
the coming months, we hope that those initiatives will
converge in a coherent manner towards the goal we all
agree on, that is, none other than to help the parties
to overcome the current dynamic of estrangement
in order to bring about the necessary conditions to
resume negotiations.

