Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): We thank Special
Envoy Michel Kafando and Ambassador Jiirg Lauber,
Chair of the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, for their insightful briefings and
significant contribution to our deliberations today.

At the outset, we would like to express our deep
condolences to the people and the Government of
Burundi for the barbaric terrorist attack that took place
on 11 May in the north-western province of Cibitoke
in Burundi, resulting in the deaths of 26 civilians. We
offer our sympathies to the families of the victims
and wish the injured a speedy recovery. We urge the
Government to undertake a thorough investigation and
bring the perpetrators to justice. We therefore support
the recommendations we heard today from our briefers,
and would like to make some observations for the
Council's consideration.

First, on the political front, we take note of the
17 May nationwide referendum on amending the
Constitution. We hope that the results of that critical
event reflect the will of the Burundian people, and
will have no negative impact on the country's political
and security situation. We reiterate our concern
about the minimal progress made in developing the
inter-Burundian dialogue. We call on all political actors
to engage in meaningful communication, which should
include negotiations for the road map aimed at charting
a viable path towards the holding of peaceful, free, fair,
transparent and inclusive elections in 2020.

That nationally owned process should be held in
an environment conducive to dialogue, confidence
and nationwide consensus, engaging all key political
stakeholders with the aim of ensuring durable peace. We
emphasize the importance of the continued efforts of
the African Union and the East African Community in
the mediation process. We therefore urge the leadership
of the subregion and the guarantors of the Arusha
Agreement to redouble their efforts in revitalizing
political interaction, while engaging all parties. In
that regard, we support the personal involvement and
commitment of the facilitator, former President of
Tanzania Benjamin Mkapa, and the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Burundi, Mr. Michel Kafando.
We hope that the next round of the inter-Burundian
dialogue will be more inclusive and productive, thereby
paving the way for the restoration of peace, security
and long-term stability in Burundi.

We also note the importance of all political sides
implementing the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement. We see that as the only key to a peaceful
resolution of the country's political crisis. We also
emphasize the importance of respecting the fundamental
rights and freedoms of all its citizens.

Secondly, on the humanitarian track, with nearly
180,000 internally displaced persons and 430,000
refugees, together with 3.6 million people in need
of assistance, the current humanitarian situation in
Burundi must be urgently addressed. The repatriation
of refugees must be voluntary and in accordance with
the principles of respect and dignity set forth in the
Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees of 1951.
We commend the signing of the tripartite agreement
between representatives of Burundi and Tanzania and
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees on the return of additional Burundian
refugees from Tanzania.

Thirdly, on the development track, we note the
efforts of the Government of Burundi to stabilize
the economic situation in the country, including by
drafting the national development plan, which will
be a significant step forward. International support is
therefore critical to assisting the nation to overcome
existing economic challenges. That platform could
become the basis for confidence-building between
Burundi and its partners.

Lastly, we commend the Burundi configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission on playing such
a significant coordinating role and for facilitating
dialogue between the Government of Burundi and the
international community.
