Mr. Listre (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Unfortunately, for some days we have been witnessing
a marked deterioration in the Middle East with a
heightening of confrontation and increased loss of
human lives. I wish to express the sorrow and concern
of Argentina at the tragic events that continue to occur
in Gaza, the West Bank and Israel. I also wish to
convey my Government's condolences to the families
of the victims of the recent wave of violence.

The concern and alarm on the part of Argentina
are increased by the acts of terrorism that occurred
yesterday and today, acts of which Israeli children and
the peaceful population were innocent victims in a
marketplace in a situation that cannot be described as
provocative. We ask the parties to expressly condemn
those acts. We ask the parties to condemn those acts of
terrorism with the same conviction with which we
condemned Israel for the excessive use of force and
with the same conviction that we asked for the
implementation of the Fourth Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War of 12 August 1949.

We believe that the current delicate situation in
the Middle East requires that all the parties act with the
utmost responsibility and self-control. Violence can
only engender more violence. Israel and the Palestinian
Authority must persevere in the implementation of the
agreements reached at the Sharm el-Sheikh summit.
The international community must do everything in its
power to help the parties put an end to the violence.

We support the immediate deployment and
immediate action on the part of the fact-finding
committee presided over by Senator Mitchell, and we
believe that the earlier it begins its work, the more
positive the impact it will have in bringing about peace
in the region.

In this context, we also want to express
Argentina's full support for the work being carried out
by the Secretary-General, to whom this Council gave a
clear and broad mandate last Friday to explore with the
parties concrete measures to put an end to the violence.
Although the short-term objective is to put an end to
the violence, we cannot lose sight of the fact that the
ultimate objective is the resumption of the peace
negotiations and a definitive resolution of the question
of Palestine on the basis of the relevant Security
Council resolutions and agreements between the
parties.

