Mr. Motoc (Romania): At the outset, I would like
to state that Romania aligns itself with the statement to
be made shortly by the Permanent Representative of
Ireland on behalf of the European Union. Therefore,
my remarks will be very brief.

My delegation expresses its deepest concern over
the deterioration of the situation in the Middle East
following the targeted killing of the Hamas leader
Abdel Aziz Al-Rantisi. We believe that the
Government of Israel must examine very carefully the
consequences of that act, for such operations do not
provide more security; rather, they fuel tension and
hatred that in turn generate even more violence.

As stated on previous occasions, Romania
recognizes the right of the State of Israel to self-
defence and to protect its citizens against attacks
perpetrated by terrorist organizations. But any
measures taken by Israeli authorities in this respect
must be in strict compliance with the relevant norms of
international law. From that point of View, the
extrajudicial killings are contrary to international law
and are totally unacceptable.

In the present, complicated and volatile situation,
both parties must do their utmost to refrain from acts
that could cause violence to escalate and compromise
any chance to revive the prospects for peace.
Effectively fighting terrorism, dismantling its
infrastructure and ending incitement to violence remain
top priorities.

We are also extremely concerned by the gravity
of the humanitarian situation in the Palestinian
territories due to the confrontations and security
restrictions. Israel must refrain from actions that
embitter the daily life of the inhabitants of the
Palestinian territories, increase their economic hardship
or induce a sense of humiliation or despair.

A just, comprehensive and lasting peace can be
achieved only through negotiations, as envisaged in the
road map and in accordance with the provisions of the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council. The
proposed Israeli withdrawal from Gaza could be a step
in that direction, provided that it takes place in the
context of the road map and contributes to an effective
implementation of the two-State solution, including
through a coordinated transfer of responsibilities to the
Palestinian Authority.

