Mrs. Nguyen (Viet Nam): I join others in
congratulating you, Sir, on China's assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month.

Viet Nam welcomes China's initiative to hold this
open debate to reaffirm our strong commitment to the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. The important theme of the debate is all the
more relevant as the United Nations approaches its
seventieth anniversary.

The founding of the United Nations seven decades
ago was a historic milestone in the advancement of
humankind. Guided by the purposes and principles
of its Charter, the United Nations has grown to be
truly universal and indispensable in coordinating
international efforts to address global challenges. The
United Nations and its Members have relentlessly worked
to reign in wars and conflicts, and have succeeded
in preventing the reoccurrence of another world war.
We have strengthened international cooperation for
development and for the promotion and protection
of human rights. We have promoted the progressive
development of international law and strengthened
democracy and justice in inter-State relations.

Yet, the challenges we face today are ever more
daunting. Wars are still raging in many regions, while
the risks of armed conflict are threatening others.
The threat or use of force and the wishful thinking of
power politics continue to endanger international and
regional peace and security. Many lessons of history,
unfortunately, have not been learnt. This compels us to
take up our collective duty to reinforce and materialize
the strong commitment to the principles and purposes
of the Charter, including the principles of sovereign
equality, national sovereignty, territorial integrity,
non-interference and the peaceful settlement of
disputes. We must also redouble our efforts to address
issues such as poverty, hunger and inequality, which
are among the root causes of insecurity and instability.

We must all contribute to the maintenance of
international peace and security through concrete,
practical actions, including the development and
promotion of principles, norms and codes of conducts
in accordance with the principles set out in the Charter.
The Security Council and its permanent members in
particular have a special role to play in this regard.

Having undergone many decades of wars, Viet
Nam cherishes the value of peace. Viet Nam is strongly
committed to the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and international law, and always
contributes actively and constructively to common
endeavours for regional and international peace, stability
and security. In South-East Asia, Viet Nam is working
with other members of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN) and partners to develop and
adhere to mutually agreed principles and codes of
conduct, and sto ettle all disputes - including the East
Sea /South China Sea issue - by peaceful means, in
accordance with the Charter and international law. We
are doing our best to build the ASEAN Community and
a South-East Asian region of peace and prosperity.

In conclusion, allow me to once again reiterate our
strong commitment to the purposes and principles of
the Charter, in the firm belief that peace, diplomacy,
law and reason will prevail.

