Mr. Muhammad Bande (Nigeria): I thank you,
Sir, for convening this very important open debate. The
protection of children is indeed a moral imperative and
a legal obligation of all States. We thank all briefers
for their insightful statements, which have broadened
our understanding of the achievements and the
challenges we continue to face in our collective efforts
to protect children.

Conflict situations put all at great risk and children at
an even greater risk, particularly where non-State armed
groups are involved. They risk being killed, abducted
or maimed. Children are vulnerable in other ways;
they face sexual abuse, recruitment as child soldiers,
trafficking, slavery and other atrocities committed by
armed groups. This situation underscores the need for
States, the United Nations, regional organizations and
other stakeholders to take urgent measures to enhance
the protection of children affected by conflict.

Nigeria condemns, in the strongest terms, the mass
abductions of children, including those carried out
by Boko Haram and the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Sham. We call for the immediate and unconditional
release of all abducted children. We demand that
parties to armed conflicts immediately cease unlawful
attacks and threats of attacks against schools, students
and teachers. To that end, we welcome the release of
the abducted Chibok and Dapchi girls and assure the
Council that our efforts will continue until all abducted
children are released.

On 29 May 2015, Nigeria was among the first
States to endorse the Safe Schools Declaration in Oslo,
Norway, thereby making a strong pledge to better
protect schools by, inter alia, using and promoting the
Guidelines for Protecting Schools and Universities
from Military Use during Armed Conflict. We call on
Member States that have not yet done so to endorse the
Declaration. We believe that this initiative will promote
and protect the right of children to education. The
Declaration complements and strengthens our existing
national safe schools initiative, established in 2014 as
part of the response of the Government of Nigeria to
promote safe zones for learning.

The Government of Nigeria has also taken steps to
cater to victims of Boko Haram terrorism - in the form
of rape and other sexual violence against children, the
abduction of children and other grave violations - by
putting in motion several legal and social remedies.
Some of the remedies undertaken by the Government
include the diligent prosecution of more than 200
detained Boko Haram terrorists in competent courts
of law, as well as reintegration, reorientation and
rehabilitation programmes designed to meet the needs
of each victim of sexual violence.

Regional and subregional organizations also have
an important role to play in addressing the plight of
children affected by armed conflict. At the subregional
level, the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) has shown a strong commitment
to promoting the welfare and well-being of children
affected by conflict through its Accra Declaration on
War-Affected Children in West Africa, adopted in April
2000. The Declaration commits ECOWAS member
States to taking a broad range of measures to protect
and rehabilitate war-affected children.

The African Charter on the Rights and Welfare
of the Child is also an important tool for advancing
children's rights. While building on the same basic
principles as the United Nations Convention on the
Rights of the Child, the African Union children's
Charter highlights issues of special importance in the
African context.As of January 2014, all AU member
States had signed the Charter. In that regard, we
welcome the growing cooperation between the United
Nations and the AU in protecting African children from
the impact of armed conflict.

Nigeria is firmly committed to meeting its
obligations under the Convention on the Rights of the
Child and its Optional Protocol on the involvement
of children in armed conflict, as well as the African
Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child. Those
instruments have been incorporated into our laws at
both the national and sub-national levels. They include
extensive provisions against the abuse of the rights of
children, and we are determined to enforce them.

We would like to take this opportunity to commend
the work of the Security Council on the issue of children
and armed conflict, as well as to acknowledge the
importance ofthe Monitoring and Reporting Mechanism
on grave violations against children in armed conflict.
We emphasize the importance of resolutions 1998
(2011) and 2143 (2014), which, inter alia, urge all parties
to armed conflict to refrain from actions that impede
children's access to education and encourage Member
States to consider concrete measures to deter the use of
schools by armed forces and armed non-State Groups
in contravention of applicable international laws.

In conclusion, it is within our capacity to safeguard
the vulnerable from the ravages of conflict and other
breaches of peace and security. We therefore reiterate our
commitment to continue to work assiduously to improve

the welfare of children in line with our obligations
under all the relevant international instruments.

