Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
My delegation greatly appreciates the briefing given by
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, for which we thank him. We
also thank Ambassador Khalilzad for his briefing on
the activities of the Multinational Force. We also thank
our colleague the Permanent Representative of Iraq for
the very useful information that we have received.

From all of these briefings, we can conclude that
the overall situation in Iraq continues to improve, even
though it is still fragile; a certain degree of hope is
therefore warranted. We welcome in particular the
progress made in the political area, with the adoption
by the Council of Representatives of the provincial
election law as well as the updating of the electoral
rolls by the Independent High Electoral Commission.
These actions are important steps to strengthening the
political dialogue.

Even though significant efforts remain to be
made in the area of human rights, including with
respect to the protection of women and children, we
should welcome certain interesting decisions, among
them the ratification by the Iraqi Government of the
Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman
or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. We encourage
the Iraqi Government to maintain this momentum by
adopting the bill on the establishment of an
independent human rights commission, a crucial tool
for a rational and equitable treatment of human rights-
related issues.

Another significant and reassuring aspect that is
worth noting is the intensity of diplomatic activity that
we have seen in Iraq, including with the restoration of
the diplomatic representation of several countries; this
offers real prospects for intraregional cooperation.

We have a highly positive view of the important
contribution made by the United Nations to Iraq's
national reconstruction effort. In particular, the
personal commitment of the Special Representative
and the prominent role played by the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) have been
decisive for the improvement of the political and
institutional process; here, we must not overlook their
contribution to the organization of free, democratic and
transparent elections.
The monitoring and elimination of systematic
human rights violations is also at the heart of the
Mission's concerns, even though in this area the role of
the Iraqi Government and of the Multinational Force is
crucial. We hope that the project to support the rule of
law and justice in Iraq, supported by the Iraqi
Government and the United Nations in partnership with
the European Commission, the implementation of
which will extend until 2010, will help to further lay
the basis for a true democracy in Iraq.

As for economic concerns, we are pleased with
the signing by the Iraqi Government and the United
Nations of the United Nations Assistance Strategy for
Iraq for the period 2008-2010. Along with the national
strategy, the International Compact with Iraq and the
Development Group Iraq Trust Fund, the Assistance
Strategy will make it possible to better coordinate
assistance and development initiatives and to build
national capacity in the area of governance.

With respect to the violence that we have seen in
the past, in particular against certain Christian
communities, and above all, looking ahead to the
upcoming provincial elections that are planned for the
beginning of 2009, we believe that the presence of the
Multinational Force and the strengthening of the
UNAMI's operational, logistic and security capacities
are still necessary.

In conclusion, we would say that more than ever
the solidarity of the international community must be
affirmed in order to support Iraq in its national
reconstruction efforts in an environment of peace with
its neighbours and in a stable and secure region.

