Mr. Mahugu (Kenya): This morning, Mr. President,
my delegation welcomed the presence of your country's
distinguished Foreign Minister, which, in our view, added
positively to our debate on this important matter.

We welcome this opportunity to discuss in open
session one of the most challenging aspects of the refugee
crisis facing us today. The number of people in need of
urgent humanitarian assistance remains unacceptably high,
with the largest percentage of these - whether they be in
ongoing conflict, post-conflict or disaster-related
situations - being in sub-Saharan Africa. This, therefore,
is a matter of utmost importance to us.

The United Nations remains the principal actor in
humanitarian emergencies. It is therefore true to say that the
responsibility of the United Nations, and particularly the
Security Council, is crucial in determining the international
community's response to humanitarian situations. The
Security Council is the organ mandated by the international
community to ensure prompt and effective action whenever
a threat to peace is determined. This primary responsibility
of the Council cannot be abdicated to any other organ or
organization. It is the Council that decides, in many cases,
how, when, and at what level a humanitarian situation
should be addressed. The Council, more than any other
body, gives the signal and direction of international
response to humanitarian emergencies.

In cases where response has been weak or failed, it
can be correctly assumed that the decision-making process
was either too slow, the objective too obscure, or mandates
of the United Nations operations ill-defined. It might also
be that a specific situation has evolved faster than initially
anticipated.

This is the crux of our debate today. How should we
improve the decision-making process to provide a viable
framework for humanitarian action and, in this way, to
better fulfil the responsibility the Council so clearly has?

Our experience in this area indicates that it is
absolutely essential, first, that the Council understand the
situation on the ground, and based on that, determine the
framework for providing assistance and protection, taking
into account all the critical aspects of the specific
situation. For instance, in cases where there have been
rampant mine-laying activities, a mine-clearing component
should be included. There has to be a clear link between
the emergency and the response.

In addition, the Council should identify the parties to
the conflict and solicit their support for action decided
upon. If deployment of humanitarian military assistance
becomes necessary, parties to the conflict should be
consulted ahead of deployment and the mandates of such
operations should be explained to them to avoid
misunderstandings at a later stage. This will improve the
chances of success, reduce casualties and minimize
instances of hostage-taking.

It is also important that the establishment of safe
havens should be undertaken only if there is an
international commitment to protect such areas and to
assure that they are respected by all parties and will not
become an excuse for "ethnic cleansing". Where a
massive outflow of refugees has occurred, it is imperative
to disarm combatants and, where necessary, separate them
from genuine refugees, as was recommended in the case
of the former eastern Zaire by our regional leaders in
Nairobi.

Sanctions, when imposed, should be clearly aimed at
ending the conflicts and be well-coordinated, respected
and monitored. Sanctions should not cause unnecessary
suffering to innocent civilians. Non-compliance with
Security Council embargoes and sanctions should not be
tolerated.

What comes to mind here is the constant flouting of
arms embargoes by producers and suppliers of arms.

We must maintain close cooperation among the
United Nations bodies involved in the provision of
assistance, and between them and non-governmental
organizations, to avoid duplication and prevent overlaps.
This will enhance coordination and make humanitarian
intervention more effective. In this connection, we
commend the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) for the excellent
work that the organization continues to carry out in
providing assistance to refugees. It is important to seek
the views of UNHCR, the International Committee of the

 

Red Cross (ICRC) and non-governmental organizations on
the nature of humanitarian intervention to be undertaken. In
many cases, these organizations are the first on the scene
and are well-informed on the atmospherics of the conflicts.

Without genuine political good-will, the provision of
prompt, appropriate and adequate protection for
humanitarian emergencies will continue to evade us. One
cannot but wonder what would have happened if the
multinational force authorized under Security Council
resolution 1080 (1996) had been deployed in Zaire. We are
inclined to think that the fate of thousands of refugees
could have been different. After all, is it not all about
saving lives? In that region, we are still unable to account
for over 80,000 lives.

In conclusion, our experience with the speed of
response to humanitarian emergencies has been very
disappointing. Although we have welcomed the successes
that have been evident elsewhere, it is shameful that the
most glaring examples of failures of humanitarian action
continue to be in Africa. We hope that we can use all the
lessons learned to improve and protect international
humanitarian assistance to refugees and others in conflict
situations.

