Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): First, we thank the Secretary- General for his presence and his briefing. We also thank Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for his detailed report on the current situation in the region. We welcome President Mahmoud Abbas, to whom we extend the appreciation and consideration of the Dominican people. I also welcome His Excellency Mr. Philippe Goffin. The Dominican Republic, as a country whose fundamental principles include respect for human rights and international law, which recognizes an international legal order that guarantees respect for the fundamental rights to peace, justice and the political, social, economic and cultural development of nations and is committed to peaceful coexistence and solidarity among nations, calls for the pursuit of a just, lasting and comprehensive solution that addresses the legitimate needs of the parties to the conflict. In that regard, the position of the Dominican Republic, which is consistent with those principles, continues to be respect for the sovereignty and self-determination of peoples and for the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations. We therefore reaffirm our full support for a two-State solution, as set out in the various United Nations resolutions. In order to reach an agreement between the parties, the Dominican Republic considers it vital to redouble reconciliation efforts, with the support of the international community, in order to guarantee the inalienable right of the Palestinian people to self- determination and the right of Israel to live in peace, within secure and recognized borders. We understand that is the only way to obtain a just and lasting peace that will resolve a conflict that for decades has eclipsed regional and international peace and security. We are convinced that it is unnecessary to formulate new resolutions or to return to paths already taken. The Dominican Republic remains committed to the frame of reference based on previous resolutions and bilateral agreements between Israelis and Palestinians. We encourage the parties to promote genuine dialogue and to relaunch negotiations on a peace plan based on internationally reached agreements. As the international community, we understand that our collective action must be aimed at contributing in an impartial and effective manner to the quest for real solutions. We reiterate the need to increase efforts and continue working tirelessly until a constructive dialogue based on mutual respect is resumed, leading to a new stage in the construction of a genuine peace between Israel and Palestine.
