Mr. Henze (Germany) (interpretation from French):
Allow me at the beginning of my statement to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council and to wish you every
success in your work. Naturally, you can count on our
close cooperation with you. It is in a feeble effort to
express our feelings of great friendship and respect that
I shall try to make my brief statement in French.

 

Germany will vote in favour of the extension for three
months of the United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM. III). This three-month extension of the mandate
of UNAVEM. III, which has become the largest United
Nations peace-keeping operation, will show the parties in
Angola that we remain determined to support the peace
process in that country, which has started to recover from
the aftermath of a long civil war.

We have noted with satisfaction the progress made in
recent weeks in the attainment of the goals and the
application of the timetable agreed between the Government
of Angola and UNITA. We encourage the parties to
continue on this path.

The job that remains to be done is not an easy one.
Although the timetable agreed between the Angolan
Government and UNITA provides for the carrying out of
several initiatives in the weeks to come, it seems to me that
two elements in particular should be at the forefront of our
concerns.

From the military standpoint, it is essential that the
quartering of all UNITA troops and their integration into
the Angolan Armed Forces, as well as the handing over of
all weapons, in particular UNITA's heavy weapons, should
be completed as soon as possible.

From the political standpoint, the establishment of the
Government of Unity and National Reconciliation as well
as the speedy solution to the question of the post of Vice-
President offered to UNITA remain essential.

I deem it important to stress that the international
community cannot fail to support the peace process in
Angola. To make the process a success, the parties, in
particular UNITA, must show greater determination to
discharge their commitments in timely fashion.

I take this opportunity to recall that UNAVEM. must
complete its mission by February 1997. We call upon the
Angolan parties to make every effort to consolidate the
peace process and to promote lasting national reconciliation
in Angola.

The German Government will continue to support the
peace process in Angola. In the area of demining in
particular, the German Government intends to keep its
deminers in the country to continue to give Angola
assistance given the importance of finding a solution to this
question. This assistance is just part of the humanitarian aid
provided to Angola. In all, if contributions made by my
country to the European Union are taken into account,
Germany will have contributed $100 million in assistance
to Angola over the last five years.
I should like to conclude by paying tribute to the
personnel of UNAVEM, the personnel of United Nations
programmes and bodies, and non-governmental
organizations for the laudable job they have been doing
in difficult conditions.

