I thank you, Madam President, for affording me this opportunity to highlight police capacity-building and development efforts during the mandate of the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH). Over the past 22 years, Haiti has benefited from the support of thousands of United Nations police and corrections advisers from the rich network of police- contributing countries, who have promoted the development of a professional and gender-responsive police organization, in accordance with the United Nations Strategic Guidance Framework for International Policing. Through the successive United Nations missions, our assistance has also progressed to a more strategic advisory role on the essentials of sound police management and security-sector governance. Police institutions are learning organizations, bound to constantly adapt to a changing environment and new threats. Securing the country on its own since the closure of the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti, the Haitian National Police (HNP) has risen to numerous challenges and proved its operational know-how time and time again. The Director General ad interim has led the police institution through a year of violent street protests, sharp increases in major crimes, a global pandemic and long-standing labour relations issues, constantly succeeding in reversing the negative trends. The evolution of the United Nations presence in Haiti has therefore allowed the national police to demonstrate its responsiveness and the value of investing in a resilient and results-oriented institution. In addition to reaffirming its operational readiness, this last transition has been the genesis of significant human resources reforms in the police, when internal fractures emerged and better working conditions were demanded. With the advice of BINUH, the Haitian National Police leadership established a facilitation and dialogue commission to address police officers' grievances and improve labour relations. Some of the recommendations from that commission, which have already been implemented with the support of the Government, including formally recognizing the right to unionize for police officers and improving medical coverage, have also proved to be effective in appeasing internal tensions. In its advisory role, BINUH continues to work with the Haitian National Police to achieve gender equality and enhance the capacity to prevent and investigate all forms of sexual and gender-based violence. Twenty years after resolution 1325 (2000), the increased recruitment and training of female police officers has been a key element of capacity-building to professionalize the police. Currently, women represent nearly 11 per cent of the 15,000 Haitian police officers, and United Nations strategic advisers are engaged in additional initiatives to achieve the gender-sensitive recruitment goal of 12 per cent female representation by 2021. Through our involvement in areas such as those covered by the National Coordination of Women's Affairs, the Sexual Crimes Investigation Unit, the National Police School and the National Police Academy, we are promoting gender-responsive policing while trying to reach an appropriate inclusive police-to-population ratio of professional police officers, in accordance with the 2017-21 HNP strategic development plan. The good offices of the United Nations and the support of the Security Council for the continued improvement of the security environment in Haiti remain vital in a country where insecurity is linked to the political context. The numerous episodes of armed gang violence over the past year and the prominence of criminality, with a resurgence of robberies, kidnappings and homicides, are raising serious human rights concerns. There is an urgent need for concrete and coherent action by the Haitian authorities for accountability and an end to impunity. Encouraged by international partners and in response to demands from the communities, State authorities must strive to curb the gang phenomenon and marshal all efforts through a holistic approach and nationally owned solutions, especially ahead of a crucial electoral period, to protect its citizens from all forms of criminality and promote democracy, justice and stability. The Haitian National Police has built up the essential knowledge to pursue its development to tackle new operational challenges. But much more remains to be done. As a precondition for the success of the ongoing transition, the Government needs to allocate sufficient and sustainable financial, operational and human resources for the police, with the United Nations country team and national and international partners continuing to support police development and ensuring oversight to maintain the trust of the population in its sole public-safety institution. With adequate support, the professionalization of the HNP can be a vehicle for stability and play a central role in restoring the rule of law in Haiti.
