Mr. Alsaidi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): Once
again, I would like to express to you, Mr. President,
our appreciation for your wise guidance of the work of
the Security Council. I would also like to pay tribute to
the role being played by Ambassador Inocencio Arias,
Ambassador of Spain and Chairman of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC), which was created in
accordance with resolution 1373 (2001).

I say nothing new when I emphasize that
everything that has been done to combat terrorism adds
up to achievements of which the Organization can
justly be proud. This also shows what can be achieved
by collective will in the face of a plethora of diverse
challenges that know no political borders or national
sovereignty. We can cope with such challenges only
through collective efforts.

Contrary to the case of the war in Iraq and the
divisions and divergences in viewpoints and positions
that emerged, the international community was
unanimous in its will to combat terrorism. That
struggle was, and is still, based on consensus and on
international cooperation - the best guarantee of
success in this area.

For its part, the Republic of Yemen was aware of
the phenomenon of terrorism and of its growth well
before the tragic events of 11 September 2001. The
Republic of Yemen was also aware of the dangers it
posed to peace, to society and to collective security. In
that light, my Government has made the campaign
against terrorism one of its top priorities and has thus
undertaken a number of measures aimed at containing
and eradicating terrorism. The Security Council
Committee established under resolution 1373 (2001)
has made clear what has been achieved, as can be seen
from the reports, including the third additional report.

The Government of the Republic of Yemen is also
working unilaterally and jointly with interested
countries to implement other measures in this respect
to combat terrorism in an ongoing manner within the
country. This is clear evidence of Yemen's will to
eradicate the phenomenon of terrorism in all its forms.

Terrorism is alien to Yemeni soil. Terrorism has
been denounced by our Muslim religion and by our
Arab traditions. We are opposed to terrorism, both in
theory and in practice, and to all who claim to possess
the truth but do not respect the opinions of others.

We cannot accept the attempts of some to impose
by force their points of view on others. Such is our
position of principle regarding terrorism within and
outside Yemen.

Here, however, we would like to emphasize that
up to now, measures of international cooperation have
not been able to contain this phenomenon, much less
eradicate it. That, in our view, is due to the fact that the
way in which this problem is being dealt with is
characterized by an incomplete vision and errors in
terms of method.

Here we are in full agreement with what was
stated in the report of the Secretary-General regarding
the work of the Organization this year - namely that
efforts made to combat terrorism require the
strengthening of measures to alleviate poverty, to
redress injustices, to strengthen good governance and
to promote tolerance.

At the same time, the war on terrorism requires
the establishment of a new world order based on
humanitarian principles and on equity. The political
leaders of the Republic of Yemen have called for a
unified vision to be developed, within the framework
of a high-level international conference to be held
under the auspices of the United Nations, to study the
phenomenon of terrorism and to lay down a strategy
that would include practical solutions for addressing
the reasons and motivations behind this phenomenon
and its development.

In conclusion, we would like to reiterate our
readiness to work for the success of efforts to draft an
international convention that would represent a legal
point of reference for fighting terrorism. We would like
to reaffirm the importance of establishing a clear
definition of terrorism that would cover all terrorist
acts, whether they be perpetrated by individuals, by
groups or by States.

Like many other Members of this Organization,
we cannot accept a formula that would deny peoples
their legitimate right to fight against foreign
occupation. We would like to reiterate the principled
dedication of the Government of the Republic of
Yemen to separating terrorism from legitimate
resistance, which has been enshrined in legislation of
all kinds.

