Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Indonesia welcomes
the adoption today of resolution 2479 (2019), which
provides the basis for a technical rollover of the mandate
of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID) for another four months. We
thank the co-penholders, the United Kingdom and
Germany, as well as other delegations, for their active
contributions and f lexibility, which enabled the Council
to reach a consensus and once again prove its unity.

Indonesia has consistently advocated for a

responsible and carefully calculated drawdown and
exit for UNAMID. The incident in El Geneina when
the UNAMID site was looted should not happen again.
The drawdown must be conducted in a way that does
not create a security vacuum, with full regard for the
humanitarian impact and the safety of the civilian
population. The mission must be guided by a careful
and honest assessment of the situation on the ground.
Positive trends must be duly recognized and challenges
addressed. We trust that the upcoming special report
of the Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission will serve its purpose of
providing recommendations on appropriate courses of
action regarding the drawdown of UNAMID. Indonesia
also welcomes the affirmation of the Council's strong
commitment to the sovereignty of the Sudan in
the resolution.

Indonesia has been at the forefront of support
for the promotion of peace and stability in Darfur.
My delegation was a member of the Council when it
authorized UNAMID's establishment in 2007. We have
been a proud contributor of peacekeepers to UNAMID,
both military and police, since 2008. Indeed, at one
point Indonesia was one of its largest contributors.
There is no doubt that much has been achieved through
the work of UNAMID in Darfur, including an improved
security situation. Indonesia certainly does not want to
see Darfur to slide back into conflict, and we hope that
our Blue Helmets will not have to return there. We hope
that the resolution we have just adopted will contribute
to the promotion of lasting peace and stability in Darfur.

In closing, we would once again like to pay
tribute to the Blue Helmets who have put their lives in
harm's way in theatres of conflict all over the world,
including Darfur.

