Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Mr. Qazi, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for today's briefing on the
challenging realities in present-day Iraq. We agree with
his conclusions and assessments. We have every reason
to expect that the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq (UNAMI) and Mr. Qazi personally will
continue their efforts to help the people of that country
and that they will remain most actively involved in the
political process, acting as mediators among the
various Iraqi factions and communities.

It is obvious that the situation in Iraq is extremely
complex. Recently, the country has once again been
experiencing an acute military and political crisis.
Intensive sectarian violence threatens a territorial
break-up of the country, and terrorists and insurgents
are continuing their activities. Unfortunately, the
formulas put forward by the Iraqi authorities and the
international community to address the situation, cited
by the Special Representative in his briefing, have
proved unsatisfactory.

We must make every effort to prevent the
eruption of a full-scale civil war in Iraq and to put an
end to the rampant activities of militias and armed
groups. We must do our utmost to protect the human
rights of civilians, who are the primary victims not
only of terrorists, but also of the militias. Otherwise,
the country's people will have no confidence in the
current Government.

We are alarmed at the massacres, arbitrary arrests
and secret detention facilities described in the report,
along with the persecution of ethnic and religious
minorities. The growing exodus of refugees from Iraq
and a growing number of internally displaced persons
is extremely troubling. In the Middle East, a situation
is emerging in which, together with millions of
Palestinian refugees, there is now a multitude of people
who are leaving Iraq. The destabilizing impact of this
turn of events is not hard to imagine.

We are convinced that in order to successfully
address the many problems relating to a settlement in
Iraq, it is essential to build a society based on national
reconciliation and consent. Genuine progress in that
area continues to be lacking. We therefore hope that the
constitutional review process will enter the concrete
implementation phase and that there will be an inter-
Iraqi conference on national unity. We believe that
UNAMI and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General must take a most active part in
organizing and holding such an essential and long-
awaited initiative.

The international community must now do its
utmost to provide appropriate and impartial assistance
aimed at reaching a peaceful settlement in Iraq. We
noted with great interest the idea - referred to in the
Secretary-General's report - of establishing a regional
group on Iraq that would include the five permanent
members of the Security Council. In that regard, we
emphasize once again the need for forums such as the
Cairo and Sharm el-Sheikh meetings, which enabled
representatives of Iraq, neighbouring countries and
other interested countries to engage in fruitful
exchanges of views. We must keep the potential of
such meetings in mind.

In conclusion, we call upon the people of Iraq to
exercise restraint and to remain composed at this very
challenging and crucial time in the country's history
and not to respond to the provocations of extremists,
who are seeking to lead the country into the chaos of
civil war.

