Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): The Republic of Equatorial Guinea is grateful
for the report of the Secretary-General presented by
Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) (S/2018/125),
to whom we extend our sincere congratulations for the
commendable and noble work he is doing in Central
Africa. We also wish to extend these congratulations to
the entire MINUSCA team. We also thank Ms. Bintou
Keita, Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, Mr. Bedializoun Moussa Nebie, Special
Representative of the African Union for Central Africa,
and Lieutenant General Esa Pulkkinen, Director of
Military Planning and Conduct Capability of the
European Union, for participating in today's meeting.

We also thank and welcome Ambassador Bernard
Tanoh-Boutchoue of Cote d'Ivoire, in his capacity
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2127 (2013), concerning the Central African
Republic, and Ambassador Omar Hilale of Morocco, in
his capacity as Chair ofthe Peacebuilding Commission's
configuration for Central Africa, for their briefings.
Both provided us with a clear illustration of the current
situation in this brotherly country of ours, the Central
African Republic.

Having heard the briefings, the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea expresses its concern at the current
atmosphere of violence being fomented by some armed
groups in the country, which affects not only the parties
to the conflict but also has a serious impact on the
civilian population, in particular the most vulnerable
segments - women and children - thereby further
aggravating the critical humanitarian situation,
weakening the State and facilitating the unrestrained
activity of mafias in plundering its natural resources
throughout the country. In that context, Equatorial
Guinea condemns the recent attacks perpetrated by
the previously mentioned armed groups against on
civilians and MINUSCA and expresses its deep regret
at the loss of human lives, both of MINUSCA personnel
and Central African citizens who have been victims of
the consequences of the violence.

Despite the outstanding progress and success
of the elections in March 2016, as well as the United
Nations presence to strengthen stability, support the
Government and provide humanitarian assistance,
the Central African Republic continues to suffer
from unrest and instability, resulting in the violation
of human rights and international humanitarian law,
giving rise to hundreds of victims - men, women
and children - who have been subjected to sexual
violence, trafficking in persons, arrests, detentions and
displacement. Equatorial Guinea calls on all armed
groups to lay down their arms and appeals to the parties
to the conflict to renounce all sectarian interests so
as to allow for a dialogue leading to peacebuilding
and the stabilization of the country. Equatorial
Guinea re-emphasizes the need for strict monitoring
of the tripartite agreement signed on 23 May 2011
in Khartoum.

Equatorial Guinea welcomes the efforts of
the Government of the brotherly Central African
Republic, under the leadership of President Touadera,
in concert with the international community, aimed
at State-building after the conclusion of the political
transition. Those efforts involve disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and repatriation and
also involve reform of the security and defence forces.
The ultimate goal is to achieve national reconciliation
and stability.

The Central African Republic will achieve the
desired stability if it is able to make a genuine national
reconciliation effort through frank, direct and inclusive
political dialogue. It is important for all the stakeholders
involved to act by putting their country's supreme
interests first; only in that way can lasting peace and
stability be achieved.

Although much progress has been made in the
right direction, much remains to be done to rebuild
the country. The role of the international community
is particularly crucial in enhancing what the African
Union and regional structures, particularly the
Economic Community of Central African States, can
do in this process. MINUSCA is also instrumental in
that regard, and its results have been very positive.

Stability in Central Africa implies stability for
the entire Central African region, which is why the
region's top leaders have been extensively involved
in the search for a solution, including sending forces
when the situation has required it. Equatorial Guinea
has been no exception: for a long time, His Excellency
President Obiang Nguema Mbasogo has been involved
in assistance and mediation efforts in conjunction with
all stakeholders.

