The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Slovenia.

Slovenia warmly welcomes the decision by the United
Kingdom and the United States to agree to an arrangement
to hold the trial of the two accused Libyan nationals in the
Lockerbie case before a Scottish court sitting in the
Netherlands. Slovenia also commends the Government of
the Netherlands for its willingness to facilitate such a trial.

We believe that this constructive and innovative
arrangement opens a new way towards a final settlement of
the Lockerbie case, a settlement long overdue. After almost
10 years since the brutal terrorist attack on the Pan Am
plane, there is now renewed hope that justice will be
served.

The initiative of holding a trial in the Netherlands
before the panel of Scottish judges and under Scots law
corresponds to one of the options which have been
advocated as proposals for a possible solution by the
League of Arab States, the Organization of African Unity,
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and the
Organization of the Islamic Conference. Indeed, Libya itself
has repeatedly, including recently, endorsed those options.
Therefore, there is every reason to expect that Libya will
embrace the present initiative.

The United Nations has an important role to play in
this development. With the adoption of the draft resolution
before us, the Security Council will pave the way for a trial
by enabling the countries concerned to take all the
necessary steps to implement the initiative. In addition, the
draft resolution requests the Secretary-General to assume a

 

pivotal role in assisting in the arrangements for the safe
transfer of the two accused, as well as to nominate
international observers to attend the trial.
The initiative presented to the Security Council has
been meticulously elaborated. We are confident that it
provides for a fair and impartial trial, with all the
necessary guarantees. It also renews and strengthens the
prospect of the suspension and, ultimately, lifting of the
sanctions imposed against Libya.

It is now up to the Libyan side to seize this
opportunity and do its part for the success of this
initiative. We note with satisfaction the statement issued
yesterday by the General People's Committee for Foreign
Affairs and International Cooperation announcing the
acceptance by Libya of this development. We were glad
to hear this position reiterated by the representative of
Libya tonight. We strongly call upon the Libyan
Government to ensure promptly the appearance of the two
accused in the Netherlands for the purpose of trial. In so
doing, Libya would fulfil its own promises. Moreover,
this is the way for Libya to achieve suspension and the
lifting of the sanctions, which would bring an end to the
unnecessary suffering of its people.

Finally, I wish to emphasize that the draft resolution
proposed for action tonight represents an important
contribution to the work of the Security Council. It
provides an example of a wise decision, opening up new
opportunities for the resolution of several problems on the
Council's agenda. The Council should be able to act with
the same wisdom whenever required. Slovenia will vote
in favour of the draft resolution.

I now resume my function as President of the
Council.

I now put to the vote the draft resolution contained
in document S/ 1998/809.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Bahrain, Brazil, China, Costa Rica, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Japan, Kenya, Portugal, Russian Federation,

Slovenia, Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America

 

The President: There were 15 votes in favour. The
draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution
1192 (1998).

I shall now call on those members of the Council who
wish to make statements following the voting.


