Mr. Shawabkah (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of April. I also wish to commend your
predecessor for the prudent manner in which he
conducted the work of the Council in March. I would
also like to thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs, for his comprehensive
briefing.

I should like to convey my condolences to the
Government and people of China for today's
earthquake.

Jordan associates itself with the statements made
by the representatives of Egypt on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement and of the Syrian Arab
Republic on behalf of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference.

There is a great deal of stress and tension in our
region because of the lack of real and concrete progress
towards achieving the two-State solution and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East. The severe
tension in the Middle East may have alarming
consequences if the Israeli Government continues to
flout the international consensus in favour of the
two-State solution and comprehensive peace based on
agreed terms of reference and the Arab Peace
Initiative; to defy the resolutions of international
legitimacy; and to pursue its intensified and
provocative unilateral practices in the occupied
Palestinian territories, in particular in East Jerusalem.
The perpetuation of the status quo would undermine
the sincere efforts being made in that respect, fuel
violence and drag the region and its people into chaos
and conflict. That, in turn, would have negative
repercussions on the security of the world as a whole.

The only way to avert that bleak scenario and to
reach a bright future lies in the intensification of
international efforts in the coming months to achieve
tangible progress towards the implementation of the
2

two-State solution - the only option for resolving the
Palestinian question and confirmed again and again in
the Security Council's resolutions. Jordan, under the
leadership of His Majesty King Abdullah Bin
A1 Hussein, is committed to continuing its work with
all parties concerned to achieve regional peace and
security on the basis of that solution, leading to the
establishment of an independent, viable and contiguous
Palestinian State on Palestinian national territory,
living side by side in peace and security with Israel,
with its capital in East Jerusalem and on the basis of
the borders of4 June 1967.

In that regard, Jordan highly appreciates the lead
role of the United States and stresses the importance of
its ongoing efforts and the efforts of the international
Quartet, the European Union and all stakeholders to
relaunch serious negotiations with clear timelines and
benchmarks to measure progress towards the two-State
solution in a regional context of comprehensive peace
based on agreed principles of international legitimacy,
in particular the Arab Peace Initiative.

Jordan has repeatedly expressed its grave concern
about and frank condemnation and rejection of all
Israeli practices in the occupied Palestinian territories,
with East Jerusalem at their heart. We have repeatedly
warned against their consequences for international
peace and security, especially considering the esteemed
place held by Jerusalem in the minds and souls of
hundreds of millions of Christians and Muslims
throughout the world. We warn again today that the
continuation of such illegal, illegitimate and
condemned procedures in the occupied Palestinian
territories in general, and in East Jerusalem in
particular, and Israel's feverish attempts to Judaize
these territories will drag the entire region into a
situation it will be unable to control, posing a major
threat to international peace and security, the
maintenance of which is a principal function of this
Council.

The practices of the Israeli Government in the
occupied Palestinian territories contradict the spirit of
genuine peace and reflect no desire for peace. Israel
has pursued its provocative unilateral measures in
occupied East Jerusalem, including excavation around
and underneath sacred Islamic and Christian sites, in
particular the Al-Haram Al-Sharif; the demolition of
homes; the obstruction of the work of the Palestinian
Endowment administration; the confiscation of lands;
the expulsion of Arab residents; and ongoing attempts
10-31422
to create new realities on the ground, to change the
demographic nature of occupied East Jerusalem, to
obliterate the Arab, Islamic and Christian features of
the city, and to alter the legal status of the city under
Israeli occupation.

Such practices are illegal, illegitimate and null
and void, and must not continue. They contravene
international humanitarian law, the Fourth Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Times of War, and relevant United Nations
resolutions, including many adopted by this Council.
They represent a grave violation of Israel's obligations
and commitments as the occupying Power.

For the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, under the
leadership of His Majesty King Abdullah Bin
Al Hussein, the desecration of the holy city is a red
line that cannot be crossed. Jerusalem will remain a
priority of our country and we will spare no effort to
preserve it, to protect and maintain the Islamic and
Christian holy sites, to safeguard the Arab nature and
identity of the city, to end the Israeli occupation, and to
support its steadfast people. The international
community must promptly hold Israel accountable for
its actions and urge it to end violations that undermine
the prospects for peace and impose a fait accompli.
Jordan calls on the international community to see to it
that no irresponsible measures are undertaken to
undermine the potential for negotiations between the
two parties.

Jordan appreciates the clear positions recently
enunciated by the international community, including
the Quartet, which has emphasized the importance of
Jerusalem and reiterated that East Jerusalem is an
integral part of the territories occupied in 1967. It has
also condemned the settlement activities there and in
the other occupied Palestinian territories, all of which
are blatant violations of international humanitarian law
and of Israel's obligations under the Road Map.

The Israeli settlements and their ongoing
construction are an unbearable burden to the
Palestinians, their movement and their development,
and represent a genuine obstacle to international and
regional efforts to relaunch the negotiations. They
undermine the prospects for a peaceful solution and a
future independent, viable and contiguous Palestinian
State. We call upon Israel to immediately and
completely halt all such activities in the occupied
10-31422
Palestinian territories, first and foremost in East
Jerusalem, including so-called natural growth.

Achieving peace requires a radical change in the
tragic status quo experienced by the Palestinians in the
occupied territories, especially in the Gaza Strip. We
call upon the international community, owing to its
humanitarian and legal responsibility, to support our
Palestinian brothers and sisters, to provide humanitarian
assistance, to end their suffering and its consequences,
to take immediate, effective action to ensure that Israel
abides by resolution 1860 (2009), and to work to lift
the blockade imposed on the Gaza Strip. We in Jordan
will spare no effort in continuing to provide all forms
of support for our Palestinian brothers and sisters and in
making others aware of their profound suffering.

Israel must know that it cannot depend on
occupation, walls and military power indefinitely. It
cannot be governed by a fortress mentality. Genuine,
lasting peace for Israel will never come about until that
country can become naturally integrated with its
surroundings and can coexist peacefully with other
countries of the region.

The explicit collective commitment of the Arab
and Islamic States, which constitute more than a third
of the United Nations membership, to attaining such a
peace is reflected in their support for the Arab Peace
Initiative adopted at the 2002 Beirut summit. This is a
key starting point for addressing all aspects of the
Arab-Israeli conflict. Today we repeat our call to seize
the historic opportunity presented by the Arab Peace
Initiative to put an end to conflict and establish a just
and comprehensive peace on the basis of the two-State
solution, to put an end to the occupation of all Syrian
and Lebanese territory and to ensure peace and security
for all the States and peoples of the region.

