Mrs. Patterson (United States of America):
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1546 (2004), I
am pleased, on behalf of the multinational force, to
report to the Security Council on the efforts of the
multinational force and on its progress in fulfilling its
mandate.

The situation in Iraq today is very different from
that on which we reported in December 2004. On 30
January we witnessed the bravery, courage and resolve
of the Iraqi people as they demonstrated their
commitment to democracy. The votes of 60 per cent of
eligible Iraqis showed that they would not be
intimidated from cooperating with the Iraqi
Government and participating in a peaceful political
process.

On election day roughly 130,000 Iraqi security
personnel were on duty. Those forces secured all 5,200
polling places with multiple rings of security, protected
voters and polling centres from over 100 attacks and
reportedly detained more than 200 suspected
insurgents. Not a single polling site was penetrated that
day. The performance of Iraqi security forces
demonstrates growing capability and testifies to the
successful continuing cooperation between the Iraqi
Government and the multinational force.

The multinational force comprises 27 countries,
in addition to the United States, and has more than
130,000 personnel. The force coordinates closely with
the Iraqi Government at the local and national levels to
employ more effective tactics to defeat the insurgents
and prevent their attacks. The United States Embassy
and the multinational force leadership continue to
attend, at the Iraqi Government's invitation, Iraq's
Ministerial Committee on National Security, which sets
the broad framework for Iraqi security policy,
consistent with resolution 1546 (2004).

Iraq remains a very difficult security
environment. Terrorists and insurgents remain
determined to try to thwart Iraq's progress towards
peace and democracy. They continue a brutal campaign
of attacks and intimidation against Iraqi leaders and
citizens, Iraqi security forces, private citizens and aid
workers from many countries and the multinational
force. Their disregard for innocent life and their
willingness to commit unspeakable horror, including
the videotaped executions of hostages, has not
intimidated the Iraqi people. Iraqis continue to
volunteer in large numbers to serve their country in the
Iraqi security forces.

According to the Multinational Security
Transition Command-Iraq, over 150,000 security
forces within the Ministries of Interior and Defence
have been equipped and trained. The some 85,000
Interior Ministry troops include regular police,
members of special police commandos, public order
and mechanized battalions, border guard units and
dignitary-protection elements. Defence Ministry forces
number 65,000 and include troops from the regular
Iraqi army - which now includes both the
Intervention Force and the National Guard - and the
air force, navy and special operations.

Building the Iraqi security force remains a work
in progress and a top priority. The Multinational
Security Transition Command and the Iraqi Ministries
of Interior and Defence continue to work closely to
recruit, train and equip Iraq's security forces. We have
prepared a more detailed information sheet, which is
being distributed now. It demonstrates some of the
progress the Iraqi security forces have made. But more
time and continued support from the multinational
force is needed before the Iraqi security forces reach
full operational capacity.

In addition to training Iraqi security forces, the
multinational force continues to conduct the full
spectrum of military operations in order to contribute
to the maintenance of security and stability in Iraq. The
multinational force continues to work arduously to
conduct traditional security and stability operations, as
well as to recover and destroy munitions and
landmines, provide air support, conduct maritime
interception operations and protect multinational
reconstruction efforts. What has changed since the last
report is the increasing use of Iraqi security forces for
those tasks, supported by the multinational force as
required. That trend will continue and increase in the
near term as Iraqi security forces become more and
more capable.

Military forces and civil affairs personnel - in
coordination with the Iraqi Government, international
donors and international and national non-
governmental organizations - also work to provide
civil, humanitarian and reconstruction assistance
throughout Iraq. Projects include the reconstruction
and renovation of hospitals, pharmaceutical stores and
primary and literary schools; the repair of roads, water
and sewage treatment plants, power supply systems
and public parks; and the provision of medical care and
water purification.

The multinational force continues to disburse
funds to build and improve infrastructure, provide for
the welfare of the citizens and support education. The
multinational force has also provided local security
forces with communication, investigation and facility
equipment and has donated equipment and medicine to
Iraqi health centres.

The United Nations has played an important role
thus far in Iraq's political transition process,
particularly in the important assistance provided to the
Independent Electoral Commission for Iraq. I thank the
Secretary-General's Special Representative,
Ambassador Ashraf Qazi, for his presentation of the
Secretary-General's report to the Council today. Under
resolution 1546 (2004), Ambassador Qazi and the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq, as
requested by the Government of Iraq, will play a
leading role to promote national dialogue and
consensus-building on the drafting of a national
constitution by the people of Iraq. The United Nations
has said it would play such a role and help coordinate
other international technical assistance. We urge the
United Nations to prepare in advance to do so, given its
broad expertise and experience with constitutional
assistance.

We understand that security for the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq is a necessary
condition for the United Nations to fulfil its mandate.
Since August 2004, United States troop contingents
have performed that function. More recently, however,
consistent with resolution 1546 (2004), a distinct entity
under the unified command of the multinational force
assumed the distinct mission of providing security for
the United Nations presence in Iraq. I am very pleased
to report to the Council that Georgian troops have
assumed that mission in Baghdad from the United
States. In addition, Romanian troops are currently
deployed in Basra and are prepared to provide security
for United Nations officials upon their arrival this
summer. I would also like to acknowledge the Czech
Republic, Denmark, Finland, Germany, Japan,
Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Portugal, Slovenia and
Sweden, which combined have pledged over $15
million towards funding for that distinct entity. As the
United Nations expands its activities in Iraq, its
security needs will increase. We encourage countries to
provide additional assistance to the protection force,
through the provision of either funds or troops. That
protection force will be a necessary precondition for an
expanded United Nations presence.

I welcome the deployment of the United Nations
liaison detachment teams to Basra and Erbil and look
forward to the deployment of additional substantive
staff. We would like to see the United Nations expand
the implementation of its responsibilities for economic
and humanitarian reconstruction assistance. A robust
United Nations presence in Basra and Erbil would
serve that purpose. In addition, we expect that offices
in Basra and Erbil will be necessary to support the
Iraqis in the next phase of the political transition.

The elections of 30 January opened a new chapter
in Iraqi history. Those elections were an essential step
in the Iraqi people's path towards stability and
democratic self-governance. Now begins the process of
drafting and ratifying a constitution that will be the
basis of a fully democratic Iraq. It is important that all
Iraqis have the opportunity to participate in that
process. Transparency and broad-based participation in
the drafting of Iraq's new constitution will be critical to
developing a stable and thriving democracy. We are
encouraged by statements from a variety of Iraq's
political leaders and from the new Iraqi Government
indicating their commitment to ensuring an inclusive
approach to the drafting of the constitution and to an
Iraqi transitional Government that represents the
interests of all Iraqis.

While there remain those who seek to undo the
progress Iraq has made over the past two years and
undermine the democratically elected Government, the
majority of Iraq's citizens have demonstrated that they
support the political process and believe that justice
should be achieved by the rule of law.

The Multinational Force, in support of those
goals, will continue to cooperate closely with the
Government of Iraq and to train and fight alongside
Iraqi security forces, while permanently turning over
security responsibilities to the Iraqi security forces as
the local situation allows.

We look forward to working closely with the
newly elected Government of Iraq to ensure effective
support for stabilization, reconstruction and continued
democratic development in Iraq.

