Mr. Rivard (Canada): First, I would like to thank
Germany for convening today's open debate and to
commend their leadership in protecting children in
conflict.
Let me also say a few words on behalf of the
Group of Friends of Children and Armed Conflict, an
informal network of 38 interested Member States.

The Friends Group is pleased with the work
undertaken by the Security Council in the past few
years in progressively strengthening the protection
framework for children affected by armed conflict. We
also commend the work of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict for her work to ensure that children
experience the full protection of all human rights in
situations related to armed conflict, and the dedicated
work of UNICEF in this regard.

Members of the Friends Group have reliably
called on the Security Council to further strengthen its
protection framework and have consistently called for
all six grave violations committed against children in
armed conflict to be included among the listing criteria
established by resolution 1612 (2005). The Friends
Group has supported a progressive approach in this
regard and therefore commends the Security Council
for filling an important gap in the child protection
framework by including attacks on schools and
hospitals as the latest trigger through resolution 1998
(2011), adopted today.

For the Friends Group, a new trigger such as this
includes in the annexes to the Secretary-General's
reports not only those parties to armed conflict who, in
contravention of applicable international law, engage in
attacks on schools and hospitals, but also those who
engage in threats or attacks against schoolchildren,
patients, and education or medical personnel. In
addition, a new trigger such as this would include
United Nations country-level task forces monitoring
attacks on schools or hospitals; threats or attacks
against schoolchildren, patients, and education or
medical personnel; and military use of and other
relevant disruptions to educational and medical
facilities. The Friends Group is pleased to see these
measures included in the resolution adopted today.

Although the Friends Group applauds the action
taken by the Security Council so far in strengthening
accountability for persistent perpetrators of grave
violations against children, we call for three types of
further decisive action against such perpetrators. First,
we urge the Security Council to ensure that grave
violations against children trigger the imposition of
sanctions when mandates are established or renewed
for relevant sanctions committees, as agreed in the
presidential statement of 16 June 2010
(S/PRST/2010/10).

Secondly, we call on the Secretary-General to
include in his annual reports actions taken by existing
sanctions committees regarding such provisions, as
well as proposals for additional steps to ensure
perpetrators' accountability.

Thirdly, we remain concerned about the
accountability gap, and call on national authorities and
all concerned parties to take appropriate legal action
against persistent perpetrators. The Friends Group also
calls on the Security Council to take decisive action
against all persistent perpetrators listed in annex I of
the Secretary-General's reports and, in cases where
there is no designated sanctions committee, to consider
how to address that gap through proactive means.

Lastly, the Friends Group has stressed the
importance of follow-up regarding the implementation
of the Working Group's recommendations, as called for
in resolution 1882 (2009). We call on all parties to
conflicts, including non-State actors, to follow up and
implement the recommendations of the Working
Group.

(spoke in French)

In my capacity as representative of Canada, I
would like to formally welcome the Secretary-
General's annual report on children and armed conflict
(S/2011/250). This debate is an opportunity once again
to bring to the Security Council's attention the
seriousness of the acts of violence that continue to be
perpetrated against children.

We firmly believe that today's adoption of a new
resolution on children and armed conflict will highlight
the gravity of the attacks being made on schools and
hospitals. With this additional trigger, strong support
on the part of the international community will be
needed for the monitoring and reporting mechanism
country teams to track attacks on schools and hospitals
on a systematic and comprehensive basis. Canada
believes that education is the strongest tool we can
provide to children in order to improve their chances in
the future. That is why one of Canada's signature
projects focuses on increasing access to education in
Kandahar by investing up to $12 million in building,
expanding and repairing 50 schools in selected districts
of Kandahar province.

We are also pleased that the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict is actively seized of the
issue of accountability. We therefore call on the
Council and its relevant sanctions committees to
impose sanctions more systematically so that
perpetrators of grave violations against children may
be held to account. As the Secretary-General has
recommended, Canada urges the Council to take more
vigorous and targeted measures against offenders who
have been listed in the Secretary-General's annual
report for at least five years for committing grave
violations against children. Canada also calls on the
Working Group, in accordance with its mandate, to
hold urgent or informal meetings in order to ensure a
speedier response to new situations where grave
violations are being committed against children in
armed conflicts.

Children's rights are a priority of Canada's
foreign policy and international development aid.
Canada will continue to play a strong role and to help
contribute to concrete results both at the United
Nations and on the ground in countries concerned.

