Mr. Tillerson (United States of America): I am
grateful for the opportunity to speak to the Security
Council today. On behalf of the United States, I thank
Japan and Foreign Minister Kono for convening
today's ministerial meeting on the growing threat from
North Korea.

Upon taking office, President Trump identified
North Korea as the greatest national security threat
to the United States. That judgment remains the same
today. After its intercontinental ballistic-missile launch
on 29 November, the North Korean Government
claimed that it now possesses the capability to strike
any location in the continental United States. North
Korea's growing capabilities reflect a direct threat to
our security and the security of the entire world. We
do not regard this claim as an empty threat. The North
Korean regime's continuing unlawful missile launches
and testing activities signal its contempt for the United
States, its neighbours in Asia and all Members of the
United Nations. In the face of such a threat, inaction is
unacceptable for any nation.

Through a series of robust Security Council
resolutions, this organ has taken a leading role in
condemning North Korea's unlawful nuclear and
missile programmes and imposing consequences.
The international community remains firm in its
determination that it will not accept a nuclear North
Korea. Each United Nations State Member must fully
implement all existing Security Council resolutions.
For those nations that have not yet done so, or that have
been slow to enforce Security Council resolutions, their
hesitation calls into question whether their vote is a
commitment to words only but not actions. For countries
that have not taken action, I urge them to consider their
interests, their allegiances and their values in the face
of this grave and global threat.

We believe that more can and must be done beyond
enforcing the minimum requirements of the Security
Council resolutions directed at the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea. Last spring, the United States
initiated a peaceful pressure campaign of economic
and diplomatic sanctions against North Korea, with the
intent of setting conditions for North Korea to engage
in serious negotiations for the complete, verifiable
and irreversible abandonment of its nuclear-weapon
programmes. Our resolve to continue that campaign
is even greater today. Over the past, year many allies
and partners of the United States have joined our
campaign, going beyond mere compliance with the
Security Council resolutions. We ask those nations to
continue to increase pressure through unilateral action.
Doing so will further isolate North Korea politically
and economically, cutting off support and funds for its
unlawful nuclear and missile programmes.

We particularly call on Russia and China to
increase pressure, including going beyond the full
implementation of the Security Council resolutions.
Continuing to allow North Korean labourers to toil
in slave-like conditions inside Russia in exchange
for wages used to fund nuclear-weapon programmes
calls into question Russia's dedication as a partner
for peace. Similarly, as Chinese crude oil flows to
North Korean refineries, the United States questions
China's commitment to solving an issue that has
serious implications for the security of its own citizens.
Recently, the North Korean regime has sought to portray
United Nations sanctions as harmful to women and
children. But this is a regime that hypocritically spends
billions on nuclear and ballistic missile programmes
while its own people suffer great poverty. The regime
could feed and care for women, children and ordinary
people in North Korea if it were to choose the welfare
of its people over weapons development.
The Democratic People's Republic of Korea has
a choice: it can reverse course, give up its unlawful
nuclear-weapon programme and join the community
of nations, or it can continue to condemn its people
to poverty and isolation. The regime in Pyongyang
bears the ultimate responsibility for the well-being
of its people. North Korea claims to undertake its
nuclear-weapon programme as an essential step for the
survival of its regime. In making that choice, North
Korea has made itself less secure, and its economy has
become further isolated and disconnected from the
global economy.

We have been Clear that all options remain on the
table in the defence of our nation, but we do not seek,
nor do we want, war with North Korea. The United
States will use all necessary measures to defend itself
against North Korean aggression, but our hope remains
that diplomacy will produce a resolution.

As I said earlier this week, a sustained cessation
of North Korea's threatening behaviour must occur
before talks can begin. North Korea must earn its way
back to the table. The pressure campaign must and will
continue until denuclearization is achieved. We will,
in the meantime, keep our channels of communication
open. Our message today is one that this body has heard
before and one that we will continue to repeat: the
United States will not allow the regime in Pyongyang to
hold the world hostage. We will continue to hold North
Korea accountable for its reckless and threatening
behaviour today and in future. We ask every nation
here to join us in exerting sovereignty to protect all of
our people. We also ask all to join a unified effort to
achieve a complete and verifiable denuclearization of
the Korean peninsula.

