Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Beforetturning to my statement, I
would like to say that the Government and the people
of the Plurinational State of Bolivia express their deep
regret and heartfelt condolences to the Government and
the people of the Kingdom of Spain for those killed and
wounded as a result of the terrorist attack carried out
yesterday in Barcelona. We also express our solidarity
with the families of the victims, and we hope that
the wounded recover soon. Even as we meet, we are
receiving reports of attacks in Finland and Burkina Faso,
which once again serve to highlight the responsibility
of the Security Council to resolve this and other matters
linked to international peace and security.

We welcome the briefings of the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Yemen, Mr. Ismail Ould
Cheikh Ahmed, and by the Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Stephen O'Brien, to
whom we express our full support for the work that they
carry out. We also welcome the Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Yemen, Mr. Abdulmalik Abduljalil Ali Al-Mikhlafi.

Despite the repeated pronouncements of the
Council on the situation in Yemen, it continues to
deteriorate. Unfortunately, many elements are coming
together in this crisis to cause it to continue to worsen
in an alarming manner. A few minutes ago, Mr. O'Brien
noted three such elements, namely, famine, cholera
and the conflict itself. In addition to those three, we
think one of the most serious of those elements is the
indifference of the international community. During
the meeting held on 12 July (see S/PV.7999), it was
noted that the number of persons possibly infected by
the cholera outbreak was already alarming. According
to the World Health Organization report of 14 August,
registered cases of possible infection have exceeded
500,000, of which nearly 2,000 have lost their lives.
According to the same organization, since the month of
April, when we were cautioned about the outbreak, the
death toll has increased fivefold.

Similarly, according to the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), this
grim situation is exacerbated by limited access to
water, sanitation, basic services and, above all, a lack of
medicine and basic supplies for treating those affected.
In additional, the diminished medical infrastructure
in Yemen leaves 14.8 million people without adequate
access to medical assistance. According to OCHA,
the troubling food shortage places 60 per cent of the
population in food insecurity and 7 million people at
risk of famine.

We are distressed that, despite the Council's issuance
of presidential statements of 15 June (S/PRST/2017/7)
and 9 August (S/PRST/2017/14), wherein it expressed its
concerns, the deployment of humanitarian aid in Yemen
continues to be obstructed by haphazard unilateral
measures imposed by the parties to the conflict and
by the high risk and insecurity faced by humanitarian
personnel, agencies and organizations on the ground.

By way of example, according to the 17 August
statement of the United Nations Resident Coordinator/
Humanitarian Coordinator in Yemen, Mr. Jamie
McGoldrick, since January 11 vehicles belonging to
humanitarian organizations have been hijacked in the
city of Taiz, in addition to the looting of food and other
humanitarian goods in that same city on three separate
occasions. In addition, the constant threat of air strikes
and sporadic armed clashes between the parties and
with the coalition limit and obstruct the distribution of
humanitarian aid required by Yemeni population.

In that regard, we once again remind the parties
to the conflict that they must allow and guarantee
the security and independence of agencies providing
humanitarian assistance and not identify them as
military objectives under any circumstance. Moreover,
they should guarantee unconditional and unobstructed
access to all places that require humanitarian assistance.

Reports of attacks against civilians and civilian
infrastructure are disturbing, as is the fact that parties
to the conflict continue to consider public spaces
and private homes as military objectives. On 18 July,
six days after the Council received a briefing on the
situation in Yemen, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights reported an
aerial bombardment of the population of Taiz, where
the target was a makeshift straw house that housed three
families of internally displaced refugees - killing 18
civilians, including women and children. Following that
incident, in August, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees reported the death of
more than 10 civilians from an aerial bombardment in
Saada governorate.

Moreover, the situation concerning migrants
continues to be worrisome. According to a report
issued by the International Organization for Migration,
on 10 and 11 August 280 migrants were forced by
their traffickers to abandon in the middle of the sea
the boats they were using to try to reach Yemen. Only
69 of them survived. According to a report issued by
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees on 11 August, despite the conflict in the
country, Yemen continues to be a destination for many
refugees fleeing the Horn of Africa in search of means
of subsistence, who are victims of criminal groups
and human traffickers. Regrettably, the conflict and a
lack of effective control mechanisms and security have
made possible the proliferation of criminal groups and
networks that traffic in persons by taking advantage of
their poverty and desperation.

For all ofthose reasons, we believe that the Security
Council should maintain a unanimous and infirm
position in condemning efforts and military actions that
exacerbate the crisis in Yemen and generate a situation
of instability that threatens the lives of millions of
innocent people. In that regard, we once again reiterate
to the parties involved in the conflict that they have
an obligation to respect the provisions of resolution
2140 (2014) and that they must commit to put in place
a sustained dialogue process that makes possible a
peaceful, inclusive and orderly political transition that
meets the legitimate demands and aspirations of the
Yemeni people, all the while respecting the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of the Republic
of Yemen.

Lastly, we would like to express our gratitude for
the work done by the various United Nations agencies
and bodies to provide humanitarian assistance in such
a difficult context, to which we reiterate our support.

