Mr. Jacob (Israel): At the outset, Sir, allow me to
say that we are pleased to see you presiding over the
deliberations of the Security Council for the month of
July.

In the pre-dawn hours yesterday morning, Israeli
forces undertook military action as part of our ongoing
effort to protect civilians from the unrelenting threat of
Palestinian terrorism. The target of the attack was
Salah Shehada, one of the most prolific and brutal
terrorists in the history of the Middle East. Along with
him, a second leading Hamas operative was killed.

To our great regret, 14 Palestinian civilians were
also killed in the attack. Israel's leaders, including
Prime Minister Sharon and Foreign Minister Peres,
have expressed their deep regret at the deaths of
civilians, particularly those of children, and at the
injuries caused to many others. Our profound
sympathies and condolences go to the friends and loved
ones of those who were lost.

Yesterday's action was precipitated by the failure
of the Palestinian Authority to respect its most basic
obligation to prevent its territory from being used as a
base for terrorist operations. As a consequence of that
failure, hundreds of Israeli civilians have been killed,
and thousands wounded, in scores of terrorist attacks
carried out with the financial, logistical and moral
support of the Palestinian leadership, including
Chairman Arafat himself. In such a climate, Israel has
been left with no choice but to take action to protect
our people from the threat posed by individuals like
Salah Shehada.

Shehada was the military leader of the terrorist
organization Hamas in the Gaza Strip. Although the
Security Council has never met to discuss the attacks
for which he is responsible, there is no shortage of
them. Shehada masterminded countless terrorist
massacres that resulted in the cold-blooded murder of
hundreds of innocent Israelis and other nationals. Over
300 mortar attacks on Israeli towns and villages were
carried out under his direction. As the deputy to the
spiritual leader of Hamas, Sheikh Ahmed Yassin,
Shehada was responsible for coordinating the activities
of senior Hamas commanders in the West Bank,
recruiting suicide bombers, drafting the group's attack
policies, determining which Jewish communities to
target, and helping Hamas enhance its arsenal of
weapons. Shehada also had no compunction when it
came to recruiting children to carry out attacks, as in
April 2002 when he dispatched three Palestinian youths
on a suicide mission to attack Israeli positions.

Shehada was also a figure who was well known
to Palestinian security officials. On numerous
occasions, Israel requested that he be arrested, but
despite the Palestinian Authority being fully aware of
his location and fully capable of bringing him to
justice, this mass murderer remained a free man - free
to roam the streets and plan further attacks against
Israeli civilians, as he did most recently with the killing
of five Israeli teenagers in the community of Atzmona.

Despite Shehada's long and bloody record of
terrorism, and despite numerous requests by Israel that
he be detained, the Palestinian Authority never lifted a
finger to have him arrested. With Palestinian leadership
refusing to do anything to impede the operations of a
leading terrorist commander, Israel had no choice but
to act.

In planning yesterday's operation, Israeli forces
did not anticipate the extent of the collateral damage
that would result from the air strike. This matter is now
the subject of an investigation by Israeli authorities.
Had we known the result beforehand, we would never
have carried out the operation. Unlike the terrorists we
have been forced to confront, Israeli commanders take
no pleasure in the loss of innocent lives. We do not
celebrate the deaths of the innocent as a military
victory, as do our adversaries. Precautions are taken to
ensure our operations entail as little harm as possible to
the civilian population. Indeed, several previous
attempts to target Mr. Shehada were called off after
intelligence revealed that significant casualties would
ensue.

In this instance, however, Israel's precautions
failed to prevent these casualties, and our regret is
sincere and profound. But the pain of these losses,
however severe, does not obscure the fact that
Palestinian terrorists continue, callously and in
contravention of all accepted international norms, to
situate themselves among civilians in order to use them
as human shields. Hamas members not only fail to
distinguish themselves from civilians, but deliberately
hide among them to avoid retribution. Salah Shehada
demonstrated no more concern for the lives of those
who were close to him than he did for the hundreds of
innocent Israelis whose lives he destroyed.

Responsibility also lies with the Palestinian
Authority. It is the Palestinian Authority's chronic
failure to do anything that might prevent future attacks
against Israel that compelled us to act to protect our
civilians from harm. Military actions would be entirely
unnecessary if the Palestinian Authority were abiding
by its signed commitment to root out terrorism from its
territory.

But the Palestinian Authority has not acted, and it
is not abiding by its commitment, so it falls to Israel to
take the steps necessary to fight terrorism and clear the
path back towards political negotiations. While we
recognize that military actions cannot stop every
potential attacker, Israel forces have been successful in
thwarting scores of attempted terrorist bombings.
Without these operations, the civilian death toll on both
sides would surely have been far higher. Chairman
Arafat has demonstrated in the past that when he wants
to he can be remarkably successful at preventing acts
of terror that emanate from the territory under his
control. His security forces know where terrorists
reside, where they hide, and where they maintain their
bases of operations. What is missing is the necessary
political will to act against them.

We are all aware of what can be accomplished in
the absence of terrorism. We have seen the great
lengths to which Israel was willing to go in the context
of peaceful negotiations. At Camp David in July 2000,
Israel extended a far-reaching and comprehensive offer
to the Palestinians. The Palestinian leadership not only
did not reciprocate, but launched instead a long and
bloody campaign of terrorism against the citizens of
Israel, precisely at the moment that both sides were
closer than they ever had been to reaching an
agreement.

Despite the bloodshed and mistrust that now
exist, we can return to the period of hope that existed
prior to the onset of violence and terror in September
2000. Security Council resolutions 1402 (2002) and
1403 (2002), President Bush's statement, the Mitchell
report and the Tenet plan collectively illustrate a way
back from the abyss, predicated first and foremost on
an end to violence and terror.

Israeli withdrawal is merely one component of
what is intended to be a multifaceted package aimed at
returning the parties to a political process. Israel has
begun to implement measures aimed at improving the
situation of the Palestinians and at rebuilding mutual
trust, including the release of funds to the Palestinian
Authority, issuing more work permits for Palestinian
labourers and loosening restrictions on movement, all
in an effort to ease the hardships facing the Palestinian
population. Israeli and Palestinian officials have been
meeting to discuss ways to move forward, and Israel
for its part is fully committed to that constructive
dialogue.

But the notion that Israeli withdrawal should
occur in a vacuum, independently of any Palestinian
action, clearly contravenes President Bush's landmark
speech, endorsed by the "Quartet" statement and
Security Council resolutions 1402 (2002) and 1403
(2002), all of which recognize that the Palestinian side
also has clear obligations it must uphold so that we can
ensure security for all and a resumption of a political
dialogue. In that regard, the Security Council would
not serve the interests of peace by focusing so intently
on Israeli actions while ignoring the responsibilities of
the Palestinian Authority. President Bush's speech set
out a clear political horizon predicated on vital steps to
be taken by both sides to ensure that progress is
genuine and lasting.

In the absence of any steps by the Palestinian
Authority to fight terrorism, Israel cannot be expected
to take unilateral action that would drastically increase
the risk to Israeli civilians. Such action has been shown
to result directly in the increased loss of innocent life.

What is needed is for the Palestinian Authority to
act, to relieve Israel of the burden of acting against
terrorists hiding out in Palestinian territory. Israel still
believes that there can be no military solution to the
conflict. And even with all the hatred that has been
aroused by the resort to violence, Israelis still believe
that peace can be achieved and that compromises
should be made, provided there is a genuine partner on
the other side that is prepared to do its part.

