Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): I would first like to thank the Under-
Secretary-General for Peace Operations, Mr. Jean-
Pierre Lacroix, and the Under-Secretary-General for
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, for their briefings.

The Belgian position in relation to the Golan Heights
remains unchanged. In accordance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions, in particular resolutions
242 (1967) and 497 (1981), we do not recognize Israel's
sovereignty over the territories occupied by Israel since
June 1967, including the Golan Heights, and we do
not consider them part of the territory of the State of
Israel. The acquisition of territory by force is illegal
under international law. Any unilateral declaration
of a change in the border is contrary to a rules-based
international order and the Charter of the United
Nations. We reiterate our deep concern about the wider
consequences of the recognition of illegal annexation,
particularly in the region.

Turning to the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force (UNDOF), I would like to commend the
quality of the Secretary-General's report (S/2019/248)
and to express our support for his observations and
recommendations. UNDOF plays an indispensable
role in preserving regional stability. The parties
have an obligation to comply with the terms of the
Disengagement of Forces Agreement, according to
which there should be no military presence in the area
of separation other than UNDOF.

We are concerned about ceasefire violations, which
only increase tensions and further undermine stability
in a part of the world where it is already sorely lacking.
We therefore call on the parties to the conflict and
UNDOF to improve their communication in order to

create more trust and prevent any deterioration of the
situation. The parties must exercise the utmost restraint
at all times.

We share the Secretary-General's deep concern
about the significant threat posed by the presence of
unexploded ordnance, explosive remnants of war and
mines to United Nations personnel in the Force's area of
operation, particularly in the southern part of the area
of separation. It is essential that the parties support all
UNDOF efforts in that regard in order to ensure that the
mission has the security it needs to carry out its work.

In conclusion, the Security Council plays a key role
as the ultimate guarantor of compliance by all States
with their international obligations in the context of
the maintenance of international peace and security.
With that in mind, we cannot accept situations in which
the law is imposed by force. It is up to the Council
to oppose unilateral acts that undermine not only the
international legal order but also any prospect of peace.

