Mr. Monteiro (Portugal): Portugal is a sponsor of the
draft resolution before the Council on the constitution of the
United Nations Civilian Police Mission in Haiti
(MIPON UH).

Despite some progress, serious problems persist in
Haiti that require the continuation of the assistance of the
United Nations. We are concerned about the continuation of
violence and unrest, the difficult economic situation, the
high level of unemployment, the rising cost of living and
the slow pace of change in Haiti.

Given the fact that elections are due to take place in
November 1998, the period ahead will be of crucial
importance for the consolidation of democracy and national
reconstruction. For that reason, comprehensive and
sustained long-term assistance by the international
community is vitally important.

A continued commitment, in particular from the
international financial institutions and other United Nations
agencies, is necessary to promote a successful and
sustainable development that will underpin political stability
in the country. We want to help Haitians build up a country
where democracy and progress will be a reality. That can
be achieved only if the rule of law and respect for human
rights are ensured.

The Secretary-General' 5 latest report underlines that,
despite some progress, the Haitian National Police has not
reached the level of professionalization required to tackle
successfully the various problems in daily activities. In
fact, a self-sustained and fully functioning police force is
essential to ensure a secure and stable environment,
economic rehabilitation and the consolidation of
democracy in Haiti.

We therefore believe that it is of the utmost
importance to maintain for a period of one year, until 30
November 1998, the presence of the United Nations, as
the present draft resolution foresees. As requested recently
by President Preval, the new Mission will continue to
help the Government of Haiti professionalize its police
force. In this context, we urge Haiti's authorities to
pursue their efforts to form a public force respectful of
legality, and also to pursue their efforts to revitalize
Haiti's justice system, to which the Permanent
Representative of Haiti referred earlier.
In conclusion, I would like to pay tribute to the
positive role played by the personnel of the United
Nations Transition Mission in Haiti (UNTMIH) and their
Governments, and also to the United States and Canada
for their positive roles in ensuring the success of the
Mission so far. Finally, I would also like to express a
special word of commendation for the role played by the
Special Representative of the Secretary General for Haiti.

