Mr. Duclos (France) (spoke in French): Like the
entire international community, France is still in a state
of shock over the terrible attack perpetrated against the
United Nations in Baghdad on 19 August, which cost
Sergio Vieira De Mellos and a number of his
colleagues their lives and wounded dozens of others. In
such painful circumstances, in which we do not yet
know the fate of many individuals, our meeting today,
which had long been planned to hear the briefing by
the Coalition Authority, can only be deeply affected by
this. Our thoughts go to the victims and the wounded,
to their families and to United Nations and
humanitarian staff in the field.

It is undoubtedly too soon to draw any final
lessons or to take any decisions on the political
implications. Simplistic, black-and-white explanations
should be avoided. All of us - the United Nations,
Council members and the coalition Authority - should
remain humble. We must take time for analysis and
reflection, beginning with some soul-searching and a
precise analysis of the situation in all its complexity.
We believe that now is the time to identify the
questions and begin to reflect on ways of answering
them.

In that spirit, I thank the United States and United
Kingdom delegations for the detailed briefings that
they have just presented. We listened with the greatest
attention to the information that they gave the Council,
and we shall very carefully study it.

Extreme transparency is necessary if we wish to
see things clearly and act effectively for Iraq's speedy
recovery of its independence and sovereignty. Our goal
for Iraq and the Iraqis, a country and a people with a
highly developed and ancient civilization, has not
changed. It remains now more than ever to ensure a
rapid political transition that will lead to the end of the
country's occupation and enable the Iraqis to regain
their sovereignty in the framework of a regime that
respects the basic rights and freedoms of all.

The sine qua non for the successful economic and
political reconstruction of Iraq clearly lies in the
restoration of security and public order. Pending the
full restoration of Iraqi sovereignty, that responsibility
falls first of all to the occupying Powers pursuant to
international law, particularly the Hague Regulations
and the Geneva Conventions, which were recalled in
Security Council resolutions 1472 (2003) and 1483
(2003).

What happened on Tuesday, 19 August - which
had been preceded by other attacks against civilian
targets - is heinous, and the perpetrators must be
condemned and brought to justice. What occurred
nevertheless tragically shows that security remains the
priority problem in Iraq and that the way of resolving
its must be reviewed in depth. Iraq has become,
unfortunately, a theatre of operations for terrorists.

There are, of course, many levels of response. We
are first thinking about security measures and
mechanisms to ensure the safety of people and goods in
Iraq, whether this concerns the United Nations, the
Iraqis or foreign diplomatic or humanitarian personnel.
The United Nations, in Iraq and elsewhere, cannot
carry out the mandate with which the Security Council
has entrusted it unless the conditions to fulfil it are
established, particularly concerning security. We must
collectively consider this serious problem concerning
the United Nations missions throughout the world.

Regarding Iraq, I would be grateful to the United
States and United Kingdom delegations for any
clarifications that they could make on existing
machinery. What is the mechanism for disseminating
and exchanging information among the Authority, the
United Nations and the foreign missions in Iraq? What
is the warning mechanism? What specific protection
measures are in place? What qualitative and
quantitative reinforcement measures have been
planned? How can the civil and humanitarian
institutions and personnel be protected while fully
respecting their independence and preventing them
from being in any way confused with the military
occupation forces?

There are no easy answers. The answer to the
challenge of terrorism and violence cannot only be a
matter of security and military force. The solution is
above all political as well. To escape from the trap set
by terrorists, which is a strategy of creating chaos and a
vacuum, Iraqis must be given back their
responsibilities and their sovereignty in the shortest
term and in a clearly defined sequence of events.

The Secretary-General had pointed this out in his
report last month. The report states: "There is a
pressing need to set out a clear and specific sequence
of events leading to the end of military occupation"
(S/2003/715, para. 107). Sergio Vieira de Mello
himself echoed this statement before the Council last
month. France is convinced that political transition will
have all the more chance of succeeding if it is led by
the Iraqis themselves, with the help not of the
occupation forces but of the entire international
community, embodied by the United Nations.

As my delegation stated last month, it seems to us
that only the United Nations has the legitimacy,
impartiality and expertise to ensure the effectiveness of
the process of restoring State authority. It is essential to
preserve its independence, which is a guarantee of its
legitimacy. France is also convinced that the
stabilization of Iraq depends on the ability to promptly
deal with the crimes and human rights violations
committed by the regime of Saddam Hussain and on
the capacity to establish machinery for national
reconciliation, transitional justice and the promotion of
respect for human rights. In that regard, I would also be
very grateful to the United States and United Kingdom
delegations for any additional clarifications that they
might give us.

Lastly, a final aspect that I believe should be
mentioned in connection with the security problem is
proliferation. We still do not have any details on
weapons of mass destruction that the regime of Saddam
Hussain was said to have held. If they do indeed exist,
we can only be concerned over the fact that they cannot
be found in a context of terrorist acts.

In that regard, it also seems to us that it is
absolutely essential for the Security Council to
reconsider the mandate of the United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
(UNMOVIC) within a reasonable time, as it has
promised to do. France continues to believe that
UNMOVIC must play a central role in verifying and
certifying Iraq's effective disarmament.

The joint mobilization of the entire international
community is the second basic requirement for the
successful economic and political reconstruction of
Iraq. That will be possible only if the coalition
authorities acknowledge that they cannot succeed alone
and if they play their role in a completely transparent
manner. In a world of equal and sovereign nations,
sharing burdens and responsibilities also means sharing
information and authority. The international
community, and in particular the United Nations, can
play a central and effective role only if the
reconstruction process begun by the coalition
authorities is transparent in every way, especially in the
political, economic and financial spheres. There must
also be a clear allocation and delineation of roles and
responsibilities.

Economic reconstruction also requires the
establishment of a timetable. We agree with the idea of
holding a donors' conference in October, especially
given that the international community should be fully
informed about how the Coalition Provisional
Authority is using Iraq's financial and oil resources.
Nevertheless, as surprising as it may seem, to date we
are still lacking the key instrument provided for in
resolution 1483 (2003) to ensure ongoing international
monitoring of the use of Iraqi resources, namely the
International Advisory and Monitoring Board of the
Development Fund for Iraq (IAMB). We believe that it
is essential for that body to be established without any
further delay. We also believe that it should have the
full authority and capacity to carry out effective
monitoring of the use of funds, as outlined in
paragraphs 13 and 14 of resolution 1483 (2003).

France is extremely concerned about the current
situation in Iraq. We vigorously condemn terrorist acts.
Today we must face the terrible question of whether we
would be in the same situation today if, under the
supervision of the United Nations, a genuine
international partnership and comprehensive approach
to security, political, economic and social problems had
been established at the outset. Everything possible
must now be done to avoid prolonged instability and
the rise of terrorism in Iraq, a phenomenon that is
morally repugnant and reprehensible regardless of its
source and which would also present a mortal danger to
the Iraqi people. That means comprehensively revising
the strategy pursued thus far in order that peace may
prevail.

