Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): We are honoured and pleased to see you, Sir,
presiding over this meeting to discuss issues relating to
a great people and its country. This demonstrates your
interest in and concern for Afghanistan, just as you
have shown your interest in and concern for African
affairs.

Allow me to express our thanks to the Secretary-
General for his comprehensive report on the situation
in Afghanistan. We also wish to thank Deputy
Secretary-General Louise Frechette for her briefing on
developments in that country. We believe that the
report provides the Council with an important
opportunity to assess and to discuss ways of improving
the situation in Afghanistan, which has suffered more
than 23 years of domestic and external conflicts and
their consequences, affecting all aspects of life in that
country. Any assessment and discussion of the United
Nations role in this area require us to address the
various issues with great patience and specificity, given
the sensitivity of the situation.

We wish to express our satisfaction with the
information contained in the report on the status of
implementation of the Bonn Agreement and the
establishment of the Afghan Interim Administration
and its key commissions, which have had important
political results. Notwithstanding the emergence of
these embryonic political institutions in a turbulent
political atmosphere, we believe that they have been
tested and made significant strides in various aspects of
national life, including education, the fight against
illicit drugs, the participation of women and the
convening of the Loya Jirga, which represents the core
of the political process. Its success will dispel the
threat of another war looming over that unhappy
country.

With respect to Afghanistan, which has suffered
for so long, I wish to associate myself with previous
speakers in expressing our deep sorrow for the victims
of the earthquakes in the northern regions of that
country. On behalf of the Syrian Arab Republic, I
convey our sincere condolences to the people and
Government of friendly Afghanistan for the catastrophe
and for their losses. We also wish to thank the
Secretary-General, the specialized agencies and other
relevant entities that have hastened to provide
assistance to all the victims of the earthquake.

Security and stability in that country continue to
be of major concern. Without the establishment of
security, neither the peace process nor economic
development and reconstruction can go forward. In this
regard, we share the Secretary-General's concern over
the ongoing instability of the security situation in many
parts of Afghanistan, particularly outside major cities.
This instability is caused by the persistence of pockets
of Taliban and Al Qaeda resistance and by the
continuing confrontation between political and military
rivals.

We would like to express our regret that these
confrontations have reached a level of ethnic violence
between and among the different parties. The report
notes many serious attacks on and violations of human
rights based on ethnic motives. We support the
Secretary-General's recommendation on making all
efforts as soon as possible with the different Afghani
leaders and their hesitant partners to participate in the
political process. We also support his recommendations
on training and equipping an Afghani security force
under the Interim Administration, making all
international efforts to set to rights the security
situation currently dividing the various Afghani parties,
and on deploying the Afghani security force efficiently
and as soon as possible.

In this regard, we would like to note the wish of
the Interim Administration and the Afghani people to
expand the area of work of the International Security
Assistance Force - ISAF - because of the sense of
security achieved in the region. We believe that the
Council should consider this issue seriously and give it
the importance it deserves.

At the same time, we believe that a national army
should be established as soon as possible, an army not
based on ethnic criteria or any other affiliations. It
should bear the responsibility for security of every part
of Afghanistan, as prescribed by the Bonn Agreement.
It should also be provided with all the logistical
support it requires, because this is the least that we can
give the Afghani people - international assistance that
would enhance stability.

The report makes clear the importance of the
continuation of humanitarian assistance and of proper
coordination among various humanitarian agencies and
institutions. Deep concern has been raised by the
drought that has struck many areas, in addition to the
disaster last night, and by the blocked roads in
mountainous areas of Afghanistan, thus threatening
great loss of life and requiring immediate measures to
prevent such a catastrophe.

We express our great satisfaction with the pioneer
girl students going back to school, raising hopes for a
future of stability and normality.

We also express concern with regard to the
information in the Secretary-General's report on poppy
cultivation in the eastern and southern areas of
Afghanistan in spite of the Interim Administration's
efforts and issuance of an edict prohibiting the
cultivation, production, processing or use of illicit
drugs. They require international financial assistance
that would dissuade different Afghani groups from
considering illicit drugs as a major source of income.
Of course, dealing with this issue requires a long time.

We support the information in the report on
Afghanistan's need for enormous international
financial assistance in the near future in order to meet
current humanitarian needs and to begin the process of
economic recovery.

The report states that current United Nations
deployment in Afghanistan is not commensurate with
the level of effort required and the role to be played in
this game of the nation's future. Therefore, the
proposal to erect a new structure of the United Nations
presence in Afghanistan comes within the proper time
frame and represents an urgent need for the
Organization to play its role and to coordinate all of its
efforts.

We would like to express our sincere appreciation
to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, and his team for their arduous
efforts in performing their difficult mandate. We hope
that the composition of the new mission, as described
by Ms. Frechette, and in the manner presented by
Ambassador Levitte, represents new hope towards
strengthening all of Ambassador Brahimi's efforts and
those of his team in Afghanistan. We believe that the
Secretary-General's appointment of two very
competent personalities to be Deputy Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General and the fact
that each chairs one of the two major components -
political affairs, and relief, recovery and
reconstruction - are very encouraging and raise hope
that this mission will be able to coordinate among the
various agencies and to carry out its mandate under
Ambassador Brahimi's leadership in the best possible
way.

