Mr. Mitchell (Bahamas): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, and the representatives of the nations of
the Security Council for agreeing to this meeting and to
air this subject, which is of such major importance to
our country, the region and this hemisphere.

The Bahamas identifies fully with the statement
that has been delivered on behalf of the Caribbean
Community (CARICOM) by the Foreign Minister of
Jamaica, The Honourable K. D. Knight. We support the
CARICOM. statement in its entirety. Haiti is a pressing
issue. As I said elsewhere, the Bahamas believes that
this is not just about a legal obligation; the situation in
Haiti presents a moral call to action.

It is clear that the situation in Haiti is out of
control. Law and order has broken down. Haiti is the
newest member of CARICOM. It is difficult for us in
the region to sit by idly, saying that we support legal
constitutional authority, and yet, when the call for help
comes from a member State to support that legitimate
authority, we seek to rely on legalisms which amount
to inaction. That cannot be logically correct. It would
seem to set a precedent that because we may consider
one politician better suited than another, we dispense
with our commitment to democracy. In that case,
democracy and the values which follow from it become
a matter of convenience which turns entirely on
parochial concerns.

There are two aspects of this present situation.
There is the immediate problem of the breakdown in
law and order in Haiti. The Haitian Government has
represented that is unable with its existing resources to
bring the matter under control. There is also the
anecdotal evidence of an insurgency that claims to
control half the country. The fact is that a nation with 8
million people, no military and a police force of just
over 4,000 meant that the governmental authority was
thin on the ground in any event. It was therefore not
difficult to dislodge a few policemen by coming along
with superior weapons and the will to murder and
pillage. There can therefore be no pride taken in the
scenes of carnage and disorder that have flowed from
the guns of the rebel factions.

Whatever the motives, if the international
community refuses to act and to act quickly, we will be
condoning a creeping attempt to overthrow the
Government of Haiti by force. In that respect, there are
32 previous examples of the dislodging of heads of
State in Haiti by this means. The question the
international community must ask is whether it is going
to contribute to the repetition of that history or assist in
breaking that cycle.

It would seem that logic dictates a clear choice to
help stop the cycle of dislodging heads of State by
resorting to extra-constitutional violence. So, the
immediate problem to be addressed is helping to
restore law and order in Haiti, not next week or next
month but today.

That answer is, of course, deceptively simple.
The fact is that in order to restore law and order,
someone will be required to do it. That means nations,
that means people. That means putting other nations'
troops or policemen in harm's way. It may also mean
supplying equipment to an undermanned and under-
equipped police force. No nation wants to put its
people in harm's way, into a situation that is a political
quagmire. The Bahamas understands that argument.

There is a need for a commonality of
understanding among all parties in Haiti if the country
is to progress out of the present difficulties. The latest
CARICOM. initiative offers that chance, and we believe
that it is imperative for all actors to agree to that plan
as the way forward. The international community also
allows for the fact that as the plan is executed, there
may have to be changes to it to meet existing realities.
But let us agree to a plan and stop the violence today.

Let us be clear: we do not support any side in
Haiti. The sovereign choices of the Haitian people as to
who their leader is or will be is entirely a decision for
the Haitian people. We do not think that our country
ought to pollute the debate by venturing a public
opinion on that matter. What we do know is that all
countries in the hemisphere have acknowledged who
presently stands as the legitimate authority in Haiti.
When that legitimate authority calls for assistance, it
appears to us that it must logically follow that those
who can help to restore law and order ought to do so
and do so now.

Following on from the short-term effort to restore

law and order, there is a need for a long-term effort for
keeping the peace in Haiti. In many respects, the world
community took its eye off the situation in Haiti in the
1990s, much too anxious to declare victory and walk
away. The result is that we are back where we started.
This time we ought to recognize and accept that the
long-term commitment in the Council must be to affect
and promote change in Haiti.

There is no doubt about our obligations in this
matter. We have had an opportunity to speak with all
our partners on this issue. We have supported a
resolution in the Organization of American States
which calls for the provision of a legal mandate for
action to assist Haiti. We urge quick and decisive
United Nations action so that countries that can help,
including our own, can move with legal authority to
provide the immediate assistance for security and then
contribute to the longer peacekeeping and humanitarian
effort.

Haiti and the Haitian people have a right to exist
in peaceful and quiet enjoyment of their country within
secure borders. The Bahamas comes today to ask for
help for the Haitian people. As we have said, that is not
only a legal obligation but a moral imperative.

