Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): Our statement aligns fully with those to be
delivered by Ms. Fatima Kyari Mohammed, Permanent
Observer of the African Union to the United Nations,
and Her Excellency Ms. Jeanne d'Arc Byaje, Permanent
Observer of the Economic Community of Central
African States to the United Nations.

Allow me to congratulate and commend the
delegation of South Africa for having included this
important, relevant and timely debate in the agenda of
its presidency. It constitutes a topic of vital importance
in the efforts of the Security Council, in collaboration
with the African Union, to maintain peace and
security on the African continent, in particular, and
the international security of all States Members of the
United Nations, in general.

We also thank Secretary-General Antenio Guterres,
Ms. Liberata Mulamula, Ms. Naledi Maite and
Ms. Linda Vilakazi for their extensive and informative
briefings, which help us contextualize preventive
diplomacy, conflict prevention and resolution and to
maintain international peace and security, using good
offices, dialogue and mediation as special tools.

One of the fundamental purposes of the United
Nations, and an essential element of its mandate, is
the maintenance of international peace and security.
Since the founding of the Organization, 74 years ago,
it has on many occasions prevented controversies from
degenerating into war by persuading disputants to come
to the negotiating table and engage in dialogue instead
of resorting to force, and when conflict has broken out,
it has helped restore peace.

The most effective way to mitigate the human
suffering, immense economic cost and the aftermath of
conflicts is to prevent them from occurring in the first
place. In that regard, the United Nations, through the
General Assembly and the Security Council, together
with regional and subregional organizations, has an
important role to play in conflict prevention. The use
of diplomacy, good offices and mediation, special
envoys and political missions to the field, peacekeeping
operations, coercive measures, preventive disarmament
and recommendations of the Secretary-General, in
accordance with the Charter, provide a range of tools
for conflict prevention.

Strengthening international cooperation between
the United Nations and the African Union is
absolutely essential, since the development of Africa,
a continent abundant in all types of resources, human
and economic alike, is a precondition for peace and
harmony throughout the world. It should be a priority
for the entire international community to finance
multinational missions deployed by the United Nations
and the African Union to maintain peace and security in
the region, which are crucial for stability on the African
continent. That is why sustainable and predictable
financing is required in support of peace missions led
by the African Union, as the case may be, with budgets
managed through the United Nations.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea is firmly
persuaded of the importance of, and believes in,
preventive diplomacy, having participated in such efforts
in various African countries through consultations and
mediation with the direct participation of President
Obiang Nguema Mbasogo, who played a decisive role in
normalizing the post-electoral situation in the Republic
of the Gambia in early 2017. Our delegation therefore
reiterates its gratitude to the South African presidency
for holding a debate on this topic, which is very well
aligned with the efforts of the three African members
of the Security Council and the importance we have
attached over the past two years to cooperation between
the United Nations and the African Union on peace and
security issues.

Members will recall that, during the presidency of
C6te d'Ivoire in December 2018, we held an open debate
on cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations, with a focus on the role
of States, regional arrangements and the prevention and
resolution of conflict by the United Nations, especially
in Africa (see S/PV.8414). During the presidency of
Equatorial Guinea in February, the Security Council
held an open debate on cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations,
with a focus on silencing the guns in Africa by 2020,
exploring the mechanisms whereby the United Nations
and the African Union could collaborate to end
conflicts in Africa (see S/PV.8473). That open debate
culminated in the unanimous adoption of resolution
2457 (2019), relating to silencing the guns in Africa,
encouraging the United Nations and the African Union
to strengthen their cooperation to coordinate efforts in
conflict prevention and resolution in Africa.

A ministerial conference on silencing the guns
will be held in November in Malabo, to which the
members of the Security Council, among other
countries, will be invited. The conference will provide
a unique opportunity to tackle in depth the topic we are
discussing here today, namely, the central importance
of preventive diplomacy and conflict prevention and
resolution. Silencing the guns in Africa is the right
mechanism to end conflicts in Africa.

I should like to conclude my statement by
highlighting that the time is now ripe to assert the
important role women have to play in preventive
diplomacy and the prevention and resolution of conflicts
by peaceful means. It is therefore necessary to ensure
that women are always involved in conflict-prevention
mediation and dialogue processes.

In conclusion, in the realm of conflict prevention,
I recall the dedicated efforts made by President Obiang
Nguema Mbasogo of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea,
where, in his capacity as Chair of the African Union
in 2011, he sought to prevent the conflict in Libya and
various African Presidents to travel to Tripoli to urge
then-leader Muammar AI-Qadhafi to leave the country.
Unfortunately, many did not agree with this African
initiative, and Libya was plunged, as we know, into
the sad situation that this fellow African country is
facing today.

