Mrs. Jakubone (Lithuania): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening this open debate and I also
thank the Secretary-General for his briefing.

Lithuania aligns itself with the statement to be
made on behalf of the European Union.

The surge of violent extremism has reached an
unprecedented scope. The Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) and other terrorist groups ruthlessly
hijack religion to control territory and vital economic
resources. They callously brutalize, kill and expel all
those who do not accept their rules and beliefs. They
abduct, rape and sell to slavery women and children.
They target and slaughter minorities. Only a coherent
and coordinated response can tackle what is truly
a global and indiscriminate threat. We must all act
together to dismantle and destroy ISIL and the likes of
it, working in tandem with the countries affected by
that plague and in support of the local populations.

We call for a thorough and comprehensive
implementation of recent resolutions 2170 (2014) and
2178 (2014). ISIL and other terrorist groups in the
region must be denied safe havens. All channels of their
financing, arming and recruiting must be disrupted.
Factors conducive to their radicalization and grievances
that drive support for such terrorist groups must be
addressed with all due urgency.

The phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters
exacerbates the threat by adding a new dimension to it.
Thousands traveled from abroad to fuel the conflicts.
They have little to do with the local communities, and
they also become tools for the most reprehensible and
barbaric acts of terror. The Security Council has two
powerful tools at its disposal: the Committee pursuant
to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities, and
the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism. They were
both given strategic and practical tasks, within their
respective mandates, to tackle that scourge. We look
forward to regular updates on their work in that regard.

Iraq has been badly affected by the onslaught of
ISIL. The newly elected Government of Iraq needs
to consolidate and sustain efforts seeking a credible
process of reconciliation, overcome past sectarianism
and divisiveness. Lessons from previous leaders'
mistakes must be learned quickly. There is no time to
lose. The humanitarian situation is dire. We encourage
all parties to the conflict to ensure the safe, unhindered
passage of civilians fleeing the violence and safe access
for humanitarian actors to all affected populations.

The fierce fighting over Kobane has become
a symbol of resistance, but also recalls the Syrian
Government's refusal to fight ISIL. In the face ofISIL's
expansion, Al-Assad continues to fight his own people,
not terrorism. The humanitarian situation in and
around Syria, extreme violence and grave violations of
basic norms of international humanitarian law by all
parties to the conflict remain our biggest concern. The
denial of access, starvation as a method of war, the use
of chemical weapons and continued barrel bombings of
civilian areas constitute war crimes and crimes against
humanity. We must make sure that all perpetrators of
such crimes be brought to account. At the same time
we note that, without an inclusive political negotiation
urgently addressing all the legitimate aspirations
and grievances of all Syrian people, the situation
will continue to deteriorate. We fully support United
Nations Special Envoy Mr. Staffan de Mistura in his
efforts and look forward to his briefing in the Council.

Lebanon, too, is increasingly affected by the
situation in the region. In August, the attacks in Arsal
recalled the looming threat of expansionist extremism
to that country. Strong democratic institutions are
essential to withstand that threat, which is affecting
the fragile balance among communities in Lebanon.
We express our full support to Lebanon, including its
Armed Forces, and call on all parties to put aside their
differences and urgently elect a new president. The
political vacuum must be filled in order to strengthen
Lebanon's resilience to the dramatic challenges it faces.

In Yemen, the use of force by the Houthis, in
disregard of the National Dialogue Conference
outcomes and the Peace and National Partnership
Agreement, is a significant blow to Yemen's peaceful
transition. The occupation of civilian and government
buildings must stop. Heavy military equipment must
be handed over to the Government. The unity and
territorial integrity of Yemen must be preserved and all
political forces should unite behind crucial economic
reforms, as further fragmentation will threaten the
very survival of Yemen as a State. The Council should
no longer hesitate to use the tools at its disposal under
resolution 2140 (2014) and impose sanctions on those
who are behind the attempts to undermine the peace,
security and stability of Yemen.

Turning to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, we
commend Egypt and Norway for convening a conference
on the reconstruction of Gaza. Let us hope that this was
the last time the international community is called upon
to rebuild Gaza. There cannot be a return to the status
quo ante. We need to see a fundamental and durable
change in Gaza, within the framework of a two-State
solution. The Palestinian Authority must assume its full
responsibilities in the Gaza Strip. We are encouraged
by the recent Palestinian Cabinet meeting in Gaza. The
understanding reached on 25 September was a positive
step and should be implemented swiftly and fully.

The Government of Israel needs to lift restrictions
on the socioeconomic development of the Gaza Strip,
in particular in the field of movement and access. We
welcome the adoption of the trilateral agreement on the
reconstruction mechanism. At the same time, we remain
concerned by the recent tensions in the West Bank and
East Jerusalem, including in the Temple Mount-Haram
Al-Sharif complex, and the price tag attack on a mosque
in the West Bank. The Israeli decision to approve a plan
for new settlement activity in the area of Givat Hamatos
is another worrying development. We call on all parties
to refrain from any actions heightening tensions and
risking a reversal to open conflict. We call on the
Government of Israel to put an end to its settlement
policy in East Jerusalem and the West Bank. We also
call on the Palestinian leadership to use its United
Nations status constructively.

In conclusion, only a credible resumption of the
peace negotiations can lead to a durable solution. Our
ultimate objective remains a two-State solution, with
the State of Israel and an independent, democratic,
contiguous, sovereign and viable State of Palestine
living side by side in peace and security, and mutual
recognition. Lithuania is fully committed to working
towards that end.

