Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, Bolivia
expresses its congratulations to the French delegation
for the conduct and conclusion of a successful and
productive month in the presidency of the Security
Council. Similarly, we express our best Wishes to the
Italian delegation in the month of November and we
appreciate its initiative to hold today's briefing about
a very important topic that has not been discussed in
the Council since 2009. We hope that henceforth the
issue of refugees will be addressed more frequently,
since it is a topic intrinsically linked to international
peace and security. We also appreciate the briefing by
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
Mr. Filippo Grandi.

According to data from the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, and as
Mr. Grandi mentioned, at the end of 2016, as a result of
war, persecution, armed conflicts and violence, there
were close to 65 million people forcedly displaced
throughout the world, of more than 22 million are
refugees, 17 million of whom are under the mandate of
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
more than 5 million of whom were registered by the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East. Former Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs Stephen O'Brien has
said that we are facing the biggest humanitarian crisis
in the world since the Second World War.

The scourge of war and armed conflics forces
thousands of people to leave their countries of origin
and their homes in the hope of finding more favourable
security conditions. They have to abandon everything
that they know - their families, friends, homes and
everything they have built with their work throughout
their lives. However, their martyrdom does not end
there. Once they leave their homes, the situation they
experience, if they survive, is precarious, since they
are often categorized as a problem or a burden and
questioned about their motivations. Sometimes they are
even placed in camps and forced to stay there.

Currently, as the High Commissioner mentioned,
one of the most complicated situations involves the
more than half a million Rohingya people who had to
leave to their homes and seek refuge in Bangladesh.
We commend and highlight the willingness shown by
the Government of Bangladesh, which has taken in
thousands ofrefugees. In that context, we also commend
all those countries that receive with open arms all the
people who are fleeing the scourge of war, violence and
armed conflict.

Likewise, many of the refugees are from Syria.
After years of war and conflict, many have lost hope

and do not believe they will return to their country.
Many of them choose the European continent to start
from scratch. They are forced to do so in precarious
conditions, moving with what they can carry in a state
of poverty. Many of them have difficulties in getting
a decent job, both because of their refugee status and
because of cultural or linguistic barriers, so that even
children have had to leave school to work and help
their families.

In order to put an end to this and other crises, it
is necessary to address the root causes of war, armed
conflicts, terrorism and the threat of violence, which
in many cases are the result of interventionist and
regime-change policies. They are changes that mostly
do not translate into peaceful or democratic transitions.
In that connection, the responsibility of all of the States
Members of the United Nations is first to recognize
the historical debt owed to those countries and people
who suffer because of actions often perpetrated
through conflicts initiated, encouraged and led by
certain military and economic Powers. That is why we
believe that, by closing their borders, building walls,
criminalizing migration and denying access to refugees,
some countries promote xenophobia, discrimination
and racism. Additionally, such policies serve to fuel
the rhetoric of terrorist groups, which we are all trying
to fight, including ,of course, intolerance of different
religious beliefs.

In that connection, during the World Peoples'
Conference, held in June under the theme "For a world
without walls, towards universal citizenship", Bolivia
proposed that we work together on the concept of
universal citizenship, with the aim of decreasing, in
addition to human trafficking, the barriers that prevent
refugees from escaping war and armed conflicts.

We call on countries to reflect and to comply with
the joint obligation of solidarity to receive refugees and
offer them protection, as well as to help them look for
ways to improve their self-sufficiency, expand their
resettlement to third countries and create favourable
conditions for their voluntary return. Initiatives
such as the New York Declaration for Refugees and
Migrants, a document that expresses the political will
of world leaders to save lives, protect rights and share
that responsibility worldwide, establish the basis for
a global compact that has the potential to generate
tangible change with respect to how we address
forced displacement.

We also emphasize that the 1951 Convention relating
to the Status of Refugees and its 1967 Protocol remain
the fundamental pillars of the international refugee
protection system. Although since 1951 the regime
for the protection of refugees has been reinforced by
the adoption of regional instruments across various
continents, the protection regime is weakened by
the lack implementation. As a result, the chances for
establishing a system of mutual understanding and
collaboration diminish.

In many cases, aid is scarce, particularly in
sub-Saharan Africa. For example, the levels of funding
needed for the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees for its work in the Central
African Republic and Burundi are funded at only 9 per
cent and 11 per cent, respectively. For South Sudan,
and the neighbouring countries that host 2 million
refugees from that country, the funding level is at only
31 per cent. Similarly, the resources available for Syria
and neighbouring host countries have decreased with
respect to last year's levels.

Global social and economic trends point to
displacement continuing to increase over the next
decade, while taking on new and different forms. The
patterns of displacement will be affected by the increase
in the world's population, which will increase from its
current number of 7 billion inhabitants to more than
10 billion in 2100 - an increase that will occur mostly
in Africa and Asia. In that regard, the needs of refugees
will increase to an even greater level, thereby leading
to complex situations in providing refugee camps with
resources. Accordingly, the international community
must therefore concretely deliver on its pledges to
provide sustainable support for the countries receiving
large flows of refugees.

Lastly, in order to achieve concrete solutions,
States must work to ensure the voluntary and timely
return of refugees, as well as their integration into
societies undergoing long-term conflict situations.
Likewise, solutions for refugees must be incorporated
into the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
by increasing commitments to provide resettlement,
settlement locations and mobility for refugees, and
actively involve them in seeking solutions. All that
requires solidarity, cooperation and the sharing of
international responsibility. We must all shoulder the
responsibility that we share with regard to this crisis.

