Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We too are pleased to welcome Mr. John
Holmes, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator. On the
occasion of his first meeting with the Security Council
we wish him every success in his important post.

As confirmed in Mr. Holmes' briefing on his trip
to the region, the humanitarian situation in the Central
African Republic, Chad and the Sudan continues to be
cause for great and justified concern. We are
particularly concerned at the growing number of
refugees and internally displaced persons and of
attacks by armed groups against the civilian
population. The security context in which the United
Nations and the humanitarian agencies must work is a
particularly difficult one.

The humanitarian problems in Darfur - and
throughout the conflict area - can be resolved only
with the attainment of a stable political solution to the
crisis; this requires that all armed groups that remain
outside the Darfur Peace Agreement become part of
that agreement. We support the efforts of Mr. Jan
Eliasson, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Darfur, and of Mr. Salim Ahmed Salim, the African
Union mediator for Darfur, to attain a comprehensive
peace agreement.

Of great importance are the decisions reached,
with Mr. Holmes' assistance, by the Government of the
Sudan, and the 28 March signing of a joint
communique by the Government of the Sudan and the
United Nations on facilitating humanitarian activities
in Darfur. We expect the communique to be fully and
strictly implemented by the Government of the Sudan.

It is the Government of the Sudan that bears
primary responsibility for the safety of civilians in
Darfur. But without effective support from the United
Nations, that goal is unlikely to be met. Therefore we
deem it important speedily to implement the plan for a
phased solution to the question of Darfur, as proposed
by the Secretary-General, through a heavy support
package for the African Union mission in Darfur and
the subsequent deployment there of a hybrid operation,
with the participation of the United Nations and the
African Union.

It is important, in the context of dialogue with the
Government of the Sudan, that agreement be reached
on parameters for the United Nations peacekeeping
contribution in Darfur.

The recommendations of the Secretary-General
could help to alleviate the humanitarian situation in
Chad, the Central African Republic and southern
Sudan. The recommendations relate to the deployment
in various regions of the Sudan of a United Nations
peacekeeping force whose primary objective would be
to protect the civilian population. The specific
modalities for such a presence must be agreed upon by
the United Nations and the Governments of those
countries. We support the work done by the Secretariat
in that area.

Improving the humanitarian situation in the
Sudan, Chad and the Central African Republic will not
be possible without continuing assistance, including
food assistance, on the part of the international
community. We deem fully justified the use of the
Central Emergency Response Fund to help
underfunded humanitarian activities for the Sudan,
Chad and the Central African Republic, and we hope
that funds will be allocated on an objective, non-
policitized basis.

