Mr. Wittig (Germany): One year after the
devastating earthquake in Haiti, our thoughts are with
the victims and their families. We recall the
extraordinary sacrifice made by the personnel of the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH).

I would also like to thank Under-Secretary-
General Valerie Amos and Under-Secretary-General
Alain Le Roy and their teams, as well as the countries
contributing to MINUSTAH for their great
commitment to tackling the multitude of challenges we
are facing in Haiti. We are grateful for today's
comprehensive briefings and analysis of the situation
in Haiti, which continues to be complex and
challenging. I also thank Mr. Cazeau for his remarks.

Haiti has suffered beyond imagination. Please
allow me to share some of our views, mainly on two
aspects: the humanitarian tragedy and the international
efforts to assist the people of Haiti; and ways to
overcome the current political crisis.

First, we are grateful to all the aid workers from
the United Nations and hundreds of non-governmental
organizations in Haiti for their tireless efforts in very
difficult circumstances. They did not falter when faced
with the magnitude of the catastrophe. We
acknowledge the important role and contribution of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA) and appreciate the efforts undertaken to date.
OCHA is working in a very complex and difficult
environment, with hundreds of non-governmental
organizations working in the field. We would like to
encourage OCHA to continue its efforts with a view to
further improving coordination among all the
stakeholders involved.

We also recall that millions of private donors
demonstrated their solidarity with the hard-hit people
of Haiti in a truly unprecedented manner. These donors
expect our best efforts to ensure that their aid reaches
the people in need.

In 2011, the focus of international assistance will
continue to shift from humanitarian towards
reconstruction efforts. We commend the constructive
work of the Interim Haiti Recovery Commission.
Germany, like others, has contributed substantially
from the outset to the relief and reconstruction efforts
conducted by the United Nations and other
humanitarian organizations.

Let me mention a point of concern to us - the
protection of people from sexual violence, in particular
girls and women living in camps. We welcome ongoing
efforts to address this situation.

We should not forget the central role of the
people of Haiti in rebuilding their country. The
strength, the determination and the spirit of millions of
Haitians command our respect.

Let me turn to the second key aspect. If the
ongoing recovery, reconstruction and development are
to succeed, political stability is indispensable. The
current political crisis surrounding the first round of
the presidential elections is a cause of serious concern
to us. The Council has consistently underlined the
immense importance of free and fair elections in Haiti
to laying the political foundations on which to rebuild
the country. We welcome the continued efforts of
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Mulet
and Under-Secretary-General Le Roy to engage the
political leadership in Haiti in a dialogue aimed at
enhancing political stability and national unity.

The decision of the Government of Haiti to call
upon the Organization of American States (OAS) to
send an expert verification mission for the first round
of the presidential elections was a good one. We fully
support the recommendations of the OAS expert
verification mission contained in its report. We
commend the Provisional Electoral Council for having
provided access to information for the OAS mission.
We now urge the Provisional Electoral Council to take
the logical second step and base its decisions on the
OAS recommendations regarding the second round of
the presidential elections. Credible elections are crucial
for political stability and ongoing reconstruction efforts
in Haiti. Germany joins the call on all political leaders
in Haiti to assume their responsibilities and work
together in order to bring the electoral process to a
successful conclusion.

In conclusion, Germany remains committed to
supporting Haiti's critical needs. Together, we can
make 2011 a better year for Haiti.

