Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We join others in congratulating you, Sir, and your
delegation, on France's assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council this month, and we reiterate
our gratitude to Equatorial Guinea for a successful
presidency last month. We welcome Mr. Miroslav
Lajcak, Minister for Foreign and European Affairs of
the Slovak Republic. We are sure that his background
and leadership will enable him to make a substantial
contribution to the objectives of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) as its
Chairperson-in-Office, as he did as President of the
General Assembly at its previous session.

In accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations, Peru promotes and stresses the
importance of developing and strengthening synergies
with regional and subregional organizations with a
view to preventing and responding more effectively
to conflict situations within the framework of the
promotion of multilateralism. In that regard, we
underscore that the priorities of the OSCE for 2019,
as outlined today, converge with those established by
the United Nations, particularly many of the priorities
that guide the work of the Council. In that regard, we
believe it will be helpful to identify three areas where
we think complementarity can be exploited.

First, regarding conflict prevention, the Security
Council continues to promote the evaluation, analysis
and implementation of the sustaining peace approach,
while the efforts of the OSCE seek to build on what
it calls comprehensive security. Both visions prioritize
the crucial importance of people and their welfare. Peru
believes that the maintenance of security, including
peacebuilding, and the protection of human rights are
complementary and mutually reinforcing. We also
welcome the fact that the chairmanship of the OSCE
is emphasizing the importance of the challenges and
opportunities represented by the participation of young
people in the OSCE's agenda.

Secondly, regarding the promotion of coordination
and regional participation, Peru believes that
regional organizations have a crucial role to play in
implementing the international normative framework,
including Security Council resolutions, and should
guide the sustaining peace approach based on the
unique characteristics of each subregion. In that regard,
I would like to highlight the OSCE's commitment
and leadership in combating terrorism and violent
extremism. We especially welcome its close cooperation
with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, a
relationship that we believe should be replicated with the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate.

Thirdly, regarding political solutions, we welcome
the OSCE'S mechanisms for political support and
follow-up and for the peaceful settlement of disputes,
which have enabled it to contribute to stability in Europe
and Central Asia. We consider them a benchmark for
any regional mechanism that seeks to promote peace
and security, and in that regard we want to highlight
its work in Ukraine, especially on achieving the full
implementation of the Minsk agreements, as well as its
work in Georgia, Transnistria and Nagorno Karabakh.

In conclusion, we would like to reiterate the
importance of cooperation and the joint efforts of the
OSCE and the United Nations system, especially in
partnership with the Council, which my delegation
fully supports.

