Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurnational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We join in commemorating
and in expressing our condolences and solidarity to
the people of the United States and to the relatives of
those persons who lost their lives in the 11 September
2001 attacks. The fight against terrorism is a task that
is shared by the entire international community.

We would like to thank the United States presidency
of the Security Council for convening this important
meeting. We thank the Russian delegation for the
briefing it provided on the outcome of the tripartite
meeting of the Astana guarantors that took place in Iran
on 7 September. Having listened very carefully to that
briefing, we feel compelled to reiterate our hope that
the violence in this conflict, which has raged for more
than eight years, can be reduced across Syria, especially
in densely populated areas. We therefore welcome the
meeting held in Tehran and its joint outcome statement,
because it served to confirm support for the provisions
of the Astana agreement, which led to the establishment
of crucial de-escalation zones, which we view as one of
the international initiatives that have helped to reduce
violence and facilitate peace and stability in Syria.

We call on the parties to work towards the full
implementation of resolution 2401 (2018) and highlight
the local agreements that contributed to reducing
violence and that allowed for the evacuation of
persons in need, including persons belonging to armed
groups and their families, and facilitated the entry of
humanitarian assistance. We hope that those agreements
will continue to be upheld in order to allow the civilian
population to return to their places of origin. We recall
that any return must be voluntary, unhindered, in full
dignity and in safe conditions.

Against that backdrop, we believe that the common
denominator in this conflict must be adoption of
measures to reduce violence on the ground, to build
confidence among the parties, to alleviate humanitarian
suffering and to advance initiatives, such as those
previously mentioned, aimed at finding a political and
peaceful solution to the conflict in general. However,
the current priority is to take measures to protect the
2.9 million civilians who live in Idlib province and the
surrounding areas. We eagerly await the outcomes of
yesterday and today's meetings, which are taking place
in Geneva, among Special Envoy Staffan De Mistura
and the Astana guarantors.

We believe that any effort undertaken or any measure
taken within the framework of resolution 2401 (2018)
aimed at combating terrorist groups designated by the
Security Council or armed groups in order to separate
them from the civilian population must also take into
consideration the protection of civilian lives within
the context of international law. Along the same lines,
we believe the political process needs to be bolstered
on the basis of the Sochi outcome document and the
establishment of a constitutional committee, a process
that needs to be facilitated by the United Nations within
the framework of the Geneva process and in accordance
with the provisions of resolution 2254 (2015). We recall
that the principles agreed upon in the Sochi statement
do not only reinforce the political process, but they also
serve to defend and uphold the rule of law and respect
for people's rights and to combat the threat of terrorism
and violent extremism, which lead to terrorism.

We emphasize that the Tehran meeting served to
foster dialogue aimed at promoting the protection
of civilians and the provision of humanitarian
assistance to them, including the 6.2 million internally
displaced persons throughout Syria and specifically
the 1.4 million who are located in Idlib province. We
underscore the initiative to convene an international
conference on Syrian refugees and internally displaced
persons, as well as the need to keep the issue of the
release of detainees and the identification of missing
persons on the agenda.

Finally, we express our rejection of any attempt to
fragment Syria or to divide it along sectarian lines. On
the contrary, in accordance with the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations and with respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of that country, we
insist that the conflict in Syria has no military solution
and that the only way to resolve it is through an inclusive
political process of dialogue and consensus, led by and
for the Syrian people, that allows for a peaceful and
lasting solution to the current situation.

