Mr. Ali (Kazakhstan): I would like to join previous
speakers in thanking Secretary-General Guterres,
President Mogae, the Chair of the Joint Monitoring
and Evaluation Commission, and civil-society
representative Ms. Sunday for their briefings.

Kazakhstan fully commends and supports the
Secretary-General's commitment to finding a peaceful
solution to the conflict in South Sudan, for which
there is no military option. We should strengthen
the capacities of the Transitional Government of
National Unity to address the political, economic, and
humanitarian challenges that it is facing, including
the full implementation of the Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan. We stress the importance of the work of the
Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission (JMEC)
in monitoring and overseeing the implementation of the
Agreement, as well as the tasks of the Government. In
order to make JMEC's work more effective, all South
Sudanese parties should implement their commitments
in full and cooperate fully with the Chair of JMEC.

Kazakhstan supports an inclusive national
dialogue aimed at tangible results, in which all leaders
in the conflict can participate. We concur with the
African Union (AU) High Representative to South
Sudan, Mr. Konare, that that dialogue must be led
by independent personalities who enjoy wide public
support. In that regard, we welcome President Salva
Kiir's promise to ensure the safety and freedom of all
of the participants. We must seek all possible ways to
support the AU High Representative's shuttle diplomacy
in promoting dialogue and ensuring the implementation
of the Agreement.

The chances of achieving the goal of ending the
conflict by political means and mediation will be
further enhanced by closer collaboration between the
African Union, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), the United Nations and other
stakeholders. We therefore encourage the international
community to support the Transitional Government in
furthering that important political process. We agree
that IGAD should play a leading role in resolving the
conflict in South Sudan, because it has always been
at the forefront in addressing problems in the region.
We look forward to the forthcoming joint consultative
meeting between the African Union Peace and Security
Council and the Security Council at which issues
relating to South Sudan will be considered.

The human suffering caused by the serious
famine in some regions of South Sudan demands the
international community's urgent attention. The effects
ofthe famine can be significantly alleviated ifthe South
Sudanese Government cooperates positively with the
United Nations and humanitarian actors by facilitating
access to conflict-affected areas and by providing free
movement to the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS).

We are also concerned about the recruitment and
use of children, in violation of international law, and
about sexual and gender-based violence, both of which
have reached alarming proportions. Closer coordination
between UNMISS and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Sexual Violence in Conflict is essential if we are to
address those issues and end impunity.

The recommendations of the AU Commission
of Inquiry to put transitional justice mechanisms in
place, including a hybrid court, should be speedily
implemented with the technical assistance of the United
Nations Secretariat.

The mandate of UNMISS has been impeded for
several months now, owing to the imposition of new
immigration conditions affecting UNMISS personnel,
and that procedure must be addressed. Likewise, the
speedy deployment of a regional protection force is
essential to reinforcing the overall security in the
country. A full operational UNMISS and regional
protection force would contribute significantly to
improving the security situation. Kazakhstan is ready
to join the multilateral action to propel South Sudan
on its path towards peace and security, which are the
prerequisites for regional stability.

