Mr. Domingos Augusto (Angola): I would like
thank you, Madam, for chairing this meeting of the
Security Council on an important issue that concerns us
all. Indeed, in all its forms and expressions, inclusion is
a theme of utmost importance in this globalized world,
where expressions of intolerance and hatred, derived
from exclusion, have become a key feature of our
societies and constitute a grave threat to international
peace and security. I take this opportunity to commend
the Chilean presidency of the Security Council for the
month of January for its excellent work in advancing the
important mission entrusted to the Security Council.

The theme proposed by the Chilean presidency
for this debate is of crucial importance in the
contemporary world, as the multifaceted aspects
of inclusion - including the territorial, political,
economic, ethnic and cultural aspects - are of great
complexity and are not linked exclusively to conflict
and to international peace and security. The issue of
inclusion also concerns historically consolidated States
that, after many centuries of existence as State entities,
have yet to address the challenges of inclusion. The
existence of centrifugal forces resulting from various
levels of exclusion in some of these States is made
evident by the emergence of secessionist expressions
in countries where, from our point of view, they would
normally be unlikely to arise, given those countries'
peaceful and democratic natures.
An important element for analysis, as referred
to in the concept paper for this meeting (S/2015/6, annex), is the issue of territorial inclusion. Indeed, this
is the starting point in ensuring that all the regions
and peoples that comprise a particular country are
treated alike, thereby strengthening national identity
and safeguarding territorial integrity. Territorial
exclusion is thus the starting point of centrifugal
forces that can lead to the territorial fragmentation of
States. Conversely, national inclusion gives all citizens
a sense of belonging and contributes decisively to
national cohesion and social harmony, and thus to the
effective mobilization of citizens towards achieving
great national goals related to peace and harmonious
development.

It is in multi-ethnic countries that the challenges
of inclusion prove to be more complex. In order to
overcome the natural tendency to exclude others based
on differences, it is essential that States address the
problems of ethnicity with particular sensitivity so as
to prevent the exclusion of any group from its national
community and promote full coexistence and equal
opportunities for all. Social inclusion is also imperative
to building societies with free and responsible citizens
who are aware of their duties and rights. In it lies the
culture of peace, tolerance and full acceptance of the
differences inherent to social plurality. Social inclusion
entails the need to fully mainstream gender issues
in the formulation of national policies. Indeed, in
today's world it is clear that women play a key role in
the economic, social and cultural lives of peoples and
countries, and their exclusion markedly impoverishes
the life of societies that exclude them.

Economic exclusion is often based on the
exploitation of well-defined social strata and often
resides in the concept of superiority of one particular
group over the rest of society. It is in general the root
cause of social conflicts that often culminate in acts of
extreme violence. By contrast, economic inclusion, as
an expression of the participation of the entire social
fabric in the enjoyment of national wealth, remains
tangible and crucial for the consolidation of the sense
of belonging, and for the effective participation in and
enjoyment of the work of each individual.

Finally, cultural inclusion, particularly in the
context of multicultural societies, is of vital importance
to the growth of social and national cohesion. Provided
there is respect for the differences and the intrinsic
nature of each culture that composes the national

cultural fabric, it is also an asset of great significance
and value.
Political stability is the foundation on which rests
the economic and social development of any country.
We are aware, however, that political stability is not an
end in itself. It should be based on a suitable system of
participation in governance by political forces and by
all social strata. This means that inclusive governance
is the best guarantee for obtaining dividends from
effective representation for economic development,
social harmony and effective human development.
Democratic and participatory governance also
guarantees that even when situations arise that may
cause feelings of exclusion in a given society, they can
be resolved in a peaceful and democratic manner in the
search for consensus in decision-making, particularly
on the key issues of national life.

Identifying and acting swiftly whenever signs of
exclusion arise in a specific country are wide-ranging
objectives that it is incumbent upon the United Nations,
regional and subregional organizations, and relevant
national actors to pursue. Indeed, national Governments,
international and regional organizations should develop
early-warning mechanisms for integrated actions to be
conducted at the national, regional or international level
in order to act immediately on the causes of tension and
misunderstanding before they degenerate into conflict.
We believe that as a facet of international life, conflict-
prevention is an important factor in building a more
peaceful world and one that better identifies with the
values of peace.

In post-conflict situations in societies that are
generally dysfunctional, it is imperative to formulate
policies to harmonize and strengthen political, security,
development, human rights and rule-of-law aspects
with a view to reconciliation, good governance and
the strengthening of social cohesion. In countries
emerging from armed conflict, peacebuilding must
be carried out as part of an inclusive process that
overcomes misunderstandings, restores confidence and
lays the foundations for lasting peace. This requires
building inclusive societies through the implementation
of appropriate policies, particularly in the fields of
education, social dialogue and social and economic
inclusion.

Angola, a country in a post-conflict situation,
has been conducting its peacebuilding process within
parameters that are consistent with the main elements
that we have stressed and has sought to undertake
that process in an environment that has enormous
development challenges. Since 2002, the Government
has been conducting a broad economic and social
reintegration programme for segments of the population
that were marginalized during the armed conflict,
especially ex-combatants and their families.

Angola has also sought to build a society of free
and responsible citizens, developing policies of social
inclusion for that purpose. In that respect, the promotion
of gender has been an element in the formulation of
Government policies, namely, concerning the rural
woman, who is gradually taking a more assertive
role, thus occupying her rightful place in the rural
community. With a View to translating that priority
into our national policy, in line with the concern of the
international community regarding the role of women
in peace and development, 2015 has been proclaimed
the Year of the Rural Woman.

In general, our appraisal on the role of women in
Angolan society is quite positive. Indeed, there has
been remarkable progress in the advancement of women
in recent years, and women have come to occupy an
important place in the political, economic and social
life of our country.

The economic growth of recent years should be
reflected in tangible economic and social well-being
for all citizens of Angola. With that objective in mind,
the Angolan authorities have been developing economic
policies aimed at ensuring that the national community
is included in the gains obtained in recent years.

Lastly, Angola fully supports the presidential
statement (S/PRST/2015/3) adopted as the outcome of
this very constructive debate.

