Mr. Hoang Chi Trung (Viet Nam): First of all, I
wish to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
important debate. I thank Mr. Alain Le Roy, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, and
Ms. Susana Malcorra, Under-Secretary-General for
Field Support, for their presentations and introduction
of some preliminary findings and proposals under the
New Horizon initiative for United Nations
peacekeeping.

Peacekeeping operations have beyond a doubt
established a niche role in the spectrum of options
available for the maintenance of international peace
and security. Together with other collective efforts to
assist countries emerging from conflict to achieve a
steady state of stability, peacekeeping has proven to be
a versatile tool and a credible mechanism to deter or
reverse conflicts and has accumulated a good track
record of legitimacy when deployed appropriately.

Since the beginning of the new millennium,
however, contemporary peacekeeping has faced one of
the most critical moments in its history as a result of
the evolving demands for complex and
multidimensional mandates, the sheer overstretch of
authorized troop and police availability and capability,
the changing nature of conflicts and the increasingly
unpredictable security environment for peacekeepers.

With an annual budget of well over $8 billion and
the mounting pressures of the global financial crisis,
peacekeeping missions have had to shoulder a daunting
agenda of deploying at a rapid pace into remote areas,
maintaining economies of scale, laying the groundwork
for sustainable peace dividends and ensuring
achievable mandates with clear benchmarks and within
specific timelines.

In the meantime, the unsustainable equilibrium
between costs and capacities that vary across
operations continues to expose looming gaps among
those who take decisions on peacekeeping operations,
those who implement them, those who allocate
resources, those who have to implement decisions on
the ground and the recipient countries.

Sharpening the peacekeeping tool to make it
more effective and successful is a continuous process
of the Organization. The non-paper on the New
Horizon initiative to be formally introduced by the
Secretariat should receive thorough consideration by
the Security Council and the broader United Nations
membership, as well as other stakeholders in
peacekeeping activities, in order to enable us to draw
good lessons and to make peacekeeping ever more
effective in the interests of international peace and
security.

The challenges emanating from the expansion
and complexity of today's peacekeeping make it
necessary to review existing practices and formulate a
comprehensive strategy that cuts across the whole
range of activities from the design of concepts and
policies to proper and comprehensive planning; from
objective analysis of ground realities to the formulation
of clear, realistic and achievable mandates and the
provision of commensurate resources; from ensuring
the safety and security of personnel to integrated
command and control; and from the implementation of
mandates to sound drawdown and exit strategies.

Against that backdrop, since the launch of the
Brahimi report (8/2000/809) nine years ago, the
Secretariat has undertaken a number of initiatives to
enhance the effectiveness, impact and efficiency of
peacekeeping operations. A good number of efforts are
also under way among the various bodies involved in
the decision-making process, such as the Fifth
Committee, the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations, the Peacebuilding Commission, United
Nations agencies and programmes, and the Working
Group on Peacekeeping Operations.

It is therefore fundamental to decisively improve
the coordination of these efforts so as to avoid the
duplication of resources, share best practices and
maximize complementary distributions of responsibilities.
In so doing, the exercise of mandates and reforms on the
peacekeeping track should be carried out in accordance
with the purposes and principles of the United Nations
Charter and universally recognized guidelines, namely,
the consent of the parties, the non-use of force except in
self-defence, total impartiality, respect for the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of States, and non-interference in
their internal affairs.

The entire United Nations membership and
international partners can have a role to play in helping
to alleviate the manifold burdens and tackle the varied
obstacles confronting peacekeeping. Troop-contributing
countries (TCCS) and police-contributing countries
(PCCs), most of which are non-aligned and developing
countries and bear the overwhelming majority of human
and material costs of missions, should be involved early
and fully in the preparation, planning, monitoring,
conduct and evaluation of peacekeeping operations so
that their operational experience and intellectual input
can contribute to the appropriate, effective and timely
decision-making and policy-formulating process both at
Headquarters and in the field.

It is henceforth crucial to strengthen the
triangular communication among TCCs and PCCs, the
Security Council and the Secretariat, as laid out in
resolution 1353 (2001) and the note by the President of
the Security Council contained in document S/2002/56.
Cooperation between the Organization and regional
and subregional organizations may have added value if
it helps us to fully comprehend the nature of the
situation and enables missions to achieve their intended
objectives, provided that those relationships are
regulated on the basis of Chapter VIII of the Charter.

Given the specific limits and comparative
advantages that they possess, peacekeeping operations
should not be considered to be panaceas for the
definitive settlements of conflicts, which can be
achieved only by addressing the comprehensive
political, security, economic and humanitarian
dimensions of a given problem.

Experience has shown that, when operations are
deployed in inappropriate circumstances, the results
can be disastrous for the population in the conflict
area, for the peacekeepers themselves and even for the
viability of the instrument of peacekeeping.
Conversely, an in-depth understanding of the specific
country setting, the sequenced application of the right
tools in response to the underlying conflict dynamics,
and the early synchronization of steps leading towards
a more normalized situation are the best guarantors of a
smooth, gradual transition to early recovery and the
best deterrence against the risks incurred by
peacekeepers.
In the final analysis, finding a lasting solution to
a conflict requires us to go beyond military and
security measures, incorporating broader and more
effective long-term responses that address the root
causes of the conflict and promote national ownership
of and contribution to future stability. It is in this
context that the Organization's potential on parallel
tracks should be further strengthened, above all in the
areas of preventive diplomacy, conflict prevention,
mediation, peacemaking and peacebuilding.

