Mr. Burleigh (United States of America): It is a
pleasure to see you in the Chair, Mr. President.

In the last several years, a new type of threat to
international peace and security has come into prominence.
It often emanates not from external dangers but from
internal crises that destabilize a State and risk drawing its
neighbours into a downward spiral of collapse and conflict.

In a number of cases, opposing sides in such countries
have signed peace accords that led to United Nations
peacekeeping operations to help the parties implement the
accords. Unlike traditional peacekeeping operations, whose
principal objective was to monitor and report on a ceasefire,
these peacekeeping operations have had multifaceted tasks
- for example, in the mandates for past operations in
Cambodia, Mozambique and Rwanda and in a number of
the United Nations peacekeeping operations under way
today.

Members of such peacekeeping operations have been
called upon, inter alia, to provide security, monitor police,
prepare for elections and monitor respect for human
rights. To accomplish these tasks, the missions have
included sizeable civilian as well as large military
components, with the civilian members involved in
activities that would contribute to a lasting peace after the
peacekeepers left. In nine of the current 16 peacekeeping
operations, the services of civilian police are required to
help meet public security challenges in such countries as
Bosnia, Haiti, Angola and the Central African Republic.
Indeed, civilian police now comprise about 20 per cent of
all peacekeeping forces.

Some of the above tasks, however, may go beyond
peacekeeping to the area of peace-building, a transition
that we in the United Nations need to understand and
manage better.

In terms of this transition from peacekeeping to
peace-building, we see three sets of concerns - the
division of labour between peacekeeping and peace-
building; resources; and coordination.

First, the division of labour between peacekeeping
and peace-building: Where should the line be drawn?

Peacekeeping mandates need to include some short-
term activities that will enhance the ability of
peacekeeping troops, military observers and/or civilian
police to stabilize the immediate situation and maintain
the momentum for peace. These activities would include
steps such as demobilization, disarmament and
reintegration of combatants, and demining. They may also
include providing support for elections or short-term
support for public security institutions through monitoring
and mentoring of local police.

However, longer-term support to rebuild or
restructure basic public security institutions, such as
police, prisons and the judiciary, fall beyond the scope of
peacekeeping and into the area of peace-building.
Admittedly, there is a "twilight zone" between
peacekeeping and peace-building, and it will not always
be possible to draw a clear distinction. Judgements will
need to be made. In addition, while some peace-building
activities might occur only after a peacekeeping operation
ends, they also might well be part of the peace accord
which the peacekeeping mission is intended to support.

In any case, both the United Nations and the host
Government need to focus early on longer-term peace-
building tasks and seek the appropriate domestic,
multilateral, and bilateral backing for them. Ideally, the

 

Security Council should work out with the host Government
a timetable for accomplishing specific objectives in peace-
building to contribute to the stability which the
peacekeeping operations help provide.

Secondly, resources. Investing in peace-building is
investing for the future stability and prosperity of a country
that has suffered the ravages of conflict. Countries that seek
peacekeeping support from the international community
need to recognize that it is just as important for them to
marshal resources to secure the peace - through peace-
building - as it was to marshal resources for conflict in
the first place. United Nations agencies, international
financial institutions, bilateral donors - and, perhaps most
important, the host countries themselves - need to
understand that devoting a share of limited resources to
furthering good governance will help create a climate in
which economic growth can occur. Without stability,
security, the rule of law and respect for human rights,
resources spent on development will yield little fruit. And
without the clear engagement of the host country in
achieving these objectives, outside assistance will ultimately
fail.

On one thing we can easily agree - that the United
Nations itself will never have adequate resources to do the
enormous job that serious peace-building entails. But it can
play an important role as coordinator of the United Nations
system and the international community as well.

So the third concern we must address is coordination.
Coordinating peacekeeping and peace-building activities and
moving a country from conflict to peace-building requires
strong leadership. As determined by the Security Council,
this political leadership can be provided by a special
representative of the Secretary-General, a special
coordinator, a transitional administrator or other high
representative of the Secretary-General. It will be
particularly important to clarify lines of authority among the
United Nations agencies involved to establish the basis for
full cooperation.

Whatever the title of the individual, he or she will
need to interact credibly with heads of Governments and
representatives of United Nations agencies, the World Bank,
regional development banks, international financial
institutions and other organizations contributing to peace-
building resources. Civil society, the private sector and non-
governmental organizations are likewise an important part
of this mix. From experience in countries like Liberia, we
know it is important for humanitarian and development
assistance donors across the board to get involved in peace-
building early, to coordinate closely and to share
experiences from previous endeavours.

The United States welcomes the renewed interest in
post-conflict peace-building, and commends you, our
President, for taking the initiative to organize today's
discussion.

