Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): I have the honour to speak on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries. At the outset, we would like to congratulate the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam on its assumption of the Security Council presidency and pay our respects to His Excellency Mr. Pham Binh Minh, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Viet Nam. We should also like to express our gratitude to the delegation of Viet Nam for having organized this open debate to mark the seventy-fifth anniversary of the Charter of the United Nations and for submitting the concept note on the topic contained (S/2020/1, annex). We welcome all of the new elected members of the Security Council - Estonia, the Niger, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Tunisia and Viet Nam - and wish them and their delegations success. We are also grateful to Cete d'Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, Kuwait, Peru and Poland for their important contributions to the work of the Council during their tenure. Armed conflicts, aggressive expansionist policies, terrorism, separatism, transnational organized crime and extremism, coupled with human rights abuses, financial crises and environmental degradation, continue to affect millions of people around the world. The Movement is committed to supporting multilateralism with the United Nations at _ its core. Preserving and strengthening the values of multilateralism and international cooperation, which underpin the Charter of the United Nations and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, is fundamental in promoting and supporting the three pillars of the United Nations, namely, peace and security, development and human rights. At its eighteenth Summit, held in Baku on 25 and 26 October under the theme "Upholding the Bandung Principles to ensure a concerted and adequate response to the challenges of the contemporary world", the Heads of State and Government of the Non-Aligned Movement reaffirmed the validity of the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and the principles and norms of international law as indispensable in preserving and promoting peace and security, the rule of law, economic development and social progress and all human rights for all. The strict observance of the principles of international law and the fulfilment in good faith of the obligations assumed by States, in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, are of the greatest importance for the maintenance of international peace and security. The Non-Aligned Movement reiterates its continued concern over the current difficult and complex situation in the field of disarmament and international security. In that regard, the Movement calls for renewed efforts to resolve the current impasse in achieving nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation in all its aspects. The Movement expresses its deep concern at the catastrophic humanitarian consequences of any use of nuclear weapons and, in that context, reaffirms the need for all States to comply with applicable international law, including international humanitarian law, at all times. Every State has the duty to refrain, in its international relations, from the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any State, or in any other manner inconsistent with the purposes of the United Nations. Such a threat or use of force constitutes a violation of international law and the Charter of the United Nations and shall never be recognized as a lawful means of settling international issues. The Non-Aligned Movement is committed to supporting and promoting the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and the principles and norms of international law, including those related to the territorial integrity of States and the inviolability of their international borders; the inadmissibility of the use of force; and non-interference in the internal affairs of States. That also extends to the right to self-determination of peoples under foreign occupation and colonial or alien domination, as well as to denounce, and demand the repeal of, unilateral coercive measures against Member States that are not authorized by relevant organs of the United Nations, or are inconsistent with the principles of international law or the Charter of the United Nations - given their extraterritorial implications and illegal character - or violate human rights and prevent the full economic and social development of the peoples subjected to them. The Movement reaffirms and underscores its principled position and commitment with regard to the promotion of the pacific settlement of disputes in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, international law and the relevant resolutions, including those adopted by the Security Council. In that context, we also emphasize the significant role played by the International Court of Justice, the principal judicial organ of the United Nations, in promoting and encouraging the settlement of international disputes by peaceful means in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and the Statute of the Court. The Movement urges the Security Council, the General Assembly and other organs of the United Nations and its specialized agencies duly authorized to make greater use of the International Court of Justice as a source of advisory opinions and interpretation of international law within the scope of their activities. The Movement, faithful to its commitment to strengthening its role as an anti-war and peace-loving force, reaffirms its determination to work for the establishment of a peaceful and prosperous world and a just and equitable world order. We also renew our determination to work for a multipolar world through the strengthening of the United Nations and multilateral processes, which are indispensable to our efforts to promote the interests of our nations and humankind as a whole. Allow me to conclude with several remarks in my national capacity. The Charter of the United Nations rests on the goal of developing friendly relationships among nations based on respect for one other's sovereignty and territorial integrity, without pursuing any policy of expansionism, aggression, occupation or ethnic cleansing. Yesterday we witnessed Armenia's renewed attempt to mislead the Security Council. Armenia's speculations and claims with regard to the right of self-determination have nothing in common with that principle as it is set forth in the United Nations Charter, the 1975 Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Helsinki Final Act and other international documents. Armenia's misstatement is particularly unacceptable, as it was delivered in the Security Council (see S/PV.8699), which adopted four resolutions on the Armenia-Azerbaijan conflict, namely, resolutions 822 (1993), 853 (1993), 874 (1993) and 884 (1993). The mandate of the ongoing peace process, mediated by the OSCE Minsk Group, is based on those Security Council resolutions. The immediate, complete and _ unconditional withdrawal of Armenian forces from the Nagorno Karabakh region and the other seven adjacent occupied territories of the Republic of Azerbaijan and the restoration of the territorial integrity of my country within its internationally recognized borders represent a basic premise for the settlement of the conflict. That is what Armenia must fulfil entirely. In that connection, I would like to quote the Secretary-General, who yesterday stated the following: "While the Charter and its purposes and principles remain as relevant as ever, our tools must adapt to new realities. We must use them with greater determination and creativity. That includes ensuring the implementation of the Security Council's decisions by Member States pursuant to Article 25 of the Charter." (S/PV.8699. p. 3)
