Mr. Pal (India): It is a particular pleasure to see
you, Sir, presiding over the Council. It is of course a pity
that I cannot speak to you in the mother tongue that we
share. As this is the first time my delegation has spoken
in the Council this year, permit me to congratulate your
delegation, as well as those of Jamaica, Mali, Tunisia, and
Ukraine, on being elected to the Security Council.

Until this morning, we thought that we were being
invited to speak on "The maintenance of peace and
security: humanitarian action and the Security Council".
This was itself the third recension of the theme. Today,
we see that there has been a further change, and the
Council is in fact discussing "Maintaining peace and
security: Humanitarian aspects of issues before the
Security Council". The fact that the 15 members of the
Council have so clearly been unable to agree even on
wording shows how controversial the underlying concept
is. Humanitarian action seems to have become, in the
Council, the love that dare not speak its name.

Though fudged, the theme still poses a question that
has not yet been answered. In almost any issue that has
to do with human beings there must be a humanitarian
aspect, but does that permit the Council to take
humanitarian action? No one has defined what
humanitarian action means, and the jury is out on whether
actions described by the actors as humanitarian have been
helpful. Some actions, driven only by humanitarian
concerns, have had disastrous consequences - the road
to hell is paved with good intentions. Others, essentially
self-serving, have provided some humanitarian benefits,
and therefore have been passed off as humanitarian
action. Many of those could indeed be described as issues
having humanitarian aspects.

 

The Security Council is a creature of the United
Nations Charter. The Charter, which in Article 24 conferred
on the Security Council primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, set out in
some detail in Chapters VI, VII, VIII and XII what it could
do to discharge its mandate. Nowhere does it speak of
humanitarian action or aspects. It would of course be
immediately argued that neither is peacekeeping mentioned
in the Charter, though that is now the bread and
many-flavoured butter of the Council's work. The crucial
difference is this: Article 24 also made it clear that the
Security Council acts on behalf of the membership of the
United Nations, and this wider membership agreed that
peacekeeping should be set up as a practical instrument. On
what humanitarian action is, and whether the Council
should have a role in it, there is no such agreement; the
debate in the General Assembly last year made that clear.

It also became clear from that debate, and from what
we have heard today in the Council, that those who
advocate humanitarian action believe it should be used in
three broad scenarios: against massive violations of
international humanitarian law, to stop serious and
widespread abuses of human rights and to provide relief for
acute human suffering. Does the Council have a role here?

Humanitarian laws are codified in the Geneva
Conventions of 1949. Though adopted soon after the United
Nations was set up, there is no mention in them of the
United Nations or of a role for any of its organs. This was
not by accident. We are signatories to the Conventions, we
abide by them, and we believe that they must be universally
respected. It is true that terrible violations have been
committed, including in 1971, on the territory of your
country, Mr. President, Bangladesh. You must have
therefore listened with astonishment to the Permanent
Representative of Pakistan's vapourings about human rights
violations. But the Conventions have inbuilt provisions to
deal with contraventions and abuses. None of them call for
action by the Security Council.

Human rights are also increasingly codified. Starting
with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, we moved
on to the two International Covenants and to the many
conventions and their protocols that now protect human
rights and lay down the process through which lapses are
dealt with. None of these instruments, which legally bind
those who are party to them - which most States are -
ask the Security Council to act even when there are major
violations of their provisions. Human rights continue to
evolve, but the most authoritative, recent and
comprehensive statement of the collective view of the
international community is the Vienna Declaration and
Programme of Action, adopted by the World Conference
on Human Rights, held in Vienna in 1993. In the
preparatory process for the Conference, a linkage between
human rights and peacekeeping was specifically
discussed, and rejected.

Because there is no comparable legal framework for
humanitarian relief, it might seem to be a greyer area, but
it is the sovereign right of a State to determine whether it
needs humanitarian assistance or not. If it chooses not to,
it can hardly be forced by the Council, or any other body,
to ask for or to accept it. Coercion or the use of force
would be wrong in law, violating Article 2, paragraph 7,
of the Charter. International law, as it stands today, is
clear. There is no provision in it for humanitarian
intervention, which is shorthand for a right to take
humanitarian action. As examples I offer the following.

The 1970 Declaration concerning Friendly Relations
rules out any use of force between States not explicitly
permitted in the United Nations Charter and prohibits
intervention in the domestic jurisdiction of a State for any
reason whatever.

In the 1986 Nicaragua case, the International Court
of Justice ruled that the Declaration reflects the
prohibition on the use of force under customary
international law and rejected what was in effect claimed
as a right of humanitarian intervention.

In the 1975 Helsinki Final Act of the Conference on
Security and Cooperation in Europe, the participating
States adopted a Declaration on Principles, in which they
resolved to refrain in their bilateral and international
relations from the threat or use of force, emphasizing that

"No consideration may be invoked to serve to
warrant resort to the threat or use of force in
contravention of this principle."

International law, like any other law, changes and
evolves. As it presently stands, though, if the Security
Council took humanitarian action, it would violate
international law, not stretch it. In addition, there are two
important reasons why the Council should be discouraged
from going down this path.

First, when the Council acts under Chapter VII, all
Member States have to respect its decisions. Even an
action illegal under international law would be legitimized
if the Council authorized it. The wider membership, on

 
whose behalf it acts, might disagree, but would be
powerless to undo the damage to law. Therefore the
Council must not act in ways that would change, undermine
or seek to develop international law; that is not its function,
and it has been given no such power by the Charter.

Secondly, if it decided to authorize or to take
humanitarian action, the Council would claim to act on
behalf of the international community. However, the
Council's membership is unrepresentative, and in its
methods of work it does not welcome or accept the views
of the wider membership. These are problems that are the
subject of ongoing debate elsewhere. There would be
well-founded fears that the Council would act not for
humanitarian, but for less lofty, reasons.

We are told that it is all very well for us, in the
comfort of New York, to debate the finer points of law, but
when there is intolerable human suffering the international
community cannot just sit back; it has the right to take
humanitarian action to save lives and relieve suffering.
Since all societies agree that rights and duties go hand in
hand, then there must be a duty to take humanitarian action,
and not just in the Council.

Simply as examples: the target of 0.7 per cent of gross
domestic product for official development assistance was
accepted by developed countries because they agreed that
this was essential to help alleviate the terrible human
suffering that underdevelopment and poverty bring with it.
Will the Council demand, under Chapter VII, that the States
that accepted this commitment honour it?

A State where the crops have failed and faced with
famine should be able to attack a neighbour and rob its
granaries, claiming that it had the duty to take humanitarian
action to protect the lives of its people.

The Council believes AIDS is a security threat. Thirty-
five million people are infected, and tens of thousands die
each day. The pharmaceutical companies that have the
monopoly on the treatment keep the price unaffordably
high, using Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property
Rights (TRIPS), to protect their profits. Should a State
ravaged by AIDS have the right to take these medicines by
force, if it can, citing a humanitarian duty to protect its
citizens? Will the Security Council decide, under Chapter
VII, that TRIPS does not apply for medicines that treat
AIDS?

I do not have to belabour the point. This is a recipe
for chaos and lawlessness in inter-State relations. It would
destroy the edifice of international relations, built on
respect for State sovereignty and non-interference in the
internal affairs of States. It would, in fact, return us to the
freebooting practices which the United Nations was
created to end. And in international relations, as within
States, when the law is bent or stretched, it is the weak
who bear the brunt.

What then of the actions the Security Council has
already taken or authorized, and which have been
described as humanitarian? Kosovo is cited as a case in
point, but last year the bombing of Kosovo was described
as humanitarian action. The Council was drawn in, after
the bombing stopped, and set up the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). Six
months later, the Special Rapporteur for Human Rights in
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia reported that the only
change was that the human rights of a different set of
minorities were being massively violated.

There is in fact a very troubling pattern usually
ignored or not acknowledged. In several countries,
because of the suspicion now engendered that
humanitarian assistance is driven by political motives, and
that those who take humanitarian action also take sides,
parties to a conflict have either targeted humanitarian
workers or those they work for, or have refused them
access. These fears can be allayed only if humanitarian
assistance returns to its roots and humanitarian action is
seen as apolitical, neutral and offered at request, in
accordance with the guiding principles so clearly
enunciated by the General Assembly in its resolution
46/182. The more the Security Council tries, perhaps with
the best motives, to arrogate to itself the role to protect
and promote humanitarian action, the more it is likely to
work against the best interests of civilian populations at
risk. The first of these humanitarian actions after the end
of the cold war, in Somalia, ended disastrously, with
repercussions which I do not need to remind the Council
about.

The Secretary-General has often said that the
international community does not respond consistently to
humanitarian emergencies. In 1998 natural disasters
caused losses estimated at over $90 billion; preventable
and curable diseases killed millions more that violence
did. And yet it is on the macabre that the media fastens,
often arbitrarily, sometimes with more political motives,
driving decisions on which disasters the world and this
Council should focus on and when. The media is not
objective; it fixes the event, chooses the spotlight and
relegates others to the shadows. It picks and chooses and

 

creates "facts" and sweeps others away. It conjures up
politically convenient realities. We have seen this in one
theatre of conflict after another: the independent media as
the handmaiden of power.

The Secretary-General's report to the fifty-fourth
session of the General Assembly last year kicked off a
lively debate on humanitarian intervention. The Foreign
Ministers of the Non-Aligned Movement were categorical
in the communique issued after their meeting on 23
September 1999: there was, they said, no right of
humanitarian intervention. This was the collective view of
countries representing two thirds of the membership of the
United Nations. The Security Council, whose mandate is to
act on behalf of the wider membership, would do well to
pay heed to their voice.

But can we stand by and let people die, ask the
proponents of humanitarian intervention, because
international law does not permit it? Put like that, it places
us on the horns of a sharp moral dilemma. But that is not
the right question. When it addresses humanitarian crises,
the international community naturally focuses on the
immediate problem, not on the longer-term consequences.
Superior firepower, mandated by the Council, might check
forced migration, unblock food aid or put an end to
genocide by paramilitary gangs, but unless we secure the
conditions from which a measure of stability and prosperity
might emerge, these evils tend to return. This longer-term
consequence of humanitarian actions undertaken by the
Security Council would imply that the United Nations
should stay the course until a divided society heals itself.
But, as with peacekeeping in the early 1990s, the number,
size, complexity and duration of sustained humanitarian
action would soon exhaust the coffers of the United
Nations, forcing a sudden withdrawal. As then, that would
make matters worse for the populations affected and for the
United Nations.

