Ms. Mejia Velez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): We
are grateful for today's debate on the situation in Haiti.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement that
will be made by the Ambassador of Peru on behalf of
the Group of Friends of Haiti.

I thank, in particular, Special Representative
Honore for her briefing on the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2017/223) and for her tireless commitment
to Haiti over the past four years. Everyone here has
stated that it is encouraging that tangible progress has

been made in a situation that, just a few months ago,
seemed dire on many fronts.

I would also like to acknowledge the Government
and the people of Haiti for demonstrating their ability
and resilience to hold free elections, which illustrates
their respect for democratic values. The election of
President Moise and the formation of his Government are
significant and tangible steps towards the consolidation
of democracy in Haiti. We also welcome the election of
30 per cent of women to municipal councils. We hope
that the United Nations will continue to provide them
with the support needed to allow them to carry out their
work efficiently.

I have repeatedly stated here in the Security Council
that we must protect, at all costs, the achievements
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH). Now that we have renewed its
mandate for the final time and are moving towards
the establishment of a new mission, it is essential to
preserve the progress that has been made in order to
overcome some of the challenges and hurdles that still
prevent the Haitian people from reaching their full
potential. The future presence of the United Nations
in Haiti must have as its goal to ensure a responsible
transition that would prevent the emergence of security
or institutional gaps. The central responsibility for the
transition lies with the Government and its leaders.
The progress made by the Haitian National Police
force, which the Special Representative outlined, in
particular with regard to its performance and the duties
that it must undertake in this new phase so as to ensure
democratic continuity, will continue to be supported by
my country through both the presence of our officers
and police in the country and the training of female
Haitian police officers in Colombia. Female police
officers, to date, barely account for 9 per cent of the
force, but we will continue to train them. We hope that
the force's 2017-2021 strategic plan will also include a
major component on gender and the prevention of and
response to acts of sexual violence.

As Special Representative Honore pointed out, it is
urgent that progress be made on reforming the justice
system so as to cut down on illegal and prolonged
detentions without trial, ease congestion in prisons and
improve respect for the rule of law and human rights,
an ongoing task that still needs work. The Haitian State
has shown itself able to comply in that regard through
its acceptance of 175 of the 213 recommendations set
out in its submission to the Human Rights Council's
universal periodic review.

Our brotherly people and the Government of Haiti
face many challenges, but there are tools available
that can help to build a peaceful, stable country with
sustainable development. That will require very
close coordination between the country team and
MINUSTAH and, later, with the special political
mission, but the Government of Haiti can count on our
support in that effort.

