The Secretary-General: I thank Germany for
having organized this open debate, and I thank the
Council for its sustained commitment to the protection
11-41067
of children affected by armed conflict. I should like to
thank in particular the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Germany for taking the time to preside over this
meeting and for his leadership.

Since 1998, the Council has adopted eight
resolutions on this issue. It has asked me to report on
the recruitment and use of child soldiers, the killing
and maiming of children, rape and other sexual
violence, abductions, attacks on schools and hospitals,
and the denial of humanitarian access to children by
parties to armed conflict. It has sent a consistent and
clear message: the protection of children in armed
conflict is a peace and security issue, and the
international community will not tolerate grave
violations of this principle.

Today's resolution takes us one step further. It not
only emphasizes that schools and hospitals should be
zones of peace respected by all parties to conflict; it
adds attacks on schools and hospitals as listing criteria
in my annual reports on children in armed conflict. I
welcome this advance. Places of learning and places of
healing should never be places of war.

Our proactive efforts on previously listed
violations, such as the recruitment and use of child
soldiers, have yielded positive results. I thank
Governments, civil society and non-governmental
organizations for their work. These efforts and the
action plan concept - laid out in resolution 1539
(2004) and later resolutions - have led to the signing
of 15 action plans covering nine conflict arenas. Two
more action plans are expected this year.

These successes show the value of naming and
shaming. Last year alone, around 10,000 children
associated with armed groups were released. We must
now secure longer-term international support for their
full reintegration into their communities. This is an
essential component of peacebuilding and
development.

The United Nations system is fully committed to
protecting children in armed conflict. My Special
Representative on this issue, Ms. Coomaraswamy, is
working with dedication and courage. The work of my
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Wallstrom, is also helping to combat impunity. The
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, too, is
playing an important role. It has deployed child
protection advisers in at least 13 missions since 2001,
and today has advisers in seven peacekeeping missions
3
and three political missions. They are working to help
missions support the implementation of Security
Council resolutions. United Nations country teams,
too, are making an important contribution, not only in
monitoring and reporting under resolution 1612 (2005),
but also in supporting reintegration and other
humanitarian interventions. UNICEF, in particular,
plays a key role here.

In closing, I would like to acknowledge the work
of the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict,
of which Germany is the Chair. With the innovative
and steadfast engagement of many partners, the
Council has demonstrated that protecting children in
armed conflict is both a moral and a security
imperative. Let us keep working together to ensure that
children everywhere can grow up safe, healthy and
educated so that they can help to build a secure and
sustainable future for themselves, their families and
their societies.

