Mr. Elmajerbi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like to begin by thanking you, Mr. President,
for organizing today's meeting. I would also like to
thank Mr. Ghassan Salame', Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, for his briefing on the serious
developments in Tripoli for more than 50 days now.
I also thank Mr. Sma'il Chergui, African Union
Commissioner for Peace and Security, for his
briefing, as well as Ambassador Juergen Schulz for
the summary he presented on the activities of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011).

Eight years have passed since the Security Council
took up an agenda item entitled "The situation in
Libya". Serious events have taken place during that
time. The Council has adopted a number of resolutions
and presidential statements calling for establishing
peace and security in my country. The Council has sent
a full political Mission, led by Special Representative
Salame, to provide support to the Libyan people and
end their ordeal. The Mission has made tremendous
efforts, which culminated in the signing of Skhirat
Political Agreement in 2015.

Following the signing of this Agreement, the
Presidency Council was formed in Tripoli and
recognized by the international community. Since then,

the Government of my country has spared no effort to
establish stability throughout Libya by addressing with
four main topics, namely, security, the economy, the
situation in the south of the country and the preparations
for the elections.

There has been notable progress in the country with
the establishment of security arrangements, in close
cooperation with the international community, in terms
of eliminating weapons, re-establishing public order
and ensuring the gradual return of State institutions.
Among the first goals set by the institutions was the
fight against terrorism, in line with their prerogatives
and consistent with the United Nations Global Counter-
terrorism Strategy. National security forces - unified
and enhanced forces exclusively under the under the
authority of the Government of National Accord - were
set up. The terrorist group Da'esh was eradicated
in Sirte and other areas of the country, thanks to the
sacrifice of our young people who paid the ultimate
price in removing that cancer from Libya.

There has also been strategic cooperation with the
United States, and we joined the international counter-
terrorism coalition. My country has also honoured its
international commitments under the Government of
National Accord, in particular with respect to chemical
weapons, as was certified by the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons in January 2018. We
saw the elimination of tons of chemical weapons, thanks
to international support. We also made achievements
in terms of human rights and migration, including
efforts made by the Libyan Coast Guard, with its
meagre resources, to save thousands of migrants off
the Libyan coast - again, working with international
organizations on a daily basis.

I would also like to mention the economy, which in
turn has also seen noteworthy progress thanks to areform
programme that aimed to decrease spending, increase
State revenue and support the national oil company.
My country's Government was able to increase oil
production, reduce our deficit and lower inflation rates,
while also responding to the basic needs of citizens,
in particular their need for food and medicines, while
working towards future economic reform. Those are
some of the efforts that have been made.

The Presidency Council of the Government of
National Accord showed great flexibility in the meetings
held in Paris, Palermo and Abu Dhabi. We continued
dialogue with those we thought are our partners in
the political process, in cooperation with the United
Nations. As Libyans began to see the first signs of a
better future, following Mr. Salame's announcement of
the upcoming national conference and the Secretary-
General's visit to Libya, Haftar launched his traitorous
aggression against Tripoli, where one third of the
Libyan population lives. His forces continue to commit
violations that constitute war crimes and crimes against
humanity. They have arbitrarily bombed civilian areas,
including schools, warehouses and civil airports. That
has led to more than 500 persons killed to date and nearly
3,000 injured, as well as more than 100,000 persons
displaced. Those violations also include the recruitment
of children, the torture and murder of detainees in cold
blood and the kidnapping of journalists covering the
war. For example, two journalists, Mohamed Al-Qurj
and Mohamed Al-Shibani, were kidnapped two weeks
ago. We hope to ascertain their fate as soon as possible.

The list of violations is very long, to which must
be added an unprecedented crime, namely, that water
supplies to the capital from the south of Tripoli, where
Haftar's forces are based, have been cut off. The toll
of the violations has been heavy and well-documented.
We sent a letter to the Security Council calling for a
fact-finding commission to verify those abuses and
violations. We have also asked that the countries
backing the aggression be identified. According
to confessions by aggressors, it appears that those
countries are providing military support.

The military arsenal being used in the aggression
is evident. It is clear to everybody that some countries
have been providing the aggressors with weapons
of all kinds for years - planes, missiles and modern
equipment - in flagrant violation of the Security
Council resolutions. That has also been documented in
the reports of the Panel of Experts established pursuant
to resolution 1973 (2011). How long are the violations
going to continue without any response, although
everybody knows who is involved? They are preventing
Libyans from finding a solution. Their actions fly in the
face of international laws and resolutions. The support
given to the aggressors is prolonging the war, killing
more civilians and destroying infrastructure, while also
undermining the social fabric and worsening the future
of our country and our relations with other countries.

The Government of National Accord has a sovereign
right to defend its citizens, and we emphasize that we
are going to continue to fight terrorism wherever it
exists on Libyan soil. Unfortunately, aggression and the

security situation have allowed for the return of Da'esh,
which we had fought and expelled from Sirte and other
Libyan cities. There have been nearly 800 martyrs and
thousands of people injured.

Some say that this aggression on Tripoli is aimed
at fighting terrorism, even though the forces that are
defending the city are the ones that liberated Sirte from
Da'esh. Recently, there was a series of terrorist attacks
by Da'esh in the south on the cities of Sabha, Ghodwa
and Zalla, among others, which were a consequence
of the aggression against Tripoli. Where are Haftar's
forces - those forces that claim they liberated those
cities? We believe that Haftar's forces aroused tribal
conflicts and tensions that we have tried for years to
calm through various measures and a national campaign
that included security, services and social assistance.

Unfortunately, this war is a flagrant failure of the
United Nations to meet its commitments to Libya,
a country that occupies an important place on the
Organization's agenda. The Security Council's mandate
is to maintain international peace and security, but the
Council has not been able to do that. It has not been able
to end this aggression or to ensure that its resolutions
are respected. They have been violated by many
countries in the form of negative intervention in Libya
and not safeguarding civilians from violations and acts
of aggression.

The Government of National Accord believes
that it is incumbent upon the Security Council today
to shoulder its historic responsibility to correct the
situation. The Council should, more than ever, do more
than just express its concern. It should implement its
resolutions and name and condemn the aggressor, while
also forcing his forces to stand down. There is no sense
in treating the aggressor and the person who is attacked
equally. There is no sense in telling people who are
being attacked to put down their weapons, when the
aggressor force does not retreat to where it came from.
Haftar responded to the call made by Mr. Salame for a
truce during the holy month of Ramadan by rejecting
that call. He declared jihad and continued fighting.
He reaffirmed that attitude during his meetings with a
number of international mediators.

In conclusion, we have always called for peace and
reconciliation, but have been obliged to wage war to
defend our people, our capital and the hope of Libyans
for a civil and democratic State. The aggression against
Tripoli is nothing but a coup against legitimacy, which
undermines the political process and aims to bring back
a totalitarian regime and the rule of one individual.

We ask the Council to support the efforts of
Special Representative Salame to begin a political
process that can be successful and take into account
the new realities so that the United Nations Mission
can find new mechanism to achieve dialogue with all
Libyans without any exclusions and without associating
that process with any particular person. The rules
of negotiation have changed after such treason and
aggression. Libya is greater than everybody.

