Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): At the outset, we would
like to associate ourselves with the letter (S/2012/257)
sent to the Security Council by the Permanent
Representative of Egypt on behalf of the Member
States of the Non-Aligned Movement regarding the
theme of this open debate. We also thank the Secretary-
General for his briefing.

The United Nations Charter creates a clear
division of work among its various organs. The
allocation of certain powers to the Security Council
was duly contextualized in both substance and scope.
Accordingly, while all Member States agree to
implement Article 25 of the Charter, it is with the clear
understanding that the functions and powers of the
Security Council are confined strictly to Article 24 of
the Charter.

Accordingly, we believe that the Security
Council, which acts on behalf of Member States, must
fully observe all Charter provisions, as well as all
General Assembly resolutions, which clarify its
relationship with the General Assembly and other
principal organs. Similarly, no action by the Security
Council should undermine the United Nations Charter
or the relevant multilateral instruments or international
organizations established in this regard, or the role of
the General Assembly.

Securing borders falls within the sovereign
purview of Member States. This core function of State
sovereignty cannot be arrogated by any external or
international institution. Only a sovereign State itself
can decide how to protect its borders, fortify their
security and ensure that the movement of goods and
people across its borders does not pose a threat to it or
to other States.

The issue of border security should become a
concern of the Security Council only in those specific
situations which pose a threat to international peace
and security. Conceptually, it is almost impossible to
lump all kinds of cross-border trafficking and
movement under the rubric of some single term or

concept. The mutual cooperation of States in the fight
against illicit cross-border trafficking and movement
can be achieved only through a coherent and
coordinated approach that respects relevant mandates
and accepts the basic principles of sovereign equality,
territorial integrity and non-interference in the internal
affairs of States.

Pakistan acknowledges the well-meaning efforts
of the United States to bring to the fore an important
aspect of United Nations mechanisms' existing
capacities to assist the efforts of Member States in
addressing illicit cross-border trafficking and
movement. Like many of our Security Council
colleagues, we believe that an overall assessment of the
United Nations capacities, including possible overlaps
and needed overhauling, must be addressed by the
General Assembly and relevant United Nations bodies
that deal with the corresponding cross-cutting issues in
a holistic fashion. We stand ready to cooperate and
address this issue in its broader framework within the
General Assembly setting. Within the Security Council
framework, this exercise has to be restricted to those
issues and threats that are addressed by the Security
Council, in accordance with its mandate.

We therefore look forward to a report of the
Secretary-General that would provide a comprehensive
assessment of the United Nations relevant work to help
Member States counter illicit cross-border trafficking
and movement that have been addressed by the
Security Council as threats and challenges to
international peace and security in specific contexts
and situations. It is our considered view that, in order
to have a well-rounded assessment, the views of
Member States on this subject would provide needed
clarity and practical solutions. Similarly, the report
must follow the logic of the treaty obligations of
Member States under various instruments and should
not try to influence the organizational aspect of various
venues of discussion on border security.

Pakistan has taken strenuous and substantive
steps to ensure that a comprehensive border control
regime is in place that is in accordance with Pakistan's
international obligations. We are also committed to
working together with the international community to
address the comprehensive issues involving illegal
cross-border trafficking and movement, with a view to
effectively constraining the spread of transnational
threats. In this regard, the importance of addressing the
root causes of such illegal cross-border trafficking and
movement, including the factors affecting supply and
demand, cannot be overemphasized.

