We would like to thank the Secretary-General for his briefing, and the Secretary-General's Envoy on Youth for sharing her perspectives and challenges in the implementation of resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018). Our deep appreciation goes to Mr. Gatwal Gatkuoth and Ms. Olla Al-Sakkaf. We listened carefully to their views and recommendations, and I must say that they are both an inspiration. We had envisioned holding a ministerial open debate, with the participation of young people from all over the world, but the circumstances did not allow that. I want to thank all youth organizations and young peacebuilders and activists that have been actively supporting this debate and are watching us through the United Nations Web TV and social media. This is for them. This year marks the fifth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 2250 (2015). We welcome the report of the Secretary-General on youth and peace and security (S/2020/167), and we echo his demand for an accelerated implementation of resolutions 2419 (2018) and 2250 (2015) and the statement by the President of the Security Council adopted last year (S/PRST/2019/15). Those documents, along with the progress study "The missing peace: independent progress study on youth and peace and security" (see S/2018/86), lead us to concrete action at the national, regional and international levels. The 2030 United Nations Youth Strategy and initiatives by the African Union, as highlighted by Mr. Gatkuoth, are important examples of that course of action. However, much more is needed to institutionalize and increase the implementation of the youth, peace and security agenda. First, the creation of a regional young mediators network and a focal point network within the United Nations system, including in peacekeeping and political missions, is essential. Annual reporting by the Secretary-General on youth, peace and security, backed by a global set of indicators to track progress on its implementation, is crucial. The strategies and active engagement on youth, peace and security by United Nations missions in Colombia, Kosovo, Somalia and Iraq are inspiring examples. We encourage other peacekeeping and political missions to emulate such efforts. More mandate renewals and reports must include specific references pertaining to the implementation of resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018). We concur with today's briefers. An increasing number of young people are proactively combating the coronavirus disease pandemic. But we must recognize its specific impact on young people, who must be included in the development and implementation of its response and whose specific needs must be addressed. Now and always, the protection of young people's lives and human rights must be a priority, including those of young peacebuilders and human rights defenders, who sometimes face reprisals for their work. The policy paper We Are Here: An integrated approach to youth-inclusive peace processes concludes that young people continue to be excluded from peace processes, inheriting peace agreements. But when agreements do not prosper, young people bear the burden of doing damage control. Is that fair? Their meaningful participation in peacebuilding and sustaining peace and security is essential to achieving just, inclusive and peaceful societies. It is also their right. The report emphasizes that "the participation of young people requires unrestricted civic space and breaking with practices of tokenism". To that end, the Dominican Republic launched its National Youth Plan to guarantee young people's participation in all stages of decision-making, including on access to justice and citizen security, based on the principles of equality and non-discrimination. The Secretary-General's report also makes more evident the need for complementarity between the women and peace and security and youth and peace and security agendas, in particular with regard to the importance of the participation of young women in building and sustaining peace. Hence, it is vital to invest in young people's initiatives, capacities and agency, as well as youth organizations, especially at the grass-roots level, through substantial financial support. In this regard, I would like to applaud the Peacebuilding Fund for its support to youth-led projects, and the Peacebuilding Commission for strengthening youth engagement in its work, including discussions on developing a youth and peace and security strategy. Efforts to open communication channels with young people must continue. There are thousands of young people such as Santiago, who briefed the Security Council on Colombia on 14 April (see S/2020/305), and Olla and Gatwal with us today, who are working tirelessly on building and sustaining peace and in support of Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire. We must continue to invite such young people to brief the Council. I wish to recognize the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General on Youth and her Office, as well as the United Nations Population Fund and the Peacebuilding Support Office, for their tenacious work in promoting this agenda. I would also like to thank the permanent and observer missions that have submitted their statements for this meeting and encourage others not yet having done so to do likewise. This is an important moment for all States to speak with one voice and take unified action to accelerate implementation. Finally, I wish formally to announce that, together with France, we will present a draft resolution that we hope will have the support of all Council members. As the report of the Secretary-General highlights, and as we mark the fifth anniversary of the youth and peace and security agenda, it is time to accelerate the implementation of resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018).
