Mr. Moriko (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation wishes to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov,
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process, for his excellent briefing on the situation in
the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.
We also welcome Ms. Adele Raemer's contribution to
this meeting.

Cote d'Ivoire remains concerned about the ongoing
deterioration of the security situation, the continued
violence and violations of relevant General Assembly
and Security Council resolutions, in particular
resolution 2334 (2016). Despite the repeated calls of
the international community for the de-escalation of
tensions, we have not witnessed any progress. In fact,
my country notes with regret that, in his most recent
report (8/2019/938), the Secretary-General once again
highlights the lack of implementation of resolution
2334 (2016) in a list of acts contrary to the spirit of
the resolution. So as not to undermine the two-State
solution for peacefully coexistence, it is urgent that
the parties refrain from any provocative actions or
statements that would exacerbate tensions, which often
degenerates into violence against the populations.

These deadly acts of violence remind us of the
urgent need to work for the relaunch of the Israeli-
Palestinian dialogue, which unfortunately has not seen
any significant progress since the Oslo Accords of 1993
and 1995. C6te d'Ivoire therefore urges the international
community to tirelessly pursue its mediation efforts
towards the resumption of the political process among
the various parties, with a view to reaching a just and
lasting solution based on mutual recognition of the
legitimate aspirations of all concerned, including the
right to self-determination for the Palestinians and the
right of Israel to live in peace and security. Any new
initiative must therefore be aimed at achieving the two-
State solution within the 1967 borders i a solution to
which my country remains profoundly attached.

My delegation also remains concerned about the
continuing deterioration of the humanitarian situation in
Gaza, which remains strongly affected by the blockade
in force, water and electricity shortages in a context of
acute economic crisis, and mass unemployment among
young people. We call on the international community
to provide the necessary humanitarian assistance to the
Palestinian people in need, as well as to work towards the
economic recovery and reconstruction of the Gaza Strip
through adequate funding and investment. My country
also welcomes the announcements of contributions
to the budget of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, with a
view to reducing the budget deficit it is facing.

In parallel to the need to de-escalate the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict, Cote d'Ivoire believes that
inter-Palestinian unity is essential to advance national
aspirations for independent statehood and sovereignty.
My delegation therefore encourages Hamas and the
Palestinian Authority to pursue dialogue in order to
achieve the Palestinian Authority's effective return to
Gaza, which would allow for better management of
the current humanitarian situation. Furthermore, my
country welcomes the prospect of the first Palestinian
elections since 2006 being held in 2020 and hopes that
the elections will be held throughout the Palestinian
territory on the basis ofa broad consensus.

It is important that the Security Council, which
has the primary responsibility of maintaining of
international peace and security, regain its unity in
order to send a single message to all parties to reduce
tensions and invite them to reopen peace talks under
the auspices of the United Nations.

Since this is the last time that Cote d'Ivoire will
speak in the Council on the situation in the Middle
East, given that our term of office ends at the end of
this month, my delegation would like to reiterate its
full support for Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for his tireless
efforts towards a peaceful resolution of the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict and for his determination to create
the conditions necessary for finding a definitive and
lasting resolution to that conflict. A lasting solution to
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is an absolute necessity
not only for the Palestinian and Israeli populations, but
also for the security and stability of the region.

