Mr. Tuwei: On behalf of the African Union
Commission and its Chairperson, Ms. Nkosazana
Dlamini Zuma, I would like to thank the Council for
the opportunity afforded to me to share some thoughts
with Council members about the fight against the
Lord's Resistance Army (LRA), within the particular
framework of the Regional Cooperation Initiative for
the Elimination of the Lord's Resistance Army.

I would especially like to thank the United Nations,
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA) in Libreville and its Head, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Abdoulaye
Bathily, for the continued cooperation in our joint
efforts in the fight against the LRA. I would also like to
thank all United Nations missions and agencies in the
areas where the LRA continues to operate - namely,
the Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and South Sudan - for the support
they continue to provide in the implementation of the
African Initiative and to meet the needs of the people
affected by the criminal acts of the LRA.

In that regard, I would like to recognize the efforts
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA), the United Nations Organization

Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO) and the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan, including the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, UNICEF
and so forth. I also thank other stakeholders and
partners, particularly the United States of America for
its operational and logistical support and the European
Union for its unparalleled financial contributions.
I cannot forget the many local and international
non-governmental organizations that constantly pound
the pavement so that we do not give up the struggle
against the LRA and work hard to provide assistance
to victims and communities affected by the atrocities
of the LRA.

At this stage of my remarks, I would also like to
warmly congratulate my predecessor, Ambassador
Francisco Madeira, on the initial work of the
implementation of the Initiative and the particularly
encouraging results he obtained, together with all the
stakeholders, when he was still in office.

The fight against the LRA seems to continue
indefinitely, and some say that Joseph Kony is still on
the run. Weariness is staring at us. But we who are at
the forefront want to draw the attention of everyone
to the collective work in which we are engaged. It is
most difficult, even exhausting, given the sacrifices
and logistical and financial resources required. The
crises that erupted in the Central African Republic
and South Sudan over the past two years have been
most devastating, but we have continued despite
those obstacles and those encountered in the theatre
of operations. We feel encouraged by the successive
defections that occurred within the LRA, the increasing
number of victims rescued and the significant reduction
in attacks and in the number of displaced persons due to
the LRA. With the assistance of the continued presence
of contingents of the African Union Regional Task
Force in Obo, in the Central African Republic, and in
Dungu, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, we
have managed to persevere. With the Task Force, we
have been able to respond quickly and deal a fatal blow
to significantly reduce the nuisance capacity of the
Lord's Resistance Army.

However, we have not achieved the ultimate goal,
namely, the physical capture of Joseph Kony and
putting an end to the atrocities of the Lord's Resistance
Army. Undoubtedly, from wherever he is hiding, Kony
is following and watching us to adjust his operational
mode. The information reaching us, especially from
those who have defected, indicates that Kony is
establishing opportunistic and even strategic alliances
and is engaged in all kinds of trafficking, particularly
in ivory and diamonds. It is now clear that Kony has
contacts with ex-Se'leka in the Central African Republic,
and certainly with other nomadic groups of people
in the vast area that extends from South Sudan to the
northern Democratic Republic of the Congo, covering
all border areas between the Central African Republic,
the Sudan, South Sudan and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. That trafficking shows clearly that Kony
maintains a network of relationships and is therefore
accessible, even if it is true that the group is divided
into several small, highly mobile and active groups,
almost exclusively in the Central African Republic and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

These latest developments convince us that there is
great interest in the need to review our strategies and
adapt them wisely. That is why I would like, on behalf of
the African Union Commission and its Chairperson, to
earnestly request the Council to maintain and increase
its support for the Regional Cooperation Initiative,
particularly through the means made available not only
to UNOCA, but also to MONUSCO and MINUSCA,
so that the scope of cooperation between those
Missions and the Regional Task Force can be expanded
operationally and take into account the logistical
support to the contingents of the Regional Task Force
based in Obo and Dungu.

We also want to request the Council to use its
influence to persuade others of good will to join us,
and encourage all the stakeholders involved in the fight
against the Lord's Resistance Army to pursue their
commitments in that collective campaign, and not to
give in to discouragement, despite the rigours of the
tests that lie ahead. It would be difficult to understand
and explain how the African Union, the United Nations,
the United States, the European Union and many other
actors, all together, failed against Joseph Kony and
some 200 men fighting in the bush.

As regards the African Union and the Regional
Cooperation Initiative for the Elimination of the Lord's
Resistance Army, and considering the outcome of
my recent tour to Bangui, Kinshasha and Kampala,
we shall go to work to give a new impetus to the
Initiative through an enhancement of cooperation and
commitment between the Member States of the Regional
Cooperation Initiative, a reorganization of the Regional
Task Force headquarters, including the operational and
tactical plans, with the support of the American Special
Forces, and an extension of our field of manoeuvre
by working and involving the Sudan further in 2015.
Furthermore, the enhancement of relations among the
Regional Task Force contingents, MONUSCO and
MINUSCA on the theatre of operations remains a key
focus of our action plan.

