Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation congratulates South Africa on its
assumption of the Presidency of the Security Council
for the month of April and on having convened this
meeting.

Mexico attaches particular importance to this
open debate on the question of small arms because of
the serious impact that the illicit trade and use of these
weapons by organized crime has on our national
security and on stability in the region.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2008/258) -
and we would like to thank Ms. Hoppe for her
introduction - clearly illustrates the evil cycle of the
use of these arms. Its quotation, in paragraph 8, from
the Small Arms Survey is revealing: "more is known
about the number of nuclear warheads, stocks of
chemical weapons and transfers of major conventional
weapons than about small arms." As a consequence, we
do not have accurate data on the number of these
weapons circulating around the world. According to
one estimate, there could be at least 875 million. This
lack of precision is serious enough on its own, but we
must add the fact that this is the only category of arms
not under State monopoly but that is in the hands of
private individuals. Moreover, to the licensed
production, estimated at 7.5 million to 8 million arms
per year, we must add the illicit production, which
encompasses countries in conflict or with scarce
resources. The circle of the lack of control is
completed by illicit trade and brokering and by the
tremendous disparities in national legislation for
regulation of civilian possession.

As affirmed by the Secretary-General, small arms
are the weapons of choice in civil conflicts, as well as
in terrorism, organized crime and common crime. Latin
America is one of the regions of the world that have
been most affected by the illicit trafficking of small
arms and light weapons to common criminals and
members of transnational organized crime;
unfortunately, it is the region where the highest number
of firearm-related deaths are concentrated.

The illegal flow of weapons in this category is a
decisive factor in the crises that the Council regularly
addresses, since it contributes to instability not only
within States, but also at the subregional and regional
levels. In Latin America, and certainly in Mexico, we
see in particular the damage caused by organized crime
linked to drug trafficking, which uses these weapons in
its daily operations.

Combating the illegal flow of small arms requires
a comprehensive approach, which must include various
levels, from joint action at the multilateral level to
subregional, national and social action. One ongoing
issue that we must resolve is, without a doubt, the
disparity in national legislation regulating civilian
possession. It is an obvious fact that what cannot be
acquired in one country can be acquired with relative
ease in a neighbouring country, just by crossing the
border.

The root of the problem is that weapons acquired
as a result of laws that prevent the State from
exercising control over them are able to cross borders,
giving rise to security problems that affect not only the
recipient countries, but also the country of origin itself.
The situation becomes even more complicated when
organized crime intervenes and establishes the link
between drugs and weapons. Hence, the importance of
bilateral and regional cooperation and coordination
mechanisms, which are gradually being improved and
which have produced encouraging results.

Under these circumstances, the fight against the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons must be a
priority for the international community, as it is for the
Government of Mexico.

Mexico considers as highly useful the biennial
presentation of the Secretary-General's report on small
arms, which virtually coincides with the Biennial
Meeting of States to Consider the Implementation of
the Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects.

We have supported full implementation of the
Programme of Action and have maintained our firm
support for the follow-up mechanisms and resolutions
adopted in the General Assembly on this issue. In our
most recent national report, we presented data
reflecting the securing and destruction of weapons as
well as exchange programmes for collection from the
civilian population. All of this is accompanied by
large-scale operations against organized crime and by
awareness-raising campaigns to prevent the illicit
possession, transfer or use of firearms. That is why we
support recommendation 11 in the Secretary-General's
report that the Security Council should encourage
States to adopt measures to cooperate in verifying
end-user certificates, which prevent the diversion of
weapons.

Mexico, together with many other countries in the
region, has emphasized that it is vitally important that
the marking and tracing instrument become legally
binding. We also urge that it include norms relating to
ammunition control. However, there has been no
consensus, despite the inherent link to the problem of
small arms and light weapons.

Mexico believes that there are still many aspects
on which States can continue to work, thereby
strengthening the Programme of Action. These include
international cooperation on marking and tracing, the
adoption of measures to regulate brokering and the use
of end-user certificates, and proper management and
control of stockpiles.

Furthermore, we recognize, as indicated in the
report of the Secretary-General, that the Programme of
Action, despite its undeniable importance, suffers from
significant weaknesses, beginning with the fact that it
is not legally binding and does not address the issue of
the illicit ammunition trade. Mexico regrets that it
hardly refers to the issue of irresponsible civilian
weapons possession or to the effects of these weapons
in humanitarian terms.
Finally, my delegation cannot fail to agree with
the Secretary-General as to the economic and social
impact that conflicts, or just the situation of insecurity
and instability, can have on the development and
prosperity of any nation. The amount of resources that
must be diverted by States to combat the illicit small
arms trade and its consequences represents enormous
and unfair costs to society. The major producers of
these weapons must shoulder their responsibility and
increase the number of measures to control their
production and, above all, their export. The idea of an
international arms trade treaty is a good initiative that
Mexico has supported enthusiastically, but that is still
far from being implemented. Therefore, we shall
continue to stress the importance of the issue that we
are considering today.

