Mr. Burian (Slovakia): We too would like to
thank Under-Secretary-General Egeland for his
important briefing.

We are deeply concerned about the deteriorating
humanitarian situation in Darfur and the increasing
number of internally displaced persons (IDP) and
refugees without humanitarian access due to new
attacks and the criminal activities of armed militias in
the area, including inside and around refugee camps in
Darfur and eastern Chad. We are horrified by the news
from Darfur about a new wave of violence against
civilians.
In that regard, we deplore the failure of the
Government of the Sudan to protect its citizens and to
address the impunity of perpetrators. We agree with
Mr. Egeland that all the necessary measures should be
undertaken to stop all attacks and to re-establish the
ceasefire and cessation of hostilities before an entire
generation of young men is enlisted in the fighting,
thereby increasing humanitarian suffering and
escalating the conflict into a major regional catastrophe
and confrontation.

We also call upon the Government of the Sudan
to remove all bureaucratic obstacles to the continuation
of the efforts of humanitarian workers and agencies
that are helping to alleviate the suffering of 4 million
people in need of humanitarian assistance. We hope
that the Government of the Sudan will understand that
the cooperation and active engagement of the
international community in addressing the crisis in
Darfur is in the best interest of all the Sudanese people
and citizens.

In that context, we remain convinced that a
speedy and robust response from the international
community is needed to help the Sudanese people and
authorities address the deteriorating situation on the
ground and to bring the peace process based on the
implementation of the Darfur Peace Agreement back
on track.

In that respect, we welcome the agreement on a
hybrid African Union/United Nations operation that
was achieved last week in Addis Ababa. At the same
time, we call upon all stakeholders to continue to
cooperate in a good and constructive spirit to resolve
all outstanding issues, in order to deploy a credible
peacekeeping force that is able and capable of
protecting civilians and securing adequate conditions
for the implementation of the Darfur Peace Agreement
as soon as possible.

Turning briefly to the situation in northern
Uganda and the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA), we are
encouraged by the progress made in the peace talks
between the Government of Uganda and the LRA, as
well as in addressing the situation on the ground,
including the improved humanitarian access to IDPs in
northern Uganda. At the same time, we agree with Mr.
Egeland that the active engagement of the international
community is crucial and that it should continue to
ensure that the Juba peace process produces concrete
results in terms of bringing this cruel conflict to an end
and allowing the nearly 2 million displaced persons in
northern Uganda to return to their homes.

In conclusion, I would like to stress that we
would welcome regular updates by the Secretariat on
developments in northern Uganda. We believe that the
Security Council must continue its active role in
support of the peace process begun at Juba.

