Mr. Khiari (Tunisia): I would like to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on your initiative to convene today's
important and thought-provoking open debate on
respect for the principles and purposes of the Charter
of the United Nations. I thank you for putting this issue
before the Council, which has been greatly debated and
discussed within and outside of the United Nations. My
delegation appreciates your insights into the theme,
as reflected in the concept note (S/2016/103, annex)
circulated earlier.

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing and for his vision on the topic.

Last year's debate on the Charter of the United
Nations (see S/PV.7389) and today's meeting testify to
our strong commitment to the Charter and its continued
relevance, 70 years after its creation. They also represent
an opportunity to reaffirm and reiterate our attachment
to the principles and purposes embodied in the Charter
and our commitment to multilateralism and to the
spirit and requirements of contemporary international
governance. Since its inception, the United Nations
has proved to be a cornerstone of the international
peace and security architecture. While we live in a
totally different world from the one prevailing in the
aftermath of the Second World War, when the United
Nations came into being, the principles and objectives
enshrined in the Charter remain unchanged.

Tunisia has always called for those principles to
be accepted as the cornerstone of relations between
nations, and we have built and shaped our foreign
policy on those parameters. We are witnessing drastic
changes in the international environment and in the
nature of international challenges, in the scope of
regional rivalries and internal conflicts. The increasing
threats to international peace and security posed by
the new global challenges on our agenda, including
the proliferation of terrorist and violent extremist
groups, require us not only to strengthen our concerted
efforts to address them but also to launch a global
drive to reaffirm the crucial role that the principles of
the Charter play in enabling us to preserve peace and
stability and tackle any threat that could jeopardize that
peace and our society and humanity.

Today there is an ever-stronger need for enhanced
international cooperation in an ever-more integrated
world, if we are to avoid the eruption of conflicts
through strategies that ensure the peaceful settlement
of disputes. My country strongly supports ensuring that
the Security Council makes use of the tools available to
it under Chapter VI of the Charter and turns to the type
of coercive measures covered in Chapter VII only as a
last resort. We regret the fact, however, that such tools
have not been applied to issues such as the question of
Palestine, which remains unresolved, owing to a lack
of will and determination on the part of the Security
Council and to its paralysis when it comes to putting an
end to the oldest colonial rule in the world.

There is an urgent need to devise a more inclusive
form of global governance if we are to adapt to
evolving global dynamics, and that implies that our
decision-making bodies must reflect the world's new
realities. The Security Council is a case in point. We
believe that reforming the Council can help to strengthen
international law as a prerequisite for peace, security
and development, and that it will further consolidate the
Council's position as a central component of effective
global governance capable of promoting concerted
efforts to address today's challenges.

Our collective efforts to maintain international
peace and security demand that we enhance strategic
partnerships, particularly in the areas of peacekeeping
and peacebuilding, with regional organizations such as
the African Union, based on innovative interpretations
of the relevant provisions of Chapter VIII of the Charter.
The African Union is playing an ever greater role,
and a costly one, in the peaceful settlement of crises
and conflicts in Africa, and we should strengthen our
support to it.

