Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to begin by thanking Mr. Ivan Simonovie,
Assistant Secretary-General for Human Rights, for his
briefing on the human rights situation in Ukraine.

What else can we say except to reiterate that
Argentina is following with great concern the
increasingly tense situation in Ukraine, in particular
in the eastern part of the country, and its potential
consequences for the region's stability? What more is
there to say that to reiterate that we are deeply concerned
that the threat of violent clashes may mean paying a
heavy price and hamper the possibility of finding a way
out of the current crisis and of stabilizing the situation
in the country?

The delegation of Argentina therefore reaffirms
once again our belief that we must uphold the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, in
particular that of non-intervention - be it military,
political or economic - in the internal affairs of other
States. We understand that the actions of any State or
international organization must show due respect for
Ukraine's management of its internal affairs and its
future.

As Mr. Simonovie informed the Council, human
rights violations were reported in Ukraine in the lead-up
to the protests of November 2013. Serious human rights
violations were also committed during the protests and
afterwards. Although the report notes that denunciations
of human rights violations have eased off since the new
authorities in Kyiv assumed power, serious concerns
remain among sectors of the population with regard to
respect for the rights of minorities, and those concerns
and fears have been raised as a result of certain attacks
or threats against various minorities. Undoubtedly we
need to have more information and we must continue to
follow those events closely.

In that context, the availability of impartial
information on the human rights situation will
contribute not just to ensuring accountability for
human rights violations and abuses, but will also help
to prevent any manipulation of such information, which
would only exacerbate a climate of impunity, insecurity
and violence. At the same time, we believe that the
exhaustive investigation into the violations and abuses
that have taken place since the beginning of the protests
in Maidan Square, regardless of who the perpetrators
are, and the sentencing of those individuals will help
to restore calm and foster institutional normalization
which is needed in Ukraine. Measures undoubtedly
need to be taken to build confidence among the various
regions and ethnic communities and provide security
to all Ukrainians throughout the country that their
primary concerns and legitimate demands will be
addressed. We must also end the incitement to hatred,
discrimination, hostility and violence.
We are not saying anything new as a delegation.
We are simply recognizing the difficult situation in
Ukraine, which cannot be resolved by unilateral actions.
We insist on the need to avoid any action that would
make the situation even more complex and complicate
the search for a peaceful political solution to the crisis.
All the parties must work together to calm the situation,
must show maximum restraint and must contribute to
an inclusive dialogue.

What can those of us who hope that those who
will be meeting in Geneva on 17 April will have a
constructive dialogue and that they will find a peaceful
political solution to the crisis? As members of the
international community, we can do a great deal. We
can hope that the much-needed meeting of 17 April will
take place in a different climate. Those of us who will
not attend that meeting must make sure that we do not
detract from it. We must recall that human rights are
not anyone's property but everyone's responsibility. We
must recall that the Charter of the United Nations is
not made up of isolated chapters or loose principles,
but is rather an unbreakable whole. With that positive
attitude, we express our desire for a positive discussion
to be held so that Ukraine can find the serenity it so
sorely needs.

