Mrs. Hussain (Maldives): I thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing today's open debate.

Terrorism and organized crime remains one of
the most complex and challenging global issues of our
time. Our ability to respond to and comprehensively
address those issues is growing deeper and becoming
more difficult. Terrorism transcends race, religion
and nationality. Combating terrorism therefore
requires a multifaceted approach, from direct action
in dismantling networks, cells and financing webs
to preventing extremist ideologies from spreading,
including by monitoring hate speech both offline
and in the digital space. Open debates such as this
would help us to better understand this multifaceted
phenomenon and learn from each other in order to gear
our collective actions to detect, counter, intercept and
prevent horrifying crimes.

The Maldives strongly condemns all acts,
methods and practices of terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations. Terrorism is an atrocious act that takes
the lives of innocent people, destroys societies, forces
people to move from their homes and sets back decades
of development. Terrorism is a transnational threat
that requires international and coordinated action.
As members of the international community, each of
us has a responsibility to collaborate more closely,
study its root causes and work to prevent violent and
extremist ideologies from taking a foothold in our
respective countries.

In recent years, we have witnessed a growing
dependency between international terrorism and
organized crime, whereby individuals are moving
between their identities as terrorists and criminals.
Their blurring functions are making it harder for law
enforcement officials to apprehend and prosecute them.
As nations, we must understand those linkages and not
only strengthen our national frameworks but also ensure
that those frameworks function as they are supposed
to. We must also ensure the full implementation of all
relevant Security Council resolutions. The Maldives
enacted the Prevention of Terrorism Act and the
Prevention of Money-laundering and Financing of
Terrorism Act in 2015. The regulation issued in 2015 by
the Maldives Monetary Authority, the country's central
bank, under the Prevention of Money-laundering and
Financing of Terrorism Act provides clear guidance
to the banking sector and other financial institutions.
Participating in terrorist activities or supporting such
activities is a criminal offence in the Maldives.

I am pleased to report that the Government of
the newly elected President Solih has accelerated
efforts in countering terrorism and radicalization as a
priority. Work is currently being carried out to amend
anti-terrorism legislation in order to better address
contemporary threats. During his first month in
office, President Ibrahim Mohamed Solih established
the Presidential Commission on Corruption and
Asset Recovery. The purpose of the Commission is
to investigate cases of misuse of Government funds,
money-laundering, corruption and abuse of power
within State institutions between January 2012 and
17 November 2018.

My country ratified the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime in 2013 and
its supplementary Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and
Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women
and Children in 2016, which led to the formulation
of a national action plan on anti-human trafficking.
More recently, in February, a new anti-trafficking
coordinating body was established to better coordinate
anti-trafficking efforts.

The National Counter-Terrorism Centre of the
Maldives (NCTC) provides a common platform for
facilitating information- and-intelligence sharing
and for synchronizing inter-agency activities in our
efforts to combat terrorism and violent extremism. The
Maldives aims to tackle the phenomenon of violent
extremism through a whole-of-society approach.
In collaboration with inter-agency partners and
community stakeholders, the NCTC has undertaken
various programmes to enable the community to resist
radicalizing ideologies and empower communities,
especially women and youth and their leaders. It is
the deep conviction of my Government that, if we are
to prevent and counter terrorism, the most feasible
strategy is through community-based programmes. We
must undertake a multi-stakeholder approach to tackle
global terrorism, extremism and organized crime.

The Maldives reiterates its commitment to upholding
its obligation to combat terrorism. As we continue to
strengthen the frameworks and countermeasures to
tackle the fight against terrorism and organized crimes
at home, we will continue to ensure that our efforts are
part ofa comprehensive regional and global approach.

