Mr. Cardi (Italy): At the outset, allow me to
thank Special Envoy De Mistura for his briefing and
especially for his leadership in advancing the political
process in very challenging circumstances.

After six years, violence and destruction continue
to plague Syrian and cause tremendous suffering for the
Syrian people. With time, attacks against civilians have

become even more barbaricand despicable, if that were
possible, as the horrific use of chemical weapons in the
air strike in Khan Shaykhun showed last week. Given
the current grave circumstances, a political solution that
meets the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people
and can relaunch the faltering cessation of hostilities,
reconsolidate the political process and possibly bring
this tragic crisis to an end is needed more than ever. We
all have a collective responsibility in that.

In that regard, let me recall the timely discussions
that took place yesterday at the ministerial meeting of
the Group of Seven (G-7), and then in the G-7 enlarged
to some key regional stakeholders, as Ambassador
Alemy rightly reminded us. On both occasions,
convened by Minister Alfano, all countries conveyed a
strong message of support to the political process, and
notably to the Geneva intra-Syrian negotiations and the
efforts of Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura.

We all need, therefore, to commit to a diplomatic
search, not a military search, to support the Geneva
talks and advance the political process by swiftly
implementing all steps agreed by the Council in
resolution to 2254 (2015). As the negotiationss move to
the substance of the issues, no rapid major breakthrough
can be expected, but we commend the Special Envoy
for having kept the parties engaged in the process and
committed to discussing the way forward, in accordance
with the defined agenda and in line with resolution to
2254 (2015).

The parties should now redouble their efforts to
address in detail the substantive matters on the agenda.
We have consistently encouraged the High Negotiations
Committee to adopt a realistic and flexible attitude
during the negotiations. Countries with influence
on Damascus should now press the regime to engage
seriously in negotiations and avoid dilatory tactics.

The Astana process made an important contribution
to the relaunch of the cessation of hostilities. However,
the situation on the ground has been deteriorating
again, putting a considerable strain on the truce. An
effective cessation of hostilities must be pursued as a
matter of priority. The Syrian regime has not renounced
its intention to achieve military territorial gains, and
the ceasefire continues to be violated by all parties.
Humanitarian access is denied in besieged areas,
notably by the regime. All parties must allow rapid,
safe, sustained and unhindered humanitarian access to
people in need throughout Syria.
It is paramount that the core guarantors of the
Astana process, and more generally the key international
stakeholders, exert all their influence in that respect.
Progress in Astana on the implementation of the
ceasefire, humanitarian access and confidence-building
measures feeds, of course, into the Geneva process by
creating an environment conducive to the political talks.

Finally, let me underline that progress on the
political track is also key to ensuring better and more
effective international cooperation in the fight against
terrorism, and the effort to end violent radicalization,
extremism and terrorism needs to include a serious
and genuine effort towards a peaceful transition and
reconciliation process. Only a real political transition,
we think, will eradicate terrorism from Syria.

