Mr. Aguilar Zinser (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Mexico welcomes the decision by the President of the
Security Council to include this public debate on the
subject of small arms and light weapons in the
programme for October.

My Government is particularly attentive to this
problem. We believe that the accumulation of small
arms and light weapons worldwide has reached such
proportions that it constitutes a challenge that the
international community must face in a much firmer,
more resolute and better coordinated manner.

According to the most recent estimates in the
2002 Small Arms Survey, worldwide there has been an
increase in the number of small arms and light weapons
to about 640 million units. This increase has not been
curbed by the implementation of the measures
contained in the Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms

and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, adopted at the
United Nations Small Arms Conference in July 2001.

The proliferation of such weapons is even more
evident in areas of conflict. Yet, when used in all of our
countries to commit ordinary crimes, as well as by
those responsible for organized crime and terrorist
attacks, small arms and light weapons confer strategic
power.

Some wars are also being waged today primarily
with small arms and light weapons, although they are
no less devastating, bloody and destructive for that. In
its various peacekeeping operations, especially those in
Africa, the United Nations has been introducing, with
increasing resolve, a disarmament component aimed at
collecting and destroying small arms and light weapons
that, in the hands of irregular armed groups, represent a
threat to the stability and security of countries
emerging from conflict or going through a peace-
building stage.

On several occasions, however, the efforts of the
United Nations, have been isolated or have been
thwarted. The responsibility for facing up to the illicit
trade in and production of small arms and light
weapons is incumbent upon all States, not just those
that are the recipients of such weapons. Indeed, those
that have the greatest responsibility are the producer
and exporter countries. We should demand greater
accountability, involvement and commitment from
them in the implementation of measures adopted by our
Organization with a view to curbing such weapons.

In this context, Mexico supports national,
regional and international efforts aimed at regulating
the illicit trade in and production of small arms and
light weapons, preventing their excessive accumulation
and combating illicit trafficking in such arms. To that
end, Mexico has promoted and is a party to the Inter-
American Convention Against the Illicit Manufacturing
of and Trafficking in Firearms, Ammunitions,
Explosives and Other Related Materials, adopted by the
Organization of American States in 1997. For the
period 2000-2002, Mexico held the position of
Secretary pro tempore of the Consultative Committee
established pursuant to that regional instrument.

Mexico also actively participated in the
development of the United Nations Programme of
Action to which I referred earlier, as well as in the
preparation of the Protocol against the Illicit
Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms, Their
Parts and Components and Ammunition,
supplementing the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime.

The Security Council must also be much more
resolute in its efforts. In 1999, the Council
incorporated the subject of small arms and light
weapons into its programme of work. Starting in 2001,
Colombia has focused on the issue, taking initiatives
that strengthen the Council's capacity to take action.
The report submitted by the Secretary-General in this
respect is the product of the work carried out by
Council members - work for which Colombia
provided a strong impetus. Likewise, the presidential
statement issued as document S/PRST/1999/28 stressed
the responsibility of that body in the maintenance of
international peace and security in relation to threats to
stability caused by such weapons in various fields,
including disarmament, human rights, public health,
international humanitarian law and democratic
stability.

The issue of small arms and light weapons has
particular significance in West Africa and the Great
Lakes region, and in this respect my delegation has
followed the work being undertaken in the sanctions
Committee on Sierra Leone and in relation to the
implementation of arms control measures. We have
noted that the availability of such weapons fuels and
keeps alive the conflicts in those regions. Such
activities are also a key element in the peace-building
strategies being carried forward through the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes of former combatants in Sierra Leone, the
Balkans, Timor-Leste and Afghanistan.

The report of the Secretary-General on small
arms and light weapons deals with some of the
objectives of the Programme of Action to which I
referred earlier. It would be advisable for the Security
Council, however, to make specific references to -
and incorporate into the various peacekeeping
operations, sanctions Committees and arms
embargoes - the coordination of activities for the
effective fulfilment of the undertakings set out in the
Programme of Action.

Mexico supports the first recommendation of the
Secretary-General on the need for the Security Council
to urge Member States to support measures aimed at
developing an international instrument that will enable
States to identify and undertake follow-up activities in
a timely and reliable fashion with regard to small arms
and light weapons that are unlawfully traded. In this
connection, the meeting of States to be held in 2003 as
a follow-up to the 2001 Small Arms Conference will be
an appropriate forum to consolidate advances achieved
in this field and to make further progress.

Mexico believes that in implementing the
recommendations of the Secretary-General, we should
undertake concerted national, regional and
international efforts, in coordination with regional and
subregional organizations, to combat, prevent and
eradicate the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons. Similarly, mechanisms should be set up to
enable the Security Council and the General Assembly
more effectively to share information and propose
strategies on measures to be adopted on the ground that
could contribute to the United Nations Programme of
Action.

Mexico will continue to urge more frequent use
of assessment missions to examine issues of small arms
and light weapons in regions of concern to the Security
Council. We need to be more active in using our
technical capacities to identify the dimensions of the
problem and ways to address it, so that States cannot
evade their commitments.

Mexico is convinced that the fight against the
illicit trafficking and production of small arms and
light weapons can be strengthened through
disarmament education at all educational levels and
encompassing the Government sector as well as civil
society and non-governmental organizations. The
recent United Nations study on disarmament and non-
proliferation education, contained in document
A/57/ 124, presents a set of 34 recommendations, some
of which stress the imperative need to combat the
excessive and destabilizing proliferation of
conventional weapons, especially small arms and light
weapons. That is a recommendation that we should
heed. Recommendation 27 of that study is of particular
interest; it encourages international and regional
organizations and representatives of civil society,
where appropriate, to include disarmament education
and training in their programmes in post-conflict
situations.

We hope that this open debate will lead to a
document that can guide the action of the international
community to combat the scourge of the illicit
trafficking in small arms and light weapons, and their
excessive and destabilizing accumulation. Accordingly,
we are prepared to work on the drafting of a
presidential statement that will reflect those aims.

