Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): Let me thank Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for their briefings. I would also like to thank the Yemenis who today, through Mr. Lowcock, have spoken to the Security Council. It is because the situation is so desperate for Yemenis like those who spoke that the Security Council and the parties on the ground need to act. We are extremely concerned that the humanitarian situation in Yemen continues to plunge to new depths as the country battles an economic crisis, an increasing risk of famine and a major outbreak of coronavirus disease (COVID-19). While we assess that Yemen is over the initial COVID-19 peak, we are concerned about the potential for new waves of infection and even more deaths. It is vital that public health mitigation efforts continue, and we call on all Yemeni parties to report cases transparently, ensure unrestricted humanitarian access and facilitate the response of the United Nations. The indirect effects of COVID-19, including on Yemen's fragile economy, will have a far longer-lasting impact. Yemen's currency has collapsed to record lows, leading food prices to rise by over 20 per cent since January. Urgent external financial assistance to the Central Bank is now needed to stabilize prices and enable more people to afford food. In the light of this economic crisis, recent food security and economic data suggest that conditions in Yemen already mirror, or are even worse than, those of late 2018, when pockets of famine were last identified across the country. As we have heard, famine is now a realistic prospect in Yemen this year. In addition to economic support, the key action the international community can take to prevent famine is to urgently provide significant funding to the United Nations humanitarian appeal. With the General Assembly high-level annual debate fast approaching, the United Nations has received only $900 million this year, as compared to around $2.6 billion at this point last year. This funding gap is curtailing the humanitarian response, and 7 million people will stop receiving food if new funding is not in place by October. In response to this funding crisis, the United Kingdom's Foreign Secretary announced £25 million in funding for Yemen earlier this month, in addition to what the United Kingdom has already pledged. We welcome other countries' announcements of extra funds but call on all donors to play their part and urgently provide funding to the United Nations appeal. We call on all countries that have given money in previous years to do so at the same level this year. A political solution is needed desperately to alleviate the humanitarian crisis and end the conflict for good. As I have said repeatedly in the Council, the United Kingdom fully supports the painstaking and patient efforts of Mr. Griffiths. Today I urge the Yemeni parties - by which I mean the Government of Yemen just as much as the Houthis - to cooperate with him and to agree to his proposals as soon as possible. The window of opportunity to end this conflict will close. It is in the hands of the parties to work with Mr. Griffiths and reach an agreement. It is in their hands to act in theinterests of their people. Are they ready to do so, or will they act in their own self-interest? I welcome Security Council unity on this issue here and at the ministerial level. Later this week, we will be co-hosting an event on Yemen, with the Secretary- General and others, that will demonstrate our close Council and international coordination. We must stay united in our messages to the parties and our support for Special Envoy Griffiths so that he can reach an agreement. The United Kingdom remains extremely concerned about the situation in Ma'rib. The Houthi offensive is not only leading to a distressing loss of life, but it also threatens to derail the political process at this crucial stage. We welcome and fully support the Special Envoy's strong statements on Ma'rib. I urge the Council and the wider international community to send a strong, unified message to the Houthis that they must cease their offensive on Ma'rib and negotiate peace. Finally, we must not forget the FSO SAFER oil tanker, on which the Council has been briefed many times, including in various meetings earlier this summer. The tanker poses a significant environmental and economic threat to the region. While I welcome progress made in negotiations between the Houthis and the United Nations Office for Project Services on the scope of the assessment and repair mission, the mission needs to happen urgently. The Houthis must follow through on their promises by allowing the United Nations experts to board the tanker to carry out their work as soon as possible. Time is running out. The parties need to move quickly to agree a ceasefire and engage in a comprehensive political process. If they do not, the Council should be ready to take action.
