I thank Prosecutor Bensouda for her report and for her briefing. A permanent and universal criminal court is more necessary than ever to bring the perpetrators of the most serious crimes to justice and to break the cycles of impunity and violence at work in too many crisis situations. The International Criminal Court (ICC) is the cornerstone of the fight against impunity at the international level. It plays an essential role within the multilateral system. France reaffirms its full support for the Court, which must be able to act independently and impartially within the framework defined by the Rome Statute. The Office of the Prosecutor must be able to exercise its prerogatives without hindrance or obstruction. We welcome the fact that a large number of States parties to the Rome Statute reminded the General Assembly of this very recently (see A/75/PV.19). With regard to the implementation of resolution 1970 (2011), France reiterates that the fight against impunity is one of the key elements in the resolution of the conflict and in reconciliation between the Libyan parties. The prosecution and conviction of criminals is necessary for rebuilding the State and restoring democratic life. To this end, the full cooperation of all stakeholders, first and foremost the Libyan parties, is crucial. France welcomes the fact that three field missions could be carried out by the Office of the Prosecutor in 2020. Access to Libyan territory is indeed an essential condition for the fulfilment of the mandate entrusted to the Court by the Council. However, France remains deeply concerned about the obstacles that the Office still faces in executing the arrest warrants for the three fugitives. France recalls that resolution 1970 (2011) urges all States concerned, whether or not they are parties to the Rome Statute, to cooperate fully with the Court and its Prosecutor. The most serious crimes committed in Libya since 2011 must all be investigated and prosecuted, including crimes committed by Da'esh and crimes against migrants and refugees. The assistance provided to the Office of the Prosecutor in this regard by international and regional organizations, as well as civil society representatives present in Libya, is more than valuable. We welcome the strengthening of working relations with the United Nations Support Mission in Libya and the structuring of cooperation with the European Police Office. We are deeply concerned about arbitrary detentions and cases of inhumane detention conditions, including with regard to migrants and refugees. The authorities in charge of the places of detention concerned must open them without delay to international observers and investigators. The enforced disappearances and sexual violence reported by the Office are equally unacceptable. There should be no doubt that anyone who incites or commits such crimes today is liable to prosecution. The Sanctions Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) must also exercise its deterrent capacity to stop those who are destabilizing Libya by organizing the trafficking of migrants and refugees. France will remain fully committed to finding a political solution to the Libyan crisis and to supporting the restoration of the rule of law in the country. In this regard, we welcome the conclusion of a ceasefire agreement on 23 October by the delegations to the 5+5 Joint Military Commission, under the auspices of the United Nations. This agreement must now be fully implemented, respected and effectively monitored. The Libyan Political Dialogue Forum, which began in Tunis on 9 November, is also an important and encouraging step. We hope that it will lead to an intra-Libyan political agreement, paving the way for the holding of elections. We welcome the rigorous approach adopted by the Office of the Prosecutor in accordance with the principle of complementarity. France will continue to cooperate fully with the ICC and mobilize the Security Council to that end. It will also remain fully mobilized in the search for a political solution in Libya, alongside the members of the Berlin process, its European partners, Libya's neighbours and its partners within the African Union and the League of Arab States.
