Mr. Henze (Germany): Let me first join other
speakers in thanking you, Madam President, for the way in
which you have directed the work of the Council in the
month of February. You have demonstrated an admirable
combination of patience, drive and perseverance, which did
not prevent late-night meetings, but which was always
successful in bringing about results which could be
accepted by all of us.

We associate ourselves fully with the statement made
by Italy on behalf of the European Union. We had strongly
supported the first draft resolution, which was presented by
the Friends of Haiti and which was in line with the report
of the Secretary-General and the request of the Government
of Haiti. We are therefore less happy with the final
outcome of the informal consultations in the Council. As
was stated by other speakers, we know that more time is
needed to help create a really stable situation in Haiti.

Germany believes, however, that the improvements
which have been achieved in Haiti could have been
jeopardized by an immediate withdrawal of the United
Nations Mission in Haiti (UNMIH). That is why we voted
for the resolution adopted today despite the misgivings I
have expressed.

In the four months to come, UNMIH will continue
to contribute to the maintenance of a secure and stable
environment for the rebuilding of the country and to the
establishment of a well-trained Haitian National Police to
which these functions will be transferred.

We congratulate the Government of Haiti, whose
permanent representative we welcome today in the
Council, and the people of Haiti on the progress already
achieved, especially in the political field. The first
peaceful transition from one democratically elected
president to another in the history of the country is one of
the positive developments that deserve special mention.
We are confident that the new Haitian leadership
under President Preval will contribute to national
reconciliation and the creation of a national consensus
that unites all parts of Haitian society in an effort to
rebuild and develop the country. A united effort by all
Haitians will be indispensable for further substantial
progress in the political, economic and social fields.

It is our sincere hope that UNMIH, even under this
limited mandate, will help Haiti in its efforts to stabilize
and rebuild the country and to continue on the way
towards the establishment of strong democratic structures.
My country has actively supported the efforts of the
international community to consolidate the democratic
order in Haiti. We provided election observers for the
parliamentary and local elections in June and September
1995, as well as for the presidential elections in
December. Together with our partners in the European
Union, and as a member of various international
organizations, we are providing economic assistance for
Haiti. Bilaterally, we have at present earmarked DM. 105
million - about $72 million - for economic cooperation
with Haiti. The main focus of this cooperation is a food
security programme.

Let me take this opportunity to thank all those
countries which are contributing troops to UNMIH.
Furthermore, I would like to extend our deep condolences
to the Governments and the families of all those who
have given their lives to fulfil this important mission.
Finally, we are particularly grateful to Canada, which
helped find the solution to our problem by making a very
generous offer.

