Mr. Scheffers (Netherlands): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for presiding over a public
meeting on another important subject. The Netherlands
welcomes your initiative to devote a follow-up open
debate to the role of the Security Council in the
prevention of armed conflicts.

Let me also join previous speakers in thanking
the Secretary-General for his important, action-oriented
presentation.

As stated earlier in our first debate in November
last year, my delegation regards conflict prevention as
the core of the duties the Security Council is called
upon to carry out on behalf of the membership of the
United Nations. It lies, naturally and manifestly, at the
heart of the Netherlands integrated approach to the
Council's agenda. The next portion of my remarks
should be seen as complementary to the statement to be
made by the representative of France on behalf of the
European Union.

Given the ongoing discussion on the scope of
responsibilities of the Security Council, the
Netherlands wishes to reiterate once more its views on
that matter. Everything the Charter has to say on
conflict prevention - Chapters VI and VII and Article
99 - appears to have been drafted, more than half a
century ago and in the aftermath of the Second World
War, with conflicts between States in mind. However,
the overwhelming majority of present-day conflicts on
the Council's agenda is of an internal, domestic nature,
while at the same time threatening international peace
and security. In View of its primary responsibilities the
Security Council cannot but subscribe to a more
flexible interpretation of Article 2, paragraph 7, which
stipulates that nothing in the Charter shall authorize the
United Nations to intervene in matters that are
essentially within the domestic jurisdiction of any
State.

A rigid interpretation of this paragraph would
preclude the Council from taking any action,
preventive or not, in the majority of issues on its
agenda and would therefore prevent the Security
Council from shouldering the responsibilities it is
called upon to carry out. Conflict prevention by the
Security Council has three pillars: early warning, early
attention and early action.

The creation of a culture of prevention requires a
broad and integrated approach based on the analysis of
the root causes of armed conflicts. We often witness
the emergence of violent conflicts within States when
political, economic, social and ethnic dividing lines
coincide in an environment in which the State is
suffering from a lack of legitimacy and capacity. In
such cases Governments often are unable to resolve
conflicts without resorting to violence and repression.
Indeed, resorting to repression is the easiest answer of
a weak State to the demands of groups within a society
that already feel discriminated against. That repression
usually takes the shape of violations of human rights.
However, the evident lack of respect for human rights
on the part of the State undermines further the
legitimacy of that State. The repressed are likely to
resort to violence as well, and a spiral of violence
ensues.

Recently we have been witnessing conflicts about
control of, or access to, natural resources. In such cases
economic considerations are at stake, and the struggle
is not so much about political power. However, the
result is the same: the emergence of armed conflict.

In some cases dormant conflicts are turned into
armed conflicts by triggering factors, such as a sudden
deterioration of economic perspectives, the demise of a
leader, or a flow of small arms and light weapons.

In a culture of prevention, the Council should be
especially alert for signs of deterioration, as these
constitute a clear early warning. In our view, it stands
to reason that international peace and security in their
widest sense are best served by democracy, the rule of
law, good governance, respect for human rights and
sustainable development. Likewise, if these basic
conditions are deteriorating within a country, the
chances of violent conflicts erupting are mounting.
Indeed, one of the most telling indicators of pending
conflict is the occurrence of rampant human rights
violations. As I indicated before, such abuses reflect a
breakdown of the rule of law and can be a prelude to
violent domestic conflict, with consequences for
international peace and security. Therefore, the
Security Council should approach reports of the
Commission on Human Rights and of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights as potential early-
warning documents.

The Netherlands is in favour of the establishment
of expert panels by the Secretary-General as early-
warning instruments. In this regard, I should like to
underline the importance of giving adequate follow-up
to early-warning signals, namely, the two other pillars:
early attention and early action- in other words, a
more proactive approach is called for.

The Netherlands is in favour of enlarging the
financial resources at the disposal of the Secretary-
General for preventive diplomacy- for instance, for
financing fact-finding missions and his special
representatives. Therefore the Netherlands, along with
other Member States, has contributed substantially to
the Trust Fund for Preventive Action. Out of this Trust
Fund activities instrumental to conflict prevention can
be financed, such as expert meetings, the organization
of peace talks, the establishment of a local United
Nations representation, and missions of special
representatives in order to improve communications
between the United Nations and the government
concerned.

In this context, I should like to point out that the
Netherlands would prefer that the Secretary-General be
able to finance such activities from the regular budget
and that the Netherlands is only contributing to the
Trust Fund awaiting agreement on this matter.

The foundations for post-conflict peace-building
should be laid during peace negotiations, which should
involve all segments of society in order to create broad
support for the peace process. Negotiations held solely
at a high political level will result only in paper
agreements without support in society. Therefore
cooperation with non-governmental organizations is of
vital importance for the peace process to take root and
to succeed.

Furthermore, peace agreements often do not
really address the root causes which have led to armed
conflict. In the post-conflict phase, ample attention
should be given to those causes in order to prevent a
rekindling of armed conflict. Of equal importance in
the post-conflict situation are the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of former combatants
in society. All in all, for security and development to
be mutually reinforcing elements of a sustainable
peace, reform of the security sector is essential.

In conclusion, Sir, my delegation considers the
presidential statement which you are going to read out
to be a welcome and useful follow-up document. That
statement covers very extensively and comprehensively
many, if not all, aspects of the issue of preventing
armed conflicts, which is and remains very much at the
core of the Council's responsibilities. Let us indeed use
this document as a catalyst for concrete actions with
renewed vigour.

