Mr. Oshima: First of all, I would like to express
my gratitude for the kind words about the work of my
Office and of my colleagues in various humanitarian
agencies and their partners. I am also very pleased that
the aide-memoire has been very positively received. I
look forward to working closely on this matter with the
members of the Council, including updating and
revising it as necessary, and to keeping the Council
informed about new developments that may require its
involvement.

I am also grateful for the Council's general
appreciation of the closer cooperation between the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA) and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO) in the future. In this regard, I
noted a couple of points that I would like to briefly
address. One was the suggestion made by the
representatives of the United Kingdom and the United
States inviting OCHA to join briefings with DPKO on
the matter of protection in the context of its
deliberations on peacekeeping mandates. I would like
to thank those two delegations for this suggestion.

I have already raised this possibility with my
colleagues from the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, and I would very much welcome the
opportunity to do so in future, as the need arises.

Another related matter was raised in this
connection. A proposal was made by the representative
of Singapore to see whether it would be useful to carry
out a review of all peacekeeping operations against the
background of the aide-memoire. I think that this is a
very useful suggestion, and I should like to thank the
representative of Singapore for raising this point. I
should like to discuss this matter further with Under-
Secretary-General Guehenno, in the spirit of the
understanding we have reached on closer cooperation
between the two bodies.

Allow me to try briefly to respond to some of the
questions raised. First, with respect to the allegations
made concerning West Africa, as I noted in my
briefing, what we have been doing so far is to follow
exactly the overall guidelines that the Secretary-
General himself has provided. He directed that these
allegations be investigated as thoroughly and urgently
as possible, and the Office of Internal Oversight
Services has already launched its investigation. As I
have already indicated, the results of the investigation
will be published in a report to the Secretary-General
to ensure that there is transparency in the conduct of
this investigation. As the Secretary-General also has
indicated, this will be done in an expeditious manner.

There is another aspect to this problem, and that
is to also look into remedial or preventive measures in
order to prevent or minimize the problem. For that
purpose, as Emergency Relief Coordinator, I have
asked, as Chairman of the Inter-Agency Standing
Committee (IASC), for the establishment of a task
force that will provide specific policy
recommendations and desirable preventive or remedial
measures to address the vulnerability of children and
women. The task force, it is hoped, will come up with
its recommendations by early April. Those
recommendations will include measures to be taken
internally by each organization.

I will also ask the task force, within the IASC, to
elaborate a code of conduct for all humanitarian
professionals. We hope to be able to come up with
some standardized code of conduct applicable to all
professionals engaged in humanitarian activities,
whether within the United Nations or outside -
hopefully, also including non-governmental
organizations in this respect. As I understand it, the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations is already
working on this issue for peacekeeping operations, and,
naturally, we will be closely coordinating and
cooperating with that Department on developing
measures that need to be put in place to address this
problem.

It was asked whether it might be necessary to
look at this issue as one that is not confined only to
West Africa but that could extend beyond it. The policy
of zero tolerance laid down by the Secretary-General,
of course, covers not just the allegations in West
Africa, but applies to this issue anywhere in the world.
In that light, the IASC members agreed on the need to
assess, at a later stage, the underlying causes, including
poverty and the misuse of power and influence by
relief workers in West Africa and elsewhere. Naturally,
we are concerned with the wider implications of this
problem.

Very briefly, I should like to answer a question
raised by the representative of Colombia on issues
relating to access - especially in the context of the
development of guidelines or manuals. We are indeed
engaged in an exercise which, hopefully, will enable us
to develop some meaningful guidelines or a manual
which will be used in our negotiations to obtain access
in the delivery of humanitarian assistance. To that end,
an inter-agency process has already been initiated to
produce guidelines that will be based on best practices
for United Nations humanitarian field staff. The
guidelines will provide practical steps on when, how
and on what basis to engage or disengage with armed
groups.

The agency staff concerned have just concluded a
one-day retreat in Geneva to elaborate on the annotated
outline, and they expect to hear more from experts
from the International Committee of the Red Cross and
from think tanks, and they will continue their efforts to
arrive at some guidelines.

Regarding respect for international humanitarian
law, I share the concerns expressed by the
representative of Syria, with whom I had the great
pleasure of working in the context of the Economic and
Social Council, that the Geneva Convention and other
standards of international human rights law must be
more strictly observed. I should like to commend, in
this regard, the untiring efforts that the International
Committee of the Red Cross in particular has made
over the past 50 years to urge respect for international
humanitarian law. I believe that, in many cases, they
have succeeded in achieving compliance. I would hope
that the Council will continue and, where necessary,
step up its efforts to promote compliance with the
recognized standards of international humanitarian law
around the world.

I wish to say a little about developing the road
map, as I have indicated briefly, as part of our effort to
take the aide-memoire out of the Security Council
Chamber in New York to the broader stages and as part
of our own training exercises. We intend to hold
workshops and training sessions on the issue of
protection of civilians, including practical application
of the aide-memoire, for our staff in the field,
government officials, academic institutions and
practitioners and others. We intend to do this in Asia,
Africa, America and other places in the coming
months. In our work, we will try to mainstream
protection issues further into decision-making and
policy development.

I am sorry if I have not responded to all questions
and requests for clarifications made, but I would like to
thank you again, Sir, for the opportunity.

