Mr. Eitel (Germany): I want to thank you,
Mr. President, for having called this meeting at the request
of our Lebanese colleague. Germany supports what will be
said by Italy on behalf of the European Union. Like all
other members of the European Union, we are also
concerned about the security of the United Nations peace-
keeping force in Lebanon, the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon (UNIFIL).

For the second time in one day the Security Council
is meeting to discuss the situation in an area which is part
of the Middle East. In both cases, this Council is dealing
with tensions heightened by brutal acts of violence, directed
against the peace process, which represents the only chance
of bringing peace to this war-torn region.

We would like to express our sympathy for Israel
when trying to protect its civilian population. We strongly
welcome the fact that Israel, in spite of constant terrorist
acts directed against it, remains committed to the peace
process. At the same time, it is obvious that, like Israel,
Lebanon is also entitled to territorial integrity, sovereignty
and political independence within its internationally
recognized borders. This is clearly spelled out in Security
Council resolution 425 (1978).

While self-defence is clearly legitimate, measures of
self-defence can become illegal if they do not abide by the
basic rule of law prescribing proportionality. This legal rule
has been universally recognized at least since the Second
World War. Even then it was nothing new. We find this
already in the third book of Moses, where it is said:
"Breach for breach, eye for eye, tooth for tooth" (Leviticus 24:20). The Talmud, that admirable compendium of
wisdom, in its tractate "Bawa Kamma", which means "First
Door", explains that rule as meaning an eye for an eye, not
a life and an eye for an eye.

Measures of self-defence must not be directed against
innocent civilians. That is laid down in article 33 of the
Fourth Geneva Convention, to which both Israel and
Lebanon are parties. Any measure of self-defence must be
proportionate not only in size but also in direction. Whereas
all States, especially those of the region, are responsible for
complying with Security Council resolution 425 (1978), the
Lebanese Government is responsible for doing all it can
to prevent its territory from being used for attacks against
persons protected by the four Geneva Conventions.

We appeal to all parties concerned to break the
vicious circle of violence along the Lebanese-Israeli
border. Military de-escalation is the key to preventing a
spiral of armed hostilities from developing. Any
mediation effort aimed at that goal finds our full
support - in particular, the one undertaken right now by
the French Foreign Minister. We sincerely hope that
current tensions will eventually give way to an all-
inclusive peace process, thus bringing peace, stability and
security to a region and its population, which has for
much too long endured the bitter experience of
confrontation and war.

The most urgent step now is an end to the fighting.
We appeal to all parties involved to refrain from further
use of arms. The civilian population must be protected.
Germany will continue to help with humanitarian
assistance.

