Mr. Arias (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me to begin by thanking you personally, Sir, and the
Indonesian delegation for the initiative of convening
this meeting and providing an opportunity to all
Members of the Organization to reflect on the situation
in Darfur. Likewise, I wish to express our gratitude for
the briefings by Ambassador Jan Eliasson and Under-
Secretary-General Jean-Marie Guehenno on the
progress made in the political process and on the
deployment of the Hybrid Operation.

We cannot speak of the crisis in Darfur without
emphasizing, as did Mr. Eliasson, that peace can only
be achieved through a political process of consultation.
Therefore, we fully support the diplomatic endeavours
and mediation undertaken by Ambassadors Eliasson
and Salim.

Regarding the Sirte meeting, we share the view
that it was successful as a first step in the
reconciliation process. We believe it is essential to
keep up the pace of negotiations, and we support the
consultations undertaken by the Joint Mediation
Support Team in different areas of the region, with a
view to drawing in those rebel groups that did not
participate at Sirte.

As for the Hybrid Operation, we recognize the
technical efforts of the African Union and the United
Nations, and we thank those countries that have offered
troops in solidarity to carry out the difficult task. Like
previous speakers, we are concerned by the delays in
obtaining necessary troops. In that connection, we
suggest that greater interaction might be desirable
between members of the Council and the parties in
conflict, also the African Union and the
troop-contributing countries. We also appeal to
everybody not to lose sight of the fact that the main
objective of the Hybrid Operation is pacification in
Darfur.

Panama was among the delegations that
considered it important to ensure the participation of
the representative of the Government for the Darfur
region in the meeting. We are pleased to hear of his
commitment to the political process. But we are
concerned that we have heard no appropriate reference
to the political crisis that is being endured by the
people in Darfur. The time the Organization has
devoted to the crisis in Darfur is not one that can be
measured in terms of the military conflict between the
Government and the rebel troops. It is to be measured
in the tremendous suffering of the people of Darfur. In
that same connection we are also concerned that the
representative of the Sudan has not dealt clearly and
specifically enough with the problems that were raised
by Mr. Guehenno regarding the make-up of the hybrid
force and the negotiation of the status-of-forces
agreement.

It is not the fate of members of the Security
Council or our citizens at stake here - we are talking
about the fate of the Sudan and the people of the Sudan
and it is the Government in Darfur that has the main
responsibility to ensure the safety and security of the
people. If we do not see in the future a significant
change, in the commitment of the Government of the
Sudan, not only to the political process, but also to
ensuring protection and to allowing the international
community to ensure the protection of the people of
Darfur as needed. If that does not happen, then the
Council and the Organization will need to consider
alternative measures.

