Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Envoy Griffiths and Under-Secretary-General
Lowcock for their briefings. China supports the Special
Envoy in his efforts to promote the political process in
Yemen and commends the United Nations and relevant
agencies for their tireless efforts to improve the
humanitarian situation in that country.

Recent developments in Yemen have added new,
complex dimensions to the search for a political
solution. The international community is paying close
attention and has called for an early de-escalation of
tension in the south. China condemns the attack on
Saudi oil refinery facilities and opposes any attack
on civilians and civilian installations. We call on the
parties to refrain from any action that could lead to the
further escalation oftensions in the region and, instead,
rely on political means, such as peaceful negotiations to
achieve regional peace and stability.

China supports maintaining the sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity of Yemen.
The parties should be guided by the primacy of the
interests of their country and their people, show reason
and restraint, resolve their differences through dialogue
and negotiations and restore stability and order in
Yemen as soon as possible.

China has taken note of the recent joint statement
issued by Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates,
in which they expressed their willingness to promote
the ceasefire arrangement and facilitate constructive
dialogue among the Yemeni parties. We hope that
countries of the region will continue to create the
positive conditions for the Yemeni parties to ease
tensions and enhance mutual trust.

The Stockholm Agreement is a major step towards
achieving a political solution to the issue of Yemen.
It was an important outcome brought about through
the good offices of the United Nations, and it should
therefore be fully implemented. Focus should be placed
on the implementation of the Al-Hudaydah Agreement.
The United Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah
Agreement and the Redeployment Coordination
Committee should play a constructive role in that
regard. On 8 and 9 September, the Committee held
its sixth joint meeting, at which it was decided to
activate the mechanism to strengthen the ceasefire and
de-escalation to establish a joint operations centre and
deploy monitoring teams to the front lines of several
locations in Al-Hudaydah.

We hope that those concrete measures will lead
to the effective implementation of the ceasefire in
the Al-Hudaydah area and the reduction of civilian
casualties. The Yemeni parties should continue
with the good offices of the United Nations, pursue
dialogue and consultations on outstanding issues,
including those concerning the regional security
forces and port revenues, and strive to make progress
on issues, including the exchange of prisoners and the
implementation of the Taiz agreement.

The Yemeni people are the primary victims of
the fighting in the country, and the deteriorating
humanitarian situation is indeed worrisome.
The international community should increase its
humanitarian assistance to the country. We hope that
the donor countries will honour their commitments
through strengthened coordination with the United
Nations. We hope that the parties concerned will ensure
that humanitarian supplies can reach all populations
and regions in need of such assistance.

A political solution is the only solution to the
Yemeni issue. The United Nations will continue to
play its role as the main avenue of good offices in
the political process, and the Security Council should
continue to maintain unity and provide political
support. The Yemeni parties should act in accordance
with Security Council resolutions, including resolution
2216 (2015), the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative,
its Implementation Mechanism and the outcome
document of the National Dialogue Conference; return
to the path of dialogue; and resolve the issue through
political negotiations.

Through bilateral and multilateral channels,
China has provided large amounts of assistance in the
areas of the economy, education, and health care, and
will continue to do so to the best of its ability. China
sincerely hopes that the country can restore peace and
stability and achieve development as soon as possible.
China stands ready to play a constructive and positive
role in that regard.

