Mr. Al-Ashtal (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, Sir, allow me to congratulate you very sincerely
on your wise and skilful management of the work of
the Council this month. I would also like to thank your
predecessor, the Ambassador of China.

Our country is concerned at the situation and
developments in Somalia because of the historic ties
between our two countries. These ties have evolved
into a very close family relationship in our community
of States. Events in Somalia have an impact on Yemen
and its people. We are host to many Somali refugees
and are suffering from additional social and economic
burdens that are beyond our resources to sustain. My
country has therefore consistently contributed to the
international community's efforts to resolve the
situation in Somalia in a peaceful, democratic way.

The Republic of Yemen has already convened a
meeting of all Somali parties in Sana'a to negotiate and
to find a solution that would restore statehood and
government to Somalia, as well as security, peace and
stability.

At one time or another, we have all tested many
different and contradictory initiatives, and sometimes
parallel formulas, to try to resolve the crisis in
Somalia, but none of them have broken the impasse.
That is why the Djibouti initiative was taken and
blessed by the Organization of African Unity (OAU),
the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC), the
League of Arab States and the Non-Aligned
Movement. This initiative should be supported by the
United Nations and by the international community.

We pay tribute here to the Government of
Djibouti and to its President, Mr. Ismail Omar Guelleh,
for having personally endorsed the initiative and for
having held a Conference on national dialogue in
Djibouti on Somalia. We believe that his initiative
gives grounds for much hope, because it is a real
attempt to restore stability and security, not only in
Somalia but also in the entire Horn of Africa. I wish to
pay tribute to the statement made by the Ambassador
of Djibouti, as well as the steps he enumerated for
holding a meeting on 15 July.

We should also stress one other important thing,
as reflected in the Secretary-General's report
(document S/l999/882): the people of Somalia are
primarily responsible for finding a solution to their
situation. No one can help them if they do not help
themselves. Therefore, we call upon the United Nations
and the international community to guarantee a real
presence in Somalia, through civil institutions, to help
that country resolve its crisis, create its State and
institutions and regain its role and status in the
international community. I wish here to stress Security
Council resolution 733 (1992), which calls upon all
external parties to comply with the resolution and to
see to its implementation, so that the conflict between
rivals outside Somalia does not spill over into Somalia
itself. Otherwise, the conflict will go on, to the
detriment of all efforts and attempts made by the
United Nations and the international community to put
an end to this tragic situation, which has gone on for
almost two decades now.

Attention should be paid to the devastation of
natural resources and the looting that has gone on in
Somalia. We call on all interested parties to respect the
sovereignty of Somalia and to terminate any action that
might lead to a transfer of control over these resources.

