Mr. Helg (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for having
invited interested non-members of the Security Council
to participate in this discussion, thereby making it
possible for them to express their opinions on the work
of the sanctions Committee and the Monitoring Group
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) on Al
Qaeda and the Taliban.

Switzerland shares your view, Sir, that terrorist
activities carried out by Al Qaeda and associated
groups will continue, in the next few years, to represent
one of the major threats to international peace and
security. The prevention and suppression of terrorism
will be a long-term effort, and the United Nations, as
the major body for multilateral cooperation, must
continue to play a key role in this respect.

The detailed briefing that you provided earlier,
Mr. President, as Chairman of the sanctions
Committee, attests to the quality of the work that you
have carried out and to your personal commitment, as
well as that of your team, over the past year.

We welcome in particular the dialogue you
conducted directly with the authorities of Member
States so as to identify problems which might arise in
the implementation of Security Council resolutions, as
well as ways of solving them.

Mr. President, you did not have the opportunity to
go to Switzerland last year; however, members of the
Monitoring Group met with representatives of the
federal authorities during a September 2003 visit.
Switzerland orally presented to the sanctions
Committee its observations on the working methods of
the Monitoring Group and requested, through a letter
dated 9 January 2004 addressed to the President of the
Security Council, that its observations on certain
inaccuracies contained in the report be distributed as an
official document of the Security Council.

For the future, Switzerland very much hopes for a
more active and transparent dialogue with the
Monitoring Group and Member States and hopes also
that the sanctions Committee will set guidelines to that
effect.

Switzerland is cooperating closely with various
countries in tracking down terrorist groups and in
identifying their sources of financing. Last week, for
example, a broad-based police operation was
conducted in Switzerland in the framework of the
judicial inquiry into the Riyadh attack of 12 May 2003.
Eight foreign nationals were arrested, about 20 persons
interrogated and many facilities searched.

With regard more specifically to United Nations
machinery, Switzerland ratified the 12 international
conventions to combat terrorism and quickly
implemented all the measures adopted by the Security
Council. It has cooperated actively with the Counter-
Terrorism Committee, the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999), and the Monitoring
Group. We have also submitted the various reports
expected of Member States pursuant to resolutions
1390 (2002) and 1455 (2003).

Switzerland would like to recall here its
conviction that the fight against terrorism should be
carried out with determination, and that this can be
done without sacrificing respect for human rights and
the rule of law. This is particularly the case with
respect to those sanctions targeting individuals or
entities suspected of being involved in terrorist
activities.

To ensure the credibility and efficiency of the
sanctions, it is important, even urgent, to work to
improve the mechanisms for listing and de-listing the
persons and entities targeted.

In conclusion, Switzerland would like to reiterate
its resolve to combat vigorously international terrorism
and its determination to cooperate closely in this regard
with the Council and with the bodies that the Council
has established to that effect.

