Ms. Ndhlovu (South Africa): I would like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
May. We would also like to commend the Security
Council, under your presidency, for the important
initiative it took in dispatching a mission to the Great
Lakes region and for conducting this open briefing.

My delegation would also like to thank
Ambassador Levitte for his comprehensive briefing.
The mission's visit to the region was of historic
importance in that it engaged, and consulted with, a
wide range of interested parties. The visit has also been
able to refocus world attention on the conflict in the
Great Lakes region. Similarly, the visit will go a long
way in promoting the credibility of the Security
Council among the people of the Great Lakes region.

My delegation believes that, now more than ever,
there exists a great chance to achieve peace and
stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We
hope that the momentum developed towards peace will
be sustained, and that it will bring about an accelerated
end to the conflict. That momentum could be greatly
sustained by the speedy deployment of phase III of the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC).

My delegation has taken note of the report of the
mission, and though we have not yet had the
opportunity to study it, we hope that the views and
proposals put forward by the interested parties will
better inform the future course of action to be taken by
the Security Council. The Council's involvement
should be further supported by the Lusaka signatories
by observing the ceasefire and by abiding by their
commitments under the Kampala and Harare
disengagement plans.

The inter-Congolese dialogue still remains key to
the establishment of a broad-based, democratic process
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In this
regard, my delegation welcomes the recent
announcement by the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to allow political parties to
participate in the inter-Congolese dialogue.

In order to establish a sustainable peace, it is vital
that the peace process be complemented by a
rejuvenation of economic activity in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The re-establishment of the
communications and transportation infrastructure will
be critical in achieving this rejuvenation. In this regard,
my delegation wishes to stress the importance of the
international community's support for the
implementation of quick-impact projects. Such a dual
approach to achieving peace and stability will ensure
that as the people of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo trade their guns for peace, they will be able to
focus their energies on the reconstruction of their
country.

My delegation believes that ultimately it is the
people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo who
will determine their destiny. However, we believe that
the international community can contribute to the
restoration of peace, stability and development in that
country. South Africa would like to see a situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo where all the
people could benefit from the enormous natural
resources that the country has been endowed with. If a
state of freedom from fear can be achieved, freedom
from want will be a long-term benefit.

