Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): Mr. President, the
initiative of the delegation of Mauritius to convene this
momentous debate receives our full support and
appreciation. We are also pleased to see the Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Regional Cooperation of
Mauritius presiding over this important meeting.

Ukraine considers this high-level Council
discussion, with the participation of the Secretary-
General of the Organization of African Unity (OAU),
the High Representative for the Common Foreign and
Security Policy of the European Union, foreign
ministers and many friends of Africa, to be a unique
opportunity to refocus the attention and commitment of
the international community towards strengthening
peace and security in the region and supporting
Africa's endeavours to achieve long-term stability,
prosperity and peace for its peoples.

There is no doubt that the conflicts in Africa
today represent a major challenge to the continent, as
well as to global security and stability. Despite some
positive developments - for instance those in Sierra
Leone, Ethiopia and Eritrea - the continent continues
to be ravaged by armed conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Burundi, by instability in
Somalia and Angola, and to be challenged by the
problems of post-conflict peace-building in Guinea-
Bissau and the Central African Republic. In the face of
persistent violence, unspeakable loss of life, human
suffering on the part of civilian populations, especially
of women and children, millions of refugees, returnees
and displaced persons, the international community
cannot afford to be complacent.

During the past few years the United Nations
Security Council has led the international front in
addressing conflict situations in Africa. During the two
years of Ukraine's membership in the Council, a
number of important issues pertaining to conflict
situations in Africa were raised in the Council, among
them the sources and driving forces of conflicts,
approaches to prevent and address these conflicts and
protect the victims, as well as various aspects of United
Nations peacekeeping and sanctions.

I must mention the major milestones in the
Council's African agenda in recent years, which gave
an opportunity to world leaders to exchange views and
to bring greater international attention to the most
burning issues of the continent - and here I mean, of
course, the holding of "a month of Africa" in January
2000, a Council meeting held at the level of heads of
State and Government on 7 September 2000 and a
series of initiatives in November and December 2001.
Today's debate is another event of this kind, which, I
hope, will add new impetus to international action in
support of Africa.

Ukraine has always been determined to make a
practical contribution to international peace efforts
aimed at resolving conflicts in Africa. The participation
of Ukrainian peacekeepers, which has sometimes
resulted in the ultimate sacrifice in United Nations
peacekeeping missions in Sierra Leone, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Ethiopia/Eritrea, testifies to
that commitment.

The complex nature of conflict in Africa calls for
a comprehensive integrated response and requires
equally responsible action from others beyond the
Council, i.e. on the part of other relevant bodies of the
United Nations. In this context, we welcome the
participation in this debate of the President of the
Economic and Social Council. International assistance
plays a critical part in Africa's efforts to eradicate
poverty and promote economic growth and
development in order to abolish the culture of war and
to promote the culture of peace and development.

Today's debate draws particular attention to the
importance of increased United Nations engagement in
Africa and better coordination and dialogue with
regional and subregional organizations. Ukraine places
particular emphasis on the need to ensure the continued
support of the international community for the efforts
of the OAU, the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) and other African subregional
organizations that have conflict prevention, conflict
management and peacemaking at the top of their
agendas.

For its part, Ukraine has offered to collaborate
with the OAU in development efforts within the
continent. Our determination was reiterated during the
January visit to Africa by Yuriy Sergeyev, the State
Secretary of the Ministry for Foreign Affairs of
Ukraine, in his discussions with the Secretary-General
of the OAU. Ukraine is prepared further to develop
constructive partnership and comprehensive
cooperation with the Organization of African Unity.

Ukraine pledges its continued support to efforts
on the part of the international community, in solidarity
with Africa, aimed at strengthening peace, cooperation
and development in the continent. We believe that the
New Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD),
an OAU-backed initiative, with endorsements
throughout the world, will move Africa's regeneration
forward.

Finally, I would like to quote the President of
Ukraine, who confirmed at the Security Council
Summit in September 2000 that "Ukraine looks
forward to a century of African renaissance and stands
ready to advance its arrival" (S/PV4194, p. 13).

