Mr. De Rivero (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): The
delegation of Peru congratulates you, Sir, on having
convened this open debate on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. We would like also to thank
Under-Secretary-General Jan Egeland for his
introduction and to highlight the work done by his
Office to promote the protection of civilians in armed
conflict - work which today does great credit to the
United Nations. I cannot but note that the events
referred to in his report cause us grave concern.

In my delegation's View, the question we are
considering is one of the most important issues on the
Security Council's agenda, given its humanitarian and
ethical implications and given its scope, which
encompasses the prevention of conflict escalation and
the restoration, maintenance and consolidation of
peace.

The primary responsibility to protect
populations - as was noted earlier; we could not agree
more - from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
and crimes against humanity lies with each State, and
cooperation is necessary to ensure that this is the case.
In armed conflicts, the protection of civilians is also
the responsibility of the parties to the conflict, be they
States or armed groups.

The United Nations has a responsibility to protect
populations from serious and systematic violations of
international humanitarian law, in particular the
Geneva Conventions. Cases of genocide, war crimes,
crimes against humanity or ethnic cleansing should
meet with an immediate and firm response by the
Security Council.

The responsibility to protect must be viewed as a
concept that guarantees the achievement of the ultimate
goal of State sovereignty, which is none other than
safeguarding the human rights of a State's own citizens
and promoting respect for the human dignity of its own
people - a fundamental element of its own definition
as a civilized State. That was the understanding
reached last September by our heads of State and
Government, who forged a new consensus so that
action could be taken to avoid any recurrence of
genocide such as took place in Rwanda and in
Srebrenica.

The United Nations must never abdicate its
ethical responsibility to safeguard and defend the
human rights of individuals throughout the world.
Human rights are of concern to all States in the
international system, and respect for such rights is a
sine qua non for the legitimate exercise of national
sovereignty. Accordingly, it is important to ensure
access to humanitarian assistance for civilian
populations affected by conflict, with full respect for
humanitarian work and for internationally agreed
principles on humanitarian assistance, and to protect
humanitarian personnel and civilian populations,
particularly its vulnerable segments, such as women,
children, refugees and internally displaced persons.

The reality is that, in various situations of
conflict throughout the world, the United Nations has
often been unable to prevent genocide, massacres and
ethnic cleansing. Against that backdrop, Peru has
stressed the importance of an ongoing focus by the
Council on the concept of the responsibility to protect.
That concept involves three basic responsibilities: first,
to prevent the causes of domestic conflict; secondly, to
respond - and this could include coercive measures,
sanctions and, in extreme cases, the use of force; and
thirdly, to reconcile the population and to rebuild the
country that has collapsed.

An important measure to strengthen the
credibility of the Council's efforts to protect civilians
could be to have the permanent members of the
Council reach a gentleman's agreement not to use the
veto when crimes against humanity are involved such
as ethnic cleansing, genocide or grave and massive
violations of human rights. That could deter those who
might be planning to perpetrate atrocities. If such
atrocities were committed, however, there could then
be rapid action on the part of the Security Council.
Moreover, that would be a coherent and consistent way
of implementing the World Summit Outcome.

Acceptance of the concept of the "responsibility
to protect" and its effective implementation by the
Security Council are now extremely important for
enhancing the credibility of the United Nations.

In that connection, my delegation would like to
draw attention to the Security Council's decision to
refer the case of Darfur to the International Criminal
Court. This represents an important milestone on the
path towards international justice for grave violations
of human rights and strengthens the position of the
United Nations in adopting appropriate measures to
help the victims of massive violations of human rights,
to defend the rule of law and, above all, to put an end
to impunity and bring the perpetrators of such
violations to international justice.

The investigation by the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court will help uproot the sense
of impunity that exists today with respect to Darfur,
and will help - in cooperation with the international
authorities and the Government of the Sudan - to
ensure that the perpetrators of violations are brought
before tribunals and judged with all the guarantees
required by international standards. In that way, the
victims of these violations may receive
compensation - at least moral compensation - and
may again hope to rejoin their society with dignity.

But judicial deterrence is not enough. At times,
solid mandates are required for peacekeeping
operations. Peru agrees with the Secretary-General that
in the five years since the adoption of resolution 1296
(2000) there have been new challenges to the safety
and well-being of civilian populations and the tools
that we have at our disposal to address these concerns
need to be developed accordingly.

We believe that it is important to improve the
design of peacekeeping missions, supported by specific
mandates for the protection of civilians during conflict.
Moreover, my delegation agrees that we need a new
resolution to update the framework used by the
Security Council to provide support for the protection
of civilians, in order to ensure that this new
environment is better reflected in the capacity of the
United Nations to respond.

In that connection, we believe it is important to
take into account regional and subregional
organizations which can play a major role because they
are in a better position to have a more complete picture
of the situation and of possible solutions for the
countries of the region. In the case of the American
continent, the Organization of American States should
at last be enabled to take an active role alongside the
Security Council.

In conclusion, I must recognize that to strengthen
the protection of civilians after the cessation of conflict,
during the post-conflict period, there must be resolute
action to build national democratic institutions - not
so much through general elections, but beginning with
democracy at the local level, then progressing to
general elections. Frequently there are elections which
do not turn countries into democracies. Also, it is
important, during post-conflict reconstruction, to put
viable economies in place, because the majority of
countries that have collapsed had economies that were
poorly integrated in the world economy. This creates
social marginalization, which, in the final analysis, is
the cause of the collapse of States and the conflicts that
the Security Council faces.

