Mr. Ehouzou (Benin) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, I congratulate Panama, your country,
most warmly. It has been a very long day, and it has
not yet come to an end. But it has been worthwhile
because we are dealing with the cause of children, who
are the future of our planet.

Three years ago, in February 2005, my country,
then the President of the Security Council, organized a
similar public debate (see S/PV.5129) to launch the
negotiations that resulted in the adoption of resolution
1612 (2005). For today's debate, I welcome the
important contributions of the French Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Mr. Bernard Kouchner; the Minister
for Development Cooperation of Belgium, Mr. Charles
Michel; and the Under-Secretary of State for Foreign
Affairs of Italy, Mr. Vittorio Craxi. Their presence lent
additional stature to this meeting of the Security
Council devoted to children.

I would also like to express the Beninese
Government's great appreciation to the Secretary-
General and to his Special Representative, Under-
Secretary-General Radhika Coomaraswamy, for the
impressive annual report submitted on children and
armed conflict (S/2007/757). The report is as
exhaustive as it is informative about the scale of
violations of which children are victim, caught as they
are in a vicious spiral of armed conflict in countries
throughout the world.

We have also been able to appreciate, through the
facts and analysis set out in the report, the
praiseworthy efforts of the United Nations system, in
particular by UNICEF, represented here today by its
Executive Director, Ms. Ann Veneman, to tackle
resolutely the violations of the rights of children in
conflict situations and to increase pressure on their
perpetrators in order to force them to halt these
violations.

We welcome in particular the effective,
methodical and persevering consideration of the issue
by the Security Council Working Group set up within
the context of resolution 1612 (2005). It provides the
Security Council with determined leadership and it
confirms the relevance of the reasons that led to its
establishment.

We also welcome the mobilization of civil
society, which makes it possible to strengthen
monitoring of the activities of national armed forces
and of non-State armed groups and of their practices
towards children in conflict situations. We have also
noted the ongoing mobilization of the special task
forces on monitoring and reporting, which strive to
keep the spotlight on violations of children's rights in
countries in conflict situations.

My delegation gathers from this report that the
Security Council has not yet fully reflected in its
actions the need to pay equal attention to the issue of
children and armed conflict, regardless of whether the
countries concerned are on its agenda. That is the only
explanation that my delegation can find for the fact
that the Working Group and the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General lack sufficient resources to
follow up on situations in countries not on the
Council's agenda.

In that regard, the seriousness of the facts brought
out in the report requires not only that appropriate
budgetary measures be taken to put an end to a
situation that penalizes children in countries not on the
agenda, but also that the Security Council's Working
Group be fully mandated so that it can fully carry out
its functions related to information received from the
monitoring and reporting mechanism concerning
children and armed conflict.

Our second observation after considering this
report is that the Security Council has not
demonstrated all the firmness necessary to make
inveterate violators of children's rights in countries in
armed conflict situations comply with international
norms. In that regard, my delegation is of the view that
effective measures must be taken against parties that
do not meet their obligations under resolutions 1539
(2004) and 1612 (2005), particularly with regard to the
adoption of action plans to cease violations of
children's rights in all their aspects.

The international justice system, in particular the
International Criminal Court, must also become more
active than it has been in the past, by pursuing those
who are responsible for the recruitment and use of
children in armed conflicts or who commit
reprehensible acts against them, in contravention of
international law and international humanitarian law.
Here, I must welcome the cooperation that has made it
possible to transfer to The Hague those warlords from
the Democratic Republic of the Congo sought by the
Court. In that regard, my delegation - which, since
2005, has raised the issue of raising the level of
qualifications for the recruitment and use of child
soldiers - is pleased to note that one of the persons
transferred is also accused of crimes against humanity,
not only of war crimes. Unquestionably, the
maltreatment of child soldiers dehumanizes them,
making them war machines or simply what we might
call cheap cannon fodder. That is very sad and is
nothing less than a crime against humanity. Those
responsible must be held accountable to the
international community.

Our third observation is that the Security
Council's actions have been aimed much more at
demobilizing children involved in armed groups. The
fundamental issue of their rehabilitation and
reintegration into their communities does not seem to
have received the attention required. That situation
could be a cause of the resurgence of conflicts in the
countries concerned. The international community
must find the means to ensure appropriate supervision
of children freed by armed groups.

The international community must redouble its
efforts to put an end to the use of rape as a weapon of
war. In that regard, my delegation welcomes the
adoption of resolution 62/134, on eliminating rape and
other forms of sexual violence in all their
manifestations, including in conflict and related
situations, adopted by the General Assembly in
December 2007.

Our fourth observation is that the United Nations
must redouble its efforts to halt once and for all, at the
level of its personnel, the ignominy of the sexual
exploitation of children in the context of peacekeeping
operations. The troop-contributing countries must fully
shoulder their responsibility by taking the measures
required to ensure the prevention of sexual crimes,
which must be vigorously prosecuted. At the same
time, international and governmental forces must
ensure strict respect for their rules of engagement in
order to avoid the abuses that have claimed countless
victims among the children and civilian populations
whom they are supposed to protect.

Finally, my delegation fully associates itself with
the recommendations made by the Secretary-General in
his report and pleads for their diligent implementation
for the great benefit of children, on whom depends the
future of countries in conflict situations, which must
return as soon as possible to the path of peace.

