Mr. Zhang Yesui (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank you, Sir, for presiding over today's
open debate and to avail myself of this opportunity to
welcome you in your new post as the Permanent
Representative of the Libyan Arab J amahiriya. I would
also like to welcome Ms. Zuma, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of South Africa, and Mr. Lamamra,
Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African
Union (AU), to our meeting today. I would also like to
thank Mr. Prodi and the African Union-United Nations
panel of eminent persons under his leadership for the
report they have submitted (S/2008/813). The report's
recommendations on strengthening the peacekeeping
capacity of the AU merit careful consideration.

The world today is confronted with more and
more challenges. As Africa is the region with the
greatest concentration of wars and conflicts, achieving
peace and security in Africa has become one of the
most immediate and pressing challenges facing us.
Maintaining peace and stability on the African
continent is not only in the interests of African
countries and peoples, but also in the common interest
of the international community as a whole.

The Security Council is entrusted with the
primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. The Council has
invested an enormous amount of energy in Africa; 60
per cent of the items on its agenda relate to the
continent, and nearly half of the Council-mandated
United Nations peacekeeping operations are deployed
there.

We are satisfied to note that the AU has played an
increasingly important role in maintaining peace and
stability in Africa and in settling African conflicts,
serving as a beneficial and strong complement to the
work of the Security Council. It is therefore both the
widely shared aspiration of the African countries and a
practical need for the Council's work to further
strengthen the cooperation between the United Nations
and the African Union.

We are all in favour of a closer partnership
between the African Union and the United Nations.
This partnership should be built on a stable yet flexible
basis. While ensuring its own authority, the Security
Council should give priority consideration to
supporting the key role of the AU in conflict settlement
and should heed the views and suggestions of the
Union, including by paying more attention to African
Union voices on questions such as Darfur, the Sudan
and Somalia.

This partnership should be equal and mutually
complementary. The United Nations and the African
Union each have comparative advantages in addressing
African hot spot issues. If the two sides strengthen
coordination on the basis of mutual respect and mutual
complementarity, and if they make joint efforts to
respond to the various challenges faced by the African
continent, this will greatly enhance the overall
effectiveness of the international community's efforts
to address African conflicts.

We support finding more reliable means of
funding for African Union peacekeeping operations as
part of our effort to provide predictable resource
guarantees. While the AU has the strong political will
to respond to conflicts in Africa, it finds it hard to play
its role fully and put to use its unique advantages,
because of logistical and financial constraints.

The recommendation in the report of the African
Union-United Nations panel of eminent persons on
establishing a new financing mechanism merits further
study by all parties concerned. In recent years, the
United Nations has worked to strengthen African Union
peacekeeping operations in places like Darfur, the
Sudan and Somalia; this has been broadly welcomed by

the international community. We support the
enhancement of capacity-building in the area of
peacekeeping for the African Union and hope that the
United Nations will scale up cooperation with the AU in
areas where the Organization has advantages, such as
personnel training, institution-building, information-
sharing, resource management and logistics support, so
as to effectively implement the United Nations Ten-Year
Capacity-Building Programme for the African Union.

We also encourage other donors to continue to
commit themselves to strengthening the African
Union's peacekeeping capacity. We support putting the
strengthening of the peacekeeping capacity of the
African Union on the list of priority areas in the United
Nations peacekeeping reform agenda.

Currently, United Nations peacekeeping
operations are confronted with such daunting
challenges as overexpansion, low efficiency and
inadequacy of resources. Thus, strengthening the
African Union's peacekeeping capacity will not only
increase the efficiency of peacekeeping and save
resources, but will also enhance Africa's sense of
ownership and the capacity to take the destiny of the
continent into Africans' own hands. It is necessary for
us to study ways to achieve the optimal combination of
the two, so that United Nations peacekeeping can be
advanced through strengthening the peacekeeping
capacity of the AU, and so that Africa can benefit from
United Nations peacekeeping reform and improve its
overall peacekeeping capabilities.

