The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Italy.

I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Vladimir Voronkov and Executive Director Michele
Coninsx for their briefings. I also wish to take the
opportunity to commend very much Ambassador
Umarov for his excellent leadership of the Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015) concerning ISIL (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and
associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities and for his detailed presentation.

Three years ago resolution 2178 (2014) underscored
the urgent need to tackle the threat posed by foreign
terrorist fighters travelling to conflict zones to join
Da'esh. In that context, the Council required Member
States to ensure that their legal systems provided
for the prosecution, as serious a crime, of travel for
terrorism or related training, as well as of the financing
or facilitation of such activities.Subsequently, in 2015,
Italy amended its penal code to criminalize the conduct
of any individual organizing, financing or promoting
transnational travels aimed at committing terrorist acts.

Since its adoption, resolution 2178 (2014) has
been considered a comprehensive and central tool
aimed at enhancing Member States' operational and
legal measures to stem the flow of foreign terrorist
fighters and implement capacity-building programmes.
Nonetheless, the global threat posed by terrorism
continues to evolve and diversify, as we have heard in
the briefings.

The sustained military pressure levied upon Da'esh,
as well as the deterioration of its financial conditions,
have not deprived the group of its capability to send
funds to its supporters outside the conflict zone and
to enable external attacks. ISIL has been continuing to
adapt to military pressure by changing its organization
from one that is State like to a network, reframing
narratives and making investments even in legitimate
businesses. The heinous attack perpetrated last Friday
in a Sufi mosque near Egypt's Sinai coast clearly
demonstrates the persistently very high level of the
terrorist threat.

While the flow of foreign terrorist fighters travelling
to the conflict zones has nearly stopped, Member States
continue to be confronted with the threat posed by
returnees and relocators. The international community
is still looking for an effective way to properly address
the challenge. Our commitment to counter-terrorism
must also be extended far and wide, including in the
Sahel, where instability contributes to the spread of
violence and terrorism.

The lack of adequate information-sharing
mechanisms further hinders countries' efforts to assess
and mitigate the threat. In this regard, it remains crucial
for Member States to enhance their cooperation within
and between public sector agencies, both domestically
and internationally, and to empower financial
intelligence units, law enforcement and intelligence
services to improve the exchange of relevant information
in a timely manner.

Effective border police measures and enhancing
capacity-building on terrorist financing investigations
are particularly key in this regard. Italy already provides
advanced training to foreign officers dealing with
counter-terrorism and is also committed to providing
judicial and law enforcement international cooperation,
in the framework of transnational investigations.

We welcome the proposal of the United States for a
new draft resolution. In it, the Security Council should
address the threat posed by returnees and relocators
by considering the international best practices and
provide comprehensive strategies and guidelines to
help Member States understand how to reintegrate
returnees, especially women and children. Italy stands
ready to continue to work with Member States and
the United Nations as a whole to guarantee a timely
implementation of existing resolutions and studying new
recommendations in order to update and enhance the
response to terrorism by the international community.

I resume my functions as President of the Council.

There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.

The meeting rose at 5.15 pm.
