Nana Effah-Apenteng (Ghana): At the outset, on
behalf of my delegation, I wish to commend you,
Mr. President, for organizing this debate, which has
given us yet another opportunity to examine and
reaffirm time-honoured values and principles that have
enabled us to avoid the fate of those who experienced
the horrors of the First and Second World Wars. The
world is showing less and less tolerance for impunity
and egregious violations of human rights, ethnic
cleansing and genocide, and wars of aggression that
threaten the independence and right to self-
determination of sovereign States.

The enduring lesson of the Second World War is
that the continued maintenance of international peace
and security is inextricably linked to the observance of
the rule of law in the conduct of international relations.
In that regard, the 2005 World Summit Outcome
document was clear when it affirmed, in part 1,
paragraph 6,

"the importance of a multilateral system, in
accordance with international law, in order to
better address the multifaceted and
interconnected challenges and threats confronting
our world". (General Assembly resolution 60/])

That proclamation is in consonance with our firm
conviction that multilateralism should drive our
approach to international issues and that the foundation
of that multilateralism should be the international rule
of law. Today, as we confront the threat to human
survival posed by the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, terrorism, authoritarianism, poverty and
armed conflicts, we need to insist with even greater
vigour that the rule of law must underpin our approach
to multilateralism. In saying this, I am all too mindful
of the enormous challenges faced by the United
Nations as it embarks on profound reforms, in order to
become more effective and credible as the pre-eminent
tool of multilateralism in the twenty-first century.

On the promotion of the rule of law in conflict
and post-conflict situations, it is clear that a great deal
more of the attention, resources and focus of the
international community must be redirected towards
addressing the root causes of conflicts. While well-
tested mechanisms and procedures such as
peacekeeping have been in place for years to handle
conflict and post-conflict situations, there is a need to
correct this lopsided emphasis, tilting it more towards
pre-conflict situations. Extreme poverty, ethnic tension
and racial, cultural and religious intolerance, set
against a background of poor governance and human
rights abuses, have been known to ignite conflict.

The responsibility of the United Nations and of
the international community at large is to note such
danger signals and take appropriate action to
ameliorate the situation before it degenerates into
conflict. This is a critical area that has often been
overlooked. It is more cost-effective to troubleshoot
when warning signals are evident than to contain a
conflagration, with the attendant toll in human lives
and huge peacekeeping costs. An effective system of
early warning could greatly reduce the incidence of
conflicts. Such an early-warning system could trigger
action by the international community, using a wide
array of tools and mechanisms, such as fact-finding
missions, mediation and conciliatory efforts, arbitration
and sanctions. Such measures may be necessary to
restore the rule of law and justice in societies that are
on a trajectory to conflict.

As stated by the Secretary-General in his report
on the rule of law and transitional justice in conflict
and post-conflict societies, prevention is the first
imperative of justice. Post-conflict situations require
the building of institutions of governance and justice,
while at the same time gradually rebuilding the trust
and confidence of a traumatized population in those
institutions.

Transitional justice systems will therefore have to
take into account the victims of past abuses and fashion
a mechanism of national reconciliation by which the
perpetrators of such abuses can at least atone for the
wrongs done, if not brought to justice. There is a vital
need for the international community to support this
fragile process with the necessary political
commitment and financial resources, if vested interests
that feel threatened do not derail the peace and
transitional processes.

We believe that the newly established
Peacebuilding Commission will address effectively
such post-conflict issues. We call on the international
community to show the necessary political will and
commitment to the Peacebuilding Commission by
providing appropriate resources to enable it to play the
role envisaged for it.

The need to end impunity for egregious violations
of human rights, crimes against humanity, genocide
and wars of aggression is necessary for the

maintenance of the rule of law and international peace
and security. On this point, we are happy to note that
the International Criminal Court (ICC), whose creation
was a landmark in the development of international
humanitarian law, is now fully operational and has
commenced investigations in a number of cases. The
referral by the Council of the Darfur situation to the
ICC is an important milestone in the Court's
development. We also note with satisfaction the
achievements of the International Criminal Tribunal for
the former Yugoslavia and of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda. My delegation hopes that the
Council will be flexible on the question of the
completion strategy of those two tribunals so as to
enable them handle the most serious cases successfully.

We also recognize the role of the International
Court of Justice in adjudicating disputes between
States. We believe that recourse to the Court has been
very effective in reducing tensions between parties to
international disputes. The facilities of the Court will
be needed more than ever for the rule of law to prevail
in international relations.

The question of enhancing the efficiency and
credibility of United Nations sanctions regimes is one
of the major challenges of our times. Sanctions,
properly calibrated and applied, remain one of the most
important tools for the maintenance of international
peace and security and for fighting terrorism. In
moving from a system of general sanctions to targeted
sanctions, the challenge is to make targeted sanctions
"smarter" by limiting or, ideally, eliminating the effects
on the general population, without compromising their
effectiveness.

The 2005 World Summit Outcome document
called on the Security Council to ensure fairness and
clarity in the placing and removal of individuals and
entities on sanctions lists.

Issues of transparency, accountability and
fairness have been raised with regard to the listing and
delisting process under Security Council resolution
1267 (1999). While commending the 1267 Committee
for its efforts to review its guidelines to address these
problems, we are concerned about growing court
challenges to the listing decisions of the Committee. To
pre-empt such challenges, which have the potential to
undermine the credibility not only of the 1267
Committee but of United Nations sanctions regimes as
a whole, we support the creation of an appeal or review
mechanism. Our preference would be for a review
mechanism distinct from the 1267 Committee. In that
regard, we will examine favourably the recent French
initiative for the establishment of a focal point in the
United Nations for this proposal.

However, this does not answer a fundamental
question which is now confronting us: Is a decision of
a Security Council sanctions committee subject to
judicial review in Member States? That also raises the
issue of which system has primacy - the United
Nations or the judicial norms of Member States. Until
this conflict is resolved, the problem may persist.

In resolving this conflict, we may need to amend
the critical sanctions resolutions to the extent that they
request Member States to incorporate them into their
domestic legislations and compel the courts to enforce
and implement them.

Finally, I wish to stress the collective
responsibility of all States Members of the United
Nations to work towards the strengthening of
international law, the rule of law and the maintenance
of international peace and security, both within the
domestic sphere and on the international plane, by
practicing good governance and accountability and
observing and implementing all international
conventions and instruments.

