Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We would like to thank
Special Envoy De Mistura and Mr. Thomas Markram
for their briefings.

Reports of the alleged use of chemical weapons in
Douma on Saturday and the videos and pictures that we
saw through media outlets are indeed very worrisome.
It is also deeply disturbing that such reports of the use
of chemical weapons have continued in the ongoing
military activities in Syria. As we have repeatedly
stated, we strongly condemn any use of chemical
weapons by any actor under any circumstances. There
is no justification whatsoever for the use of chemical
weapons. Those responsible for these inhuman acts
must be identified and held accountable. This is
absolutely vital, not only for the sake of the victims
of chemical weapons in Syria but also for maintaining
international peace and security and for preserving the
non-proliferation architecture.

As the Secretary-General said in his 8 April
statement, cited by the Special Envoy earlier, any
use of chemical weapons, if confirmed, is abhorrent
and requires a thorough investigation. That includes
the need to establish accountability - something on
which the Council has yet to achieve consensus. In
the meantime, we believe the reported use of chemical
weapons in Douma, and in other parts of Syria,
should be investigated by the Fact-finding Mission,
and all parties should extend full cooperation in that
regard, in accordance with the relevant Security
Council resolutions.

While we all agree that accountability is
indispensable for deterring and stopping the use of
chemical weapons in Syria and beyond, there is currently,
as has already be said, no independent, impartial
and professional investigative mechanism that could
identify those individuals, entities, State or non-State
actors that use chemical weapons in the country. In that
regard, the Council should recover its unity and engage
in a positive and constructive discussion that could
address the existing institutional lacunae.

We all know that the threats to international peace
and security we face today are becoming increasingly
more complex by the day. We are seeing that the
proliferation of nuclear weapons is posing a real danger
and that the international norms on the use of chemical
weapons are also being undermined. Since the end of
the Cold War, the trust among major Powers has never
been so low as it is currently, which has enormous
implications not only for global peace and security but
also for the transformative agenda that we have set for
ourselves in the development sphere. We cannot think
of making any meaningful headway towards achieving
the Sustainable Development Goals without creating the
necessary global security environment. At the moment,
we really cannot say that this is an environment
conducive to making any progress on that account.

The Security Council has the primary responsibility
for the promotion and maintenance of international
peace and security. Unfortunately, it has not been able
to effectively address the new and emerging threats
and challenges to peace and security that we are facing
today. It has been all the more apparent that the lack
of unity and cohesion among members is undermining
the credibility of the Council. Perhaps we, the elected
members, have to look for ways and means to have a
greater impact, with a view to contributing to increasing
the Council's effectiveness. Without dialogue among
the major Powers to build the necessary trust and
understanding, it will be extremely difficult to address
some of the most difficult and complex security
challenges we have ever seen, including the situation
in Syria.

Things are in fact bound to get even worse unless

something is done. We cannot afford to bury our heads
in the sand. The dangers are very palpable. That is why
every opportunity should be seized. That is also why
we consider the news about the upcoming summit-level
meetings being planned to be encouraging. We can only
hope that those meetings will help to defuse tensions
and allow for serious discussions to take place with a
view to finding a common approach to tackling current
threats and challenges. The sooner those discussions
happen, the better for preserving global peace and
stability, which, as we speak, is becoming a source of
extremely great concern. In fact, I am understating the
magnitude of the potential danger we are facing.

