Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State ofBolivia) (spoke in Spanish): It is a true pleasure to have you, Sir,
preside over this Security Council meeting.

My delegation is grateful for the briefings today by
Mr. Vladimir Voronkov, Under-Secretary-General of
the Office of Counter-Terrorism, and by Ms. Michele
Coninsx, Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate, to whom we
reiterate our greatest support for their important work.
We also appreciate the informative presentation by
Ms. Joana Cook of the International Centre for the
Study of Radicalisation.

The threat posed by terrorism and extremism has
surpassed local and regional dimensions to become
a global problem that represents one of the greatest
challenges facing the international community today,
particularly because terrorist groups and organizations
have developed capacities to coordinate their criminal
acts through various platforms, including digital ones,
as well as to recruit people remotely using different
means and narratives.

In light of that, it is necessary to reiterate that
terrorism cannot, and should not, be associated with
any religion, nationality, civilization or ethnic group.
Such characteristics should not be used to justify for
any reason measures to combat or to prevent terrorism.

As has been noted, a clear example of the threat
represented by terrorism can be seen in foreign terrorist
fighters, whose return to their countries of origin and
their movement across areas of conflict are a source
of concern that calls for greater action on the part
of States. The fact that since 2011 more than 30,000
combatants from approximately 100 countries have
travelled primarily to Syria and Iraq demonstrates the
magnitude of the problem, all the more so given the
increasing victories in eliminating Da'esh.

It is important to bear in mind that foreign terrorist
fighters did not emerge suddenly or spontaneously.
Rather, they are the product of a process of ideological
radicalization and, once on the ground, of military
training in handling weapons and explosive devices,
including improvised explosive devices, which,
according to the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/770), and as Ms. Cook noted, has even involved
entire families, including women and children. It is
therefore necessary to realize that the most influential
factors in recruiting people are linked to their
socioeconomic situation and their vulnerability when
presented with promises of material and personal
benefits, as well as claims of ideological or sectarian
beliefs. That must of course go hand in hand with an
analysis and assessment of the structural causes of the
rise of terrorism, which include regime-change policies
and interventionism.

The fight against and the prevention of terrorism
must also focus on implementing measures of
development, inclusion and dialogue, as established by
pillars I and II of the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy. Similarly, the implementation of
resolutions 2178 (2014) and 2396 (2017), which propose
parameters to deal with the problem of foreign terrorist
fighters, take on particular importance when drafting
strategies and taking decisions.

In addition, the link between terrorist groups and
transnational criminal organizations associated with
crimes such as people smuggling, trafficking in persons
and the smuggling of weapons, ammunition, oil, its by-
products and cultural and heritage assets is increasingly
evident, since by perpetrating such crimes those
organizations gather economic resources and legitimize
them through money-laundering and other mechanisms
that seek to undermine or to eliminate State control. We
must identify these networks and payment mechanisms
so as to take concrete actions to eliminate the capacity
of these criminal and terrorist organizations to avail
themselves of economic and financial resources. It is
also crucial that the international community focus
its efforts on investigating whether terrorist groups
have access to tax havens and to take joint actions to
eliminate them.

We must also strengthen States' capacities to fight
decisively against money-laundering and the financing
ofterrorism. To that end, the cooperation, joint work and
assistance of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism
and the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate are, of course, of paramount importance.

In that light, we reiterate that all of the efforts
deployed by the Security Council and our Organization
to counter terrorism must enjoy the greatest possible
support and participation of Member States and aim to
strengthen the capacity of States both in the domain
of prevention and in counter-terrorism efforts, in full
respect of the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of States. Likewise, accountability before the
law is vital so that those responsible for committing
such criminal acts are duly investigated, prosecuted
and punished with the greatest severity, pursuant to
international law.

In that regard, my delegation once again expresses
its strong support for the transparent and balanced
implementation of the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy and its four pillars. We call on the
entire international community to act decisively in
the struggle against this scourge, using all the means
provided by the Charter of the United Nations to
fulfil the commitments undertaken in the framework
of international law and the resolutions of the
Security Council.

