Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): First, let me thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict - a topic of
particular importance in Afghanistan. I would also like
to thank the High Commissioner for Human Rights and
the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
for their briefings, and welcome the recent report of the
Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict (S/2010/579).

Nine years ago, the Afghan people
overwhelmingly supported the United States-led
intervention and joined the United States and coalition
forces in the fight against terrorism. They saw the
international military campaign as crucial to security in
the country and the region and to bringing an end to
their suffering. From 2001 to 2006, the trust and
cooperation between the Afghan people and the
international community helped the country to become
increasingly stable. However, with the re-emergence in
2006 of the Taliban from sanctuaries in the region and
its attempts to attack national and international forces,
parts of the country began to slide back into conflict.
Violence and insecurity, particularly in the past two
years, have widely affected people's security, and
thousands of civilians have lost their lives. The
increase in the number of civilian casualties has
negatively affected the people's trust in the prospect of
peace, security and development in the country.

Afghans are the first to feel the tragic effects of
conflict in their country. Civilian casualties are caused
mainly by intentional acts of the Taliban, Al-Qaida and
other extremist groups. Terrorists and extremists have
recently expanded the scope of their activities,
attacking all sectors of Afghan society. By resorting to
new and brutal tactics, including suicide bombings,
abductions, targeted assassinations and the
indiscriminate use of improvised explosive devices,
they show complete disregard for human life.
Furthermore, terrorists and extremists continue to
conduct attacks from densely populated areas and to
use civilians as human shields. Nevertheless, there are
also a number of unfortunate, unintended casualties
resulting from the military operations and activities of
international forces and the joint military operations of
both international and Afghan forces.

As shown in the 2010 mid-year report of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(S/2010/463), the number of civilian casualties due to
violence in my country has increased. In the first six
months of 2010, there were 3,268 civilian casualties,
including 1,271 deaths as a result of armed conflict -
or an average of over 18 civilian casualties a day. It
shows a 31 per cent increase from the same period last
year. Seventy-six per cent of the incidents were the
result of the activities of the Taliban and Al-Qaida
terrorist groups. Six thousand civilian casualties
occurred in 2009.

In discussing civilian casualties, let us remember
that we are referring to people - to the loss of human
life, all too often of innocent women, children and
elders. Such deaths must not be looked at as merely the
consequences of ongoing violence or as collateral
damage. Each death in Afghanistan represents a life
lost, a family left behind and an entire future denied its
potential.

The protection of civilians during military
operations is our shared responsibility and an
international obligation. Increased coordination
between international and Afghan forces during
military operations and greater cooperation between
the international community and the Afghan
Government are necessary for ensuring the safety and
security of civilian populations.

This is an important issue that has long been a
crucial point of discussion with Afghanistan's
international partners. My Government has called on
international forces to take measures necessary to
minimize or eliminate civilian casualties. We
appreciate the NATO commanders' commitment to
give a central place to the protection of civilians in
their new military strategy. We hope that further
necessary steps will be taken in this regard so as to
safeguard the lives and rights of Afghan civilians,
particularly in the areas affected by conflict.

To protect the lives of civilians, Afghanistan is
committed to working with the international
community to achieve lasting peace and stability in the
country. The protection of civilians must be placed in
the context of the emerging transition, in which Afghan
national forces will begin to assume full responsibility
by 2014.

Just this weekend at the NATO summit in Lisbon,
we embarked on the transition from an internationally
guided process to an Afghan-led one. Security is at the
core of this transition. It is essential that NATO and our
international partners enhance training for Afghan
security forces in order to ensure enduring security and
consequently the elimination of civilian casualties. The
transition is happening while the enemy is attempting
to disrupt the Government's activities and continuing
its attacks on the Afghan people and Government and
the international forces. As the Afghan Government
seeks to prepare itself to take on the responsibility for
leading security efforts, the continuing support of the
Afghan people for our shared efforts and their active
participation in the stabilization process are crucial to
success.

The protection and promotion of the rights of
civilians should be among the top priorities of the
international engagement in Afghanistan. In his address
to the heads of State at the NATO summit in Lisbon,
President Karzai said,

"We are in dialogue with the International
Security Assistance Force on issues of serious
concern to the Afghan people, in particular:
civilian casualties, detentions, lawless behavior
by some security companies and, at times,
NATO's posture. We need the space to discuss
these issues and resolve them in a spirit of
collaboration and teamwork. The sustainable
solution to these issues will, of course, come
from the realization of our common objective of
replacing international forces with Afghan
security forces."

We are of the conviction that civilian protection
is not confined to preventing civilian casualties.
Ending the loss of civilians requires the establishment
of lasting peace and stability. The recent Joint
Coordination and Monitoring Board's progress report
on the Afghanistan National Development Strategy,
covering the first 100 days after the Kabul Conference,
rightly points out that we have achieved more success
in improving security. Afghanistan has completed 89
per cent of planned activities in the area of security and
has exceeded expectations in the growth of the national
army and national police.

In addition to military efforts, the Afghan
Government is engaged in a comprehensive outreach
initiative aimed at achieving lasting peace and security.
The Afghan-led peace process calls on the Taliban to
lay down their arms and join the peace process and
reconciliation efforts. Engaging the armed opposition
in peace talks, creating Afghanistan's High Peace
Council and selecting 60 members for it are significant
steps towards strengthening peace and reconciliation
efforts. Our national reconciliation process is based on
our growing responsibility for the promotion of human
rights, building trust and continuing outreach to the
people of Afghanistan.
Going forward, the issue of protecting civilians in
armed conflict will continue to be central to our
national efforts. Today's meeting reminds us of the
importance of civilians in the overall work of the
United Nations and the international community's
efforts in general. We look forward to further
collaboration with our international partners in
achieving our ultimate objective: ending violence and
attaining lasting peace. The success of our joint efforts
is the best way to ensure the protection of civilians.

