Mr. Batu (Turkey): Let me take a moment to extend
our heartfelt condolences over the terrible loss of life
caused by the recent earthquake in Japan.

I wish to express our appreciation to the Secretary-
General for providing us with his "Supplement to An
Agenda for Peace", which is before the Security Council
today for its consideration.

At the time of its release, the report, "An Agenda
For Peace", was a compelling endeavour to remind the
international community of the urgency of the need to
strengthen the capabilities and arrangements of the United
Nations with a View to enabling the Organization to bear,
in a more effective and efficient manner, the ever-
increasing burden of maintaining peace and security
around the globe. The extensive and voluminous debate
that the Agenda has generated thus far is testimony to the
timeliness of the Secretary-General's initiative.

Since then there have been enormous changes in the
international scene - some of them encouraging, but
mostly disheartening. In relation to these changes, the
burdens on the United Nations have increased
dramatically. The Organization is going through a serious
soul-searching about its role, its effectiveness and its
credibility, almost on a daily basis.

In view of these most recent developments, and
given that this year we celebrate the fiftieth anniversary
of the United Nations, we believe that the Secretary-
General's "Supplement to the Agenda for Peace" is a
valuable and timely step forward to highlight the areas
where difficulties regarding the initiatives and ideas that
have been put forth in the Agenda have arisen.

We warmly support the point made by the Secretary-
General in his position paper that it is better to prevent
conflicts than to try to handle them after they have broken

 

out. Indeed, the idea of preventing disputes in a peaceful
manner is embodied in the letter and the spirit of the
Charter. In fact, this is not only a desirable and ideal
method of controlling and resolving conflicts, but also the
most cost-effective way of doing so. To this effect, we have
noted with attention the proposals made by the Secretary-
General in his position paper.

Furthermore, we believe that more attention should be
focused on certain measures of preventive diplomacy, such
as fact-finding missions, preventive deployment and
early-warning capabilities.

We share the observations of the Secretary-General in
the Supplement with regard to the qualitative and
quantitative changes that have been taking place since the
end of the cold war - in particular, on the tragic human
toll of the increased hostilities that have surfaced. The sheer
number of the refugees - given by the Secretary-General
as 26 million, representing a two-fold increase since
1987 - calls for swift and determined action. We believe
that as one immediate step the financial and material
capabilities of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) should be enhanced.
In the area of disarmament, the Secretary-General
introduces two new concepts in his position paper -
namely, micro-disarmament and macro-disarmament. The
proposition that micro-disarmament is relevant to
post-conflict peace-building is particularly interesting and
worth considering. We also agree with the Secretary-
General's assessment that

"The significance of micro-disarmament is
demonstrated by the enormous proliferation of
automatic assault weapons, anti-personnel mines and
the like." (S/1995/1, para. 61)

We believe that the efforts to address the proliferation of
this type of armament should be carefully balanced between
the need to deal with its serious consequences and the
legitimate rights of States to defend themselves.
Accordingly, the relevant measures in this area should focus
on ways to enable the various arms control mechanisms to
detect and verify illegal end-users.

We fully endorse the Secretary-General's views
pertaining to sanctions - particularly his reference to
Article 50 of the Charter. As he rightly states in paragraph
73 of his supplementary report,

"Sanctions are a measure taken collectively by the

United Nations to maintain or restore international

peace and security. The costs involved in their

application, like other such costs should be borne
equitably by all Member States and not exclusively
by the few who have the misfortune to be
neighbours or major economic partners of the target
country." (S/1995/1, para. 73)

We wholeheartedly support the Secretary-General's
proposals, contained in paragraph 75 of his position
paper, regarding the establishment of a mechanism to
carry out certain functions in relation to sanctions.

To the observations made by the Secretary-General
I must add that the lack of efficient consultation
mechanisms and secrecy in the decision-making of the
Council are also causing great concern to the general
membership. In this context, I should like to reiterate
what I said to this body on 16 December last year,
especially in reference to the imposition and review of the
economic sanctions. Since all Member States must
comply with sanctions imposed by the United Nations, we
propose that the decision-making and the review process
thereon must be totally transparent.

To be effective, sanctions regimes require the full
cooperation of the Member States. The successful
implementation of sanctions can be ensured only with
great sacrifice by the countries most affected. It is
difficult to understand why reviews of existing sanction
regimes are held in closed, informal consultations. At this
point I should like to repeat our concrete proposal. We
request that the Council consider

"reviewing existing sanction regimes in public
meetings with open debate." (S/PV.3483, p.]8)

In this vein, it is the considered opinion of my country
that the sanction committees should also carry out their
deliberations in public meetings or inform the
non-member countries of their deliberations and decisions
by circulating detailed reports periodically. We strongly
believe that openness in the activities of the Council with
respect to sanctions would make the system more just and
fair.

We took note with particular attention of the
Secretary General's remarks and suggestions in his
supplementary report with respect to the peace-keeping
activities of the United Nations, and urge members to
carefully examine their implications.

 

We hold the view that the success of peace-keeping
operations rests on a clear and practicable mandate given
by the Security Council, the cooperation of the parties
concerned, the readiness of Member States to contribute
personnel and, last but not least, adequate financial and
logistic support.

Furthermore, mandates must be tailored to the realities
and imperatives of the situation. In conjunction with this,
mandates of peace-keeping operations should be
periodically reviewed, and, when necessary, mandates
which no longer correspond to the prevailing situation
should be modified, so that peace-keeping forces could
operate with maximum efficiency. In this respect, their
degree of effectiveness should also be reviewed and, if
appropriate, they should be streamlined in keeping with the
goal of minimizing the costs.

In view of the financial strains that we face with
regard to the peace-keeping activities, I would like to refer
once again to the proposals made by the Secretary General
in "An Agenda for Peace." We continue to support his
proposals contained therein to deal with this problem, such
as taxing arms sales, retaining budgetary surpluses,
increasing the Working Capital Fund, authorizing
commercial borrowing and establishing a peace endowment
fund.

Given the stark realities that we painfully witness
around the globe, especially in the humanitarian aspects of
the conflicts, the Secretary-General's conclusion in his
supplementary report on the need to give serious thought to
the idea of a rapid deployment force is thought-provoking
and merits urgent consideration. Such a force could also
play a deterrent role in certain cases, depending on its size,
mandate, modalities of deployment, level of readiness and
proximity to potential conflict areas.

It is our firm opinion that the regional organizations
have much to contribute to the maintenance of peace and
security within the framework of Chapter VIII of the
Charter. The challenges we are facing today are far greater
than the means and resources of the United Nations to
respond to them by itself effectively and adequately. We
believe that the activities of the United Nations and the
regional organizations should be viewed as mutually
reinforcing and complementary in nature. In this respect,
we should also bear in mind that the United Nations
continues to play the central role in the maintenance of
peace and security around the world. To this effect, we add
our voice to the Secretary-General's point that, given the
unique characteristics of each situation and the varied
mandates, as well as the structures of the regional
organizations, an attempt to establish a universal model
for their relationship with the United Nations would be
counterproductive. In this context, we support the
principles that are laid out by the Secretary-General in
paragraph 88 of his report as the basis of this relationship.

This year we are celebrating the fiftieth anniversary
of this Organization. It is a most opportune time to take
stock of our past experiences and start reflecting on the
future. I sincerely hope that the Secretary-General's
supplementary report to "An Agenda For Peace" will be
an appropriate starting point to this end.

