Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): I would like to
thank Under-Secretary-General Ladsous, as well as
Commissioner Champion, Commissioner Hinds and
Deputy Commissioner Bent for their briefings.

We welcome your decision, Mr. President, to focus
this briefing on the protection of civilians. About
13,000 United Nations police work in dangerous and
challenging conditions in 16 peacekeeping and five
political missions around the world. They certainly play
a key role in making civilians safer, whether through
direct patrolling of areas of increased risk and by
ensuring security in camps for refugees and internally
displaced persons (IDPs), or indirectly by supporting
building national police institutions and assisting in the
development of national rule-of-law capacities.

United Nations peacekeepers are deployed in
places where law-enforcement structures are weak or
non-existent or, worse, where the local security forces
that do exist commit crimes against the very people
they are expected to protect. The task facing United
Nations police in each and every mission is certainly
enormous. The Council must therefore make sure
that it engages in a genuine and regular dialogue with
Police Commissioners, not just in this once-a-year open
meeting but also in the various configuration briefings

we hold, so as to ensure that we are fully apprised ofthe
challenges they face and are providing them with all the
support they need in their work.

Turning to the specific missions represented here
today, in South Sudan, as has been noted, almost
190,000 civilians have been forced to seek protection at
sites overseen by the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan. Forty per cent of the UNMISS force strength is
now dedicated solely to protecting those sites, a huge
and daunting task for the Mission's police component,
not just of protecting civilians from outside threats but
also of ensuring order within the camps. We commend
Deputy Commissioner Bent's efforts under such
extremely difficult circumstances. He has spoken about
the transformation of the Mission. I would like to ask
him if he could elaborate later on the key hurdles he
encountered in that urgent, unexpected task, and on the
lessons he could offer to other missions that might, God
forbid, face similar circumstances.

My second question is about the extent to which
the availability of the flow of small arms in the area
is complicating his task and what could be done about
that. The Deputy Commissioner also referred to hostile
IDPs and the difficulties created for the police in doing
their work; besides the issues that are created within
the sites, I would like to know if there is an issue, or
if there could be one in the future, with infiltration by
criminal elements, radical extremists or members of
armed groups coming in from outside and exploiting
the situation in the camps. What measures can the
Commissioner take to protect his own staff in such
situations, what do they need and what should the
Council pay greater attention to?

My next question concerns the measures that are
being taken to tackle sexual and gender-based violence
within and around the sites and, again, what the Council
can do to facilitate implementing that task in terms of
additional capacity or needed supplies.

I believe the Police Commissioner for the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) spoke
about drones. Certainly, the use of modern technologies
and equipment is always an issue. Could any of the
Police Commissioners elaborate as to what else would
be needed besides the drones, and how does that change
the effectiveness of what they do?

Bearing in mind the history of sexual exploitation
and abuse - unfortunately, not only in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in the past, but also the recent
unfortunate stories we hear about sexual abuse and
exploitation in the Central African Republic - we
certainly welcome some of initiatives that MONUSCO
has taken on additional training of personnel and
setting up whistle-blower mechanisms. I wonder if any
of the Police Commissioners could elaborate on the
good practices that they have introduced in that respect,
and what else needs to be done from their point of view
on that issue?

A number of delegations have spoken on the
percentage ofpolice women. We fully support and agree
with what has been said in that respect. Again, we also
understand the constraints that the representative of
the United States referred to, but for our delegation the
issue of encouraging more female police representatives
is extremely important. Could any of the Police
Commissioners share some experience from the field?
How greatly does a female police presence change the
interaction with the local communities, and how would
that improve the work of the Police Commissioners?

The report of the United Nations High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446) points out that national police development
and reform cannot be implemented separately from
the broader efforts to strengthen rule of law capacities
and the security sector. The police do not operate in a
vacuum. If other branches of law and order are weak or
inoperative - be it the prosecutor's office, correction
facilities, or the courts - even the most genuine efforts
of the police can be compromised. In that respect, from
our point of View it is essential that the United Nations
presence on the ground develops a comprehensive
approach to strengthening the justice and security
sectors, ensuring close cooperation among all mission/
country team components, including United Nations
police.

As the largest United Nations peace operation,
MONUSCO is responsible for implementing a
particularly multifaceted mandate. My question to
Commissioner Champion is: How does he ensure
coordination among all mission components in assisting
the development of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo's security sector and rule of law institutions?
How big a challenge is posed by criminal groups
or traffickers? He referred to natural resources and
poachers who are increasingly well equipped. What
additional needs does MONUSCO have in that respect?

With regard to the United Nations Mission in
Liberia, we appreciate the tremendous work done during
the Ebola crisis. It really is an inspiration to all of us.
That is an issue the Police Commissioner has spoken
about at length. What lessons could he draw from the
Ebola crisis with regard to preparedness, resources,
training and contingency planning needs?

