The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Australia, Indonesia, Luxembourg,
New Zealand, Portugal, Singapore, Thailand and
Timor-Leste in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to the Senior Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Timor-Leste,
Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ramos-
Horta (Timor-Leste) took a seat at the Council
table; the representatives of the other
aforementioned countries took the seats reserved
for them at the side ofthe Council table.

The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Sukehiro
Hasegawa, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Timor-Leste and Head of the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Hasegawa to take a seat at the
Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2005/99, which contains the progress
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Mission of Support in East Timor. I should also like to
draw members' attention to document S/2005/103,
which contains a letter dated 23 February 2005 from
the representative of Timor-Leste addressed to the
Secretary-General.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Sukehiro Hasegawa, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Timor-
Leste and Head of the United Nations Mission of
Support in East T imor.

I now give the floor to Mr. Hasegawa.


