Mr. Tiendrebeogo (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): Burkina Faso, which is a party to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and
actively advocates the timely entry into force of the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, voted in
favour of resolution 1874 (2009), which we have just
adopted, because it firmly believes in the need for a
world free of nuclear arms.

While our principled position is that all States
have the right to develop nuclear energy for civilian
purposes, we also advocate that all States should
abstain from activities in this area which could
endanger international peace and security and weaken
the relevant legal and institutional frameworks. That is
why, together with the whole of the international
community, including the countries of the region, my
delegation has condemned the nuclear test carried out
by the Democratic People's Republic of Korea on
25 May last in contravention of relevant resolutions of
the Security Council, in particular resolution 1718
(2006), and which bears the seeds of an exacerbation of
tensions on the Korean peninsula and throughout the
region.

We hope that to the extent that resolution 1874
(2009) takes into account the essential parameters of
the issue, it will make an effective contribution to the
efforts to find a lasting solution to the North Korean
nuclear issue. Because the measures approved are
targeted, as is stated in the resolution itself, we hope
they will effectively make it possible to avoid any
negative humanitarian impact on the population of
North Korea. That is also one of the reasons why we
supported the resolution.

Burkina Faso urges North Korea to resume
cooperation with the International Atomic Energy
Agency and to return to negotiations, in particular the
Six-Party Talks, which despite all the difficulties
remains the most appropriate framework for emerging
from the crisis.

We invite the country and all parties to do
everything possible to favour dialogue, which is the
only way to prevent any escalation in the region. The
Security Council, the countries of the region and the
entire international community have a particular
responsibility in this regard. Within that framework, we
hope they will accompany the parties on the way to a
peaceful, comprehensive and lasting settlement of the
matter.

