Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Ambassadors Umarov, Aboulatta
and Llorentty Soliz for their briefings. The Security
Council Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999),
1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities, the
Counter-Terrorism Committee and the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), under the leadership of the three ambassadors,
have actively carried out their work. That is something
that China appreciates.

Terrorism is a common enemy of the whole of
humankind. Da'esh, Al-Qaida and other terrorist forces
pose a serious threat to international peace and security.
Counter-terrorism capacity-building in all countries
and international counter-terrorism cooperation
need to be strengthened urgently. The prevention
of the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
and their means of delivery is a shared task of the
international community. Under such circumstances,
the international community should strengthen
cooperation by implementing comprehensive policies
and effectively dealing with these issues.

First, the 1267 Committee is an important Council
counter-terrorism mechanism. It evaluates the threats
of terrorism organizations, strengthens sanctions
measures and ensures that the relevant Council
resolutions are implemented effectively. Indeed, it
plays an important role. Recently, the 1267 Committee,
pursuant to the mandate of the Council's resolution,
carried out a review of the sanctions list, strengthened
its work on listing and delisting and conducted other
review work. It has strengthened cooperation with
the Monitoring Team and the Ombudsman and has
consistently improved its working methodologies,
efficiency and effectiveness. Its work is full of
positive results. China hopes the 1267 Committee will
strengthen its communication with the Member States
concerned, strengthen its cooperation with regional and
subregional counter-terrorism mechanisms and support
the capacity-building and counter-terrorism efforts
of relevant countries and regional organizations. The
1267 Monitoring Team and the Ombudsman should
follow the Security Council resolutions and the rules
of procedure of the Committee by further improving
their work and jointly maintaining the mechanism's
effectiveness and authority.

Secondly, the 1373 Committee, supported by the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate,
has promoted the full implementation of the Council's
resolution, monitored new terrorist threats and evolving
trends and provided technical assistance in the area of
counter-terrorism, thereby playing an important role in
that regard. China supports the continuing attention
given by the 1373 Committee to the fight against the use
of the Internet by terrorist organizations for terrorist
activities and financing. China welcomes the 1373
Committee's submission ofproposals to the Council for
a comprehensive international framework on counter-
narratives. China hopes the 1373 Committee will
continue to strengthen its dialogue with Member States
and have better coordination and cooperation with
other United Nations agencies. Furthermore, it hopes
the Committee will help Member States to strengthen
their counter-terrorism capacities so as to cooperatively
deal with the new challenges of terrorist organizations
using the Internet for their terrorist activities.

Thirdly, the prevention of the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction and their means of
delivery is a common challenge for the international
community. It is also an important component of the
global governance. In 2016 the 1540 Committee carried
out a comprehensive review of the implementation of
the resolution by Member States and the work of the
1540 Committee. It also produced a comprehensive
review report.

The Council also adopted resolution 2325 (2016)
unanimously. In the next stage of work, the 1540
Committee, guided by the Council's resolutions and
the programme of work of the Committee, should
insist on Member States playing a leading role in
non-proliferation efforts, and avoid the establishment
of new mechanisms. It should give priority to meeting
the needs of developing countries so as to strengthen
their capacity to implement the resolutions. China
is against all forms of terrorism and is actively
implementing relevant United Nations resolutions in
earnest. China is taking part actively in international
counter-terrorism cooperation. China is willing to work
with the international community to promote actively
international cooperation on counter-terrorism, to
improve the non-proliferation system and to jointly
maintain international peace and stability.

