Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): As
is the custom in the Council, I will focus specifically
on the topic of this debate, which is to analyse the
eighteenth report of the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court received by the Security Council, in
accordance with resolution 1593 (2005).

Not as a reproach, but rather so as to exercise our
memory, I would like us, Council members, to remember
that in February, through resolution 2091 (2013), we
noted that the population of Darfur was in an "urgent
humanitarian crisis". We also reiterated the demand for
an end to military actions, indiscriminate attacks on
and other violence against civilians, the recruitment of
child soldiers, other crimes against children and abuses
against women.

In July, the Council adopted resolution 2113 (2013),
in which it stressed the importance of full compliance
with all of its resolutions on the Sudan and recalled the
importance of ending impunity and ensuringjustice for
crimes committed in Darfur. In that respect, Argentina
also notes that the Office of the Prosecutor is mandated
to act in accordance with the provisions of the Council's
resolutions that specifically address the responsibilities
of that Office.
Furthermore, Argentina notes that the Prosecutor is
mandated to deal with current crimes, including - as
other members have mentioned - aerial and ground
bombardments affecting civilians, high numbers of
civilian deaths, sexual and gender-based violence,
attacks on human rights and civil society activists,
kidnappings, attacks on humanitarian workers and
the staff of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur, impeded access of humanitarian
personnel and peacekeeping forces and the forced
displacement of civilians that has generated- according
to what is known and accepted as accurate - some
430,000 newly displaced people.

As has also been noted in prior statements, the
briefing on Darfur by the Prosecutor ofthe International
Criminal Court (ICC), in addition to taking stock of
the crimes committed, emphasized the crucial factor
of cooperation. Despite any subjective opinion that
one might entertain of the individual in the position of
Prosecutor, an objective assessment of the functions
of the Prosecutor e which, in accordance with the
Statute, are established on the basis of the principles of
cooperation and complementarity - would demonstrate
that she is simply doing what she is supposed to do.
The work of the ICC and the Prosecutor is to promote
cooperation and complementarity; it is not to provoke
or cause conflict.

In that context, the Government of the Sudan,
pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005), is required to
cooperate with the Court and to provide all necessary
assistance. The resolution also calls on States not party
to the Rome Statute and all Members of the United
Nations to cooperate with the Court, without politicizing
the situation, and to continue to fight against impunity.

The issue of cooperation with the Court includes
cooperation in the execution of arrest warrants and
follow-up by the Council through referrals to the
International Criminal Court. The Prosecutor's briefing
recalled - as many Council members have also
done - that none of the eight formal communications
from the Court to the Council has elicited any response
or action on the part of the Council. I must add that
the Council has not even acknowledged receipt of those
communications. However, in presidential statement
S/PRST/2013/2, we Council members committed to
effective follow-up. To date, however, and despite our
efforts, there has been no agreement on a mechanism to
follow up referrals to the International Criminal Court.
Again, I believe that we must focus on dealing with that
issue.

I wish to conclude by recalling that in resolution
2113 (2013), the Council urged all parties to the conflict
to make every effort to reach a permanent ceasefire and
a comprehensive peace settlement based on the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur, and to immediately
cease all acts of violence and fulfil their responsibilities
under international humanitarian and human rights
law. It urged the Sudan to cooperate with the ICC in
accordance with the Council's earlier resolution 1593
(2005).

For our part, we must assume our responsibilities
under our own resolutions and ensure that the Court is
provided with adequate funding when that debate takes
place before the General Assembly, and must encourage
all States members of the international community to
cooperate in good faith with the International Criminal
Court.

