Ms. Moutchou (Morocco) (spoke in French):
At the outset, my delegation wishes to thank you,
Mr. President, for having organized this open debate on
youth, peace and security.

Today, a quarter of the world's population is under
the age of 24. This is the largest generation of young
people the world has ever seen. They are therefore
decisive agents of social development and represent
tremendous potential for sustainable development. The
United Nations proclaimed 1985 as the International
Youth Year, thereby laying the foundations for the
global consideration of youth-related issues. Ten
years later, the General Assembly adopted the World
Programme of Action for Youth, which offered practical
guidelines to improve the situation of young people. For
its part, resolution 2250 (2015) recognized for the first
time the positive role played by young people in the
promotion of lasting peace, defining them as important
partners in global efforts to achieve peace and combat
violent extremism.

As the world evolves, so do the issues facing young
people, who today are bearing witness to a world where
poverty goes hand in hand with the concentration of
wealth, where ignorance exacerbates social tensions
and where conflict causes them to doubt the promise
of a better future. In the face of exclusion, lack of
opportunities and unemployment, the ambitions
of young people morph into frustrations that are
exploited by criminal and extremist groups. We must
bridge this gap exploited by the enemies of humanity,
peace and development. The long-term solution to
youth radicalization lies in building more inclusive,
participatory and egalitarian societies.

It is in this spirit that Morocco has for years
undertaken numerous commitments to young people,
particularly by giving pride of place to youth in
the Constitution of Morocco, calling on the public
authorities to universalize the participation of young
people in the Kingdom's socioeconomic, cultural and
political development. We have adopted a quota for
young people in Parliament, launched an integrated
national strategy for youth for 2015-2030, and created
a national institute for youth and democracy, a
national youth documentation and information centre
and an advisory council for youth, as called for by
the Constitution, and other training and integration
centres for young people. In Rabat, we have created
the Union of Young African Parliamentarians, which
fosters exchanges and cooperation among young
parliamentarians on the African continent. We have set
up a national initiative for human development, which,
inter alia, focuses on the promotion of the well-being of
all population groups, specifically young people.

We commemorate Youth Day, an annual event that
highlights royal solicitude and provides an opportunity
to appreciate the projects set up for young people and
to take stock of the achievements and accomplishments
made in the field of youth promotion. In March 2017, in
the context of implementing resolution 2250 (2015), we
held a national forum on young people facing violence,
extremism and the promotion of peace and security,
which was enshrined by the Bouznika appeal.

To conclude, allow me to emphasize the two
following points. First, young people are often
a preferred target of extremist rhetoric, which is
anathema to coexistence and the culture of peace.
The establishment of sustained dialogue among
young people on issues concerning youth, peace and
security will allow them to strengthen their defences
against hate speech, radicalization and extremism.
Secondly, youth empowerment and participation
in public life are key factors in the construction and
development of peaceful societies. This requires us to
seek new opportunities for the effective, structured and
sustained participation ofyoung people in all aspects of
political, economic, social and cultural life, particularly
through the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.

