Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): I congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for this month, and thank Togo for its effective
presidency last month.

We thank the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for her
briefing. We have taken careful note of the seventeenth
note of the Prosecutor. We welcome the presence of the
Ambassador of the Sudan in the Council Chamber.

Pakistan is not a party to the Rome Statute of
the International Criminal Court. However, we
acknowledge the rights and obligations of States parties
to the ICC.

Pakistan supports a peaceful and viable resolution
of the situation in Darfur through an inclusive
political process that respects and upholds the unity,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Sudan. The
goal of durable peace in Darfur can be realized only
through a comprehensive multipronged strategy. Such
a strategy should provide impetus to encouraging a
peaceful solution through dialogue, promote justice and
reconciliation, establish an environment conducive to
security and address the human rights and humanitarian
aspects of the long-standing conflict in Darfur by
ending impunity.

We support the efforts of the African Union, in
particular those of its High-level Implementation
Panel, towards achieving peace, stability, justice and
reconciliation in Darfur. The advice of the League of
Arab States and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
should also be given due weight.

We welcome the several important steps taken by
the signatories to implement the Doha Document for
Peace in Darfur, including the transfer of funds to
the Darfur Regional Authority and the holding of the
international donors conference for reconstruction
and development in Darfur. Those steps would help
to address the underlying issues of development and
governance in the region. We urge the signatories
to implement their commitments under the Doha
Document. It is important that progress be made on the
provisions relating to land and property.

The attacks against peacekeepers in Darfur remain
a serious concern. Those attacks should be swiftly
investigated and the perpetrators brought to justice.
The destabilizing activities of Darfuri armed rebel
movements under the Sudan Revolutionary Front
umbrella, as well as their attacks against civilians
and humanitarian workers, should be thoroughly
investigated. Sanctions should be imposed against all
armed movements that continue to obstruct the peace
process in Darfur, and against all those who flagrantly
violate humanitarian and human rights law.

The Secretary-General's guidelines of 3 April on
contacts between United Nations officials and persons
who are subject to ICC arrest warrants and summonses
highlight that the United Nations and the ICC are
separate organizations, each with its own mandate.
They also underline the operational nature of the
decision on the requirement of contact with various
individuals in carrying out United Nations-mandated
activities. That is a new document and we should give it
some time to be tested in the field.

Durable peace and stability in the Sudan is a strong
aspiration of the Sudanese people and an imperative
for regional peace and security. Achieving that
objective requires the support and understanding of the
international community. The situation in Darfur, in
particular the suffering of its people, has been a matter
of concern for several years. We must do more to help
to resolve that complex problem in a holistic manner.

