Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
The Security Council is meeting again to discuss the
situation in Afghanistan. The situation is slightly
different than the one we considered three months ago
(see S/PV.7208), as we can see from the briefing by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General.

Spain is a friend of Afghanistan. The people and
the Government of my country have demonstrated
that all these years. Spain has responded throughout
the 12 years with constant actions to the requests of
Afghans. We stand by Afghanistan and will continue to
do so. My delegation fully endorses the statement made
earlier by the Head of the Delegation of the European
Union, but I wish to add a number of considerations on
various issues with regard to, first, the elections and,
secondly, aspects of the security, the economy and the
regional and international dimensions.
With regard to the elections, the men and women
of Afghanistan recently demonstrated great courage on
5 April and 14 June. We are at a crucial point. It is clear
that we must strengthen the political process. Only a
renewed and strengthened leadership will be able to
provide a hopeful future for the people of Afghanistan.

Regarding the security situation, we note with
concern the information outlined by Secretary-General
in his report (S/2014/656), in particular the 24-per-cent
increase in the number of civilian victims. We take
this opportunity to convey our regret to Ambassador
Tanin following the attack by the Taliban in the centre
of Kabul two days ago.

With regard to the economic situation, we are
concerned about the deterioration noted in the
performance ofthe Afghan economy. That perhaps goes
hand in hand with the worsening security situation.
However, we are sure that the ministerial conference,
to be held in Tokyo, will yield results for the economic
situation in Afghanistan.

Finally, we believe that regional efforts are
absolutely key. There are great expectations. In Spain's
view, there is a hopeful future with the ministerial
conference to be held in Tianjin, the People's Republic
of China.

We once again reiterate our support for the
Government and people of Afghanistan, through
Ambassador Tanin, who is present. In conclusion, on
behalf of the Spanish delegation, I would express our
gratitude for the efforts and outstanding work of Mr. J an
Kubis during all these years as head of UNAMA.

