Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): We would like to
join our colleagues in paying high tribute to
Ambassador Holbrooke for his leadership of the
Security Council mission to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. He brought the Council's authority to
bear with his well-known diplomatic skills, tenacity,
determination and power of persuasion upon the
leaders of the nations involved. We are deeply grateful
to him for the service he rendered to the Security
Council and for the contribution he has made to the
cause of peace.

We appreciate Ambassador Holbrooke's
introduction of the report this morning, giving us the
mission's insights into the real issues and challenges
born of first-hand experience and an assessment of the
situation. We are grateful to you, Mr. President, for
arranging this open debate for considering the report of
the mission. We recall our regret that the report of the
Council mission to Kosovo could not be held in a
format allowing participation of even the most deeply
involved Members of the United Nations.

My delegation would also like to express
sincerest thanks to the members of the mission for the
role they played in their individual capacities and as
members of the mission. Theirs was an enormously
difficult mission, complicated by the rapidly
deteriorating situation in Sierra Leone and preparations
for war between Eritrea and Ethiopia. The mission's
intervention yielded immediate results, as evidenced by
the conclusion of the status-of-forces agreement and by
the joint declaration on the demilitarization of
Kisangani.

We shall limit our intervention to five issues. The
most immediate question in our mind is the deployment
of the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC). As the
mission reports, the same concern is shared by the
leaders in the region. Drawing lessons from the Sierra
Leone experience, the mission advises caution against
deployment before a conflict has run its course. The
mission also recommends that we should be assured of
the security of peacekeepers and immediate availability
of reinforcements. We are obviously confronted with
two opposing considerations: on the one hand, the
expediency of deployment of MONUC for maintaining
the peace process, and on the other hand, the
imperative of security for peacekeepers and avoiding
humiliation.

In this connection, we should like to recall
Bangladesh's offer to provide one infantry battalion to
MONUC. We have not hesitated to maintain our offer
for the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL), even in the midst of recent
developments. We remain firm in our commitment to
MONUC.

We believe in the complementarity of our
collective efforts. We contribute to the cause of peace
with what is at our disposal. Nations willing to
contribute their men but not having the capacity to
furnish materiel should have their contribution
complemented by countries that can provide equipment
and other logistic and technical support. This will make
our collective security efforts collective in the real
sense.

Related to the deployment of MONUC is the
issue of its functioning with the Joint Military
Commission (JMC). It is disappointing to note that
some members of the JMC refuse even to meet in
Kinshasa, while the Council, in its resolution 1291
(2000), provided for co-location of MONUC and JMC.

The second question I would address is
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
resettlement. We endorse the view that all armed
groups, including the ex-Rwandan Armed Forces and
Interahamwe, must commit themselves to the
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
resettlement process. This issue remains at the heart of
the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and has implications for peace and stability in the
Great Lakes region.

The third issue we would comment on is the
inter-Congolese dialogue. We share the view that the
dialogue should be in conjunction with the deployment
of MONUC and the disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and resettlement process. The lack of
agreement on the issue is disconcerting. We are
confident Sir Ketumile Masire will be able to work out
a consensus among the parties at an early date.

Fourth is the question of respect for humanitarian
law and human rights. We are grateful to Ambassador
van Walsum for raising the issue during the mission's
visit. The Mwenga incident is particularly abhorrent,
and the response of Mr. Ilunga is outrageous. This
shows the long-term consequences of impunity. We
agree that the Mwenga incident, because of the
particularly grotesque nature of the crime, should be
investigated in the first place. We also agree that all
cases of violation of humanitarian law and gross
violation of human rights in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo must be investigated and that those
responsible must be prosecuted. The release of
prisoners of war is a humanitarian priority. We call
upon all concerned to proceed quickly to release
prisoners of war under the aegis of the International
Committee of the Red Cross.

The fifth and final point we would like to address
is the setting up of an expert panel on the illegal
exploitation of natural resources and other forms of
wealth in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. When
the draft reply to the Secretary-General was discussed,
views were expressed in favour of a decision after the
return of the mission from the country. My delegation
would support the establishment of the panel as
outlined by the Secretary-General, now that the
mission is back and has made recommendations in
favour of an early establishment.

We hope the Council and the Secretariat will have
the occasion to exchange views with the Political
Committee on all these issues during its proposed visit
to the United Nations in June.

Here we would like to support the
recommendation made by the United Kingdom for
immediate attention to Kisangani. We too would
request the Secretariat to make an assessment on a
priority basis for rapid deployment of required
MONUC contingents in that area without any loss of
t1me.

Finally, the chances for peace in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and in the area will depend on
the leaders of the region. We believe they have control
over the armed groups. We also believe they can
commit these groups to the disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and resettlement process
and ensure full cooperation with the United Nations,
allowing early deployment of phase II of MONUC.
They can give the required assurances in their
discussion with the Secretary-General, as
recommended by the mission.

