Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Feltman for his briefing.

Defeating the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham
(ISIS) is an urgent priority. As noted in the report
(S/2017/467) of the Secretary-General, the international
community has made notable progress in degrading
ISIS, but we have a long road ahead to ultimately defeat
it. Thanks to the efforts of the United States-led global
coalition, ISIS has not retaken any territory in Iraq and
Syria from coalition forces since May 2015. Overall,
with the support of the coalition, local ground forces
have liberated more than 4 million people - 2.7 million
in Iraq and 1.4 million in Syria. They have retaken more
than 55,000 square kilometres of territory from ISIS,
about 66 per cent of the populated territory ISIS once
held in Iraq, and 47 per cent of the populated territory it
once held in Syria. That is real progress.

While ISIS is losing territory and the ability
to fund itself, we must stay vigilant to counter the
evolving threat that it poses across the globe. We need
to maintain pressure on regional and local safehavens.
To advance that work, I should like to emphasize today
three lines of effort: first, cracking down on 1818's
finances; secondly, addressing the threat posed by its
foreign terrorist fighters; and thirdly, countering ISIS's
terrorist messaging.

Isolating ISIS from the international financial
system remains essential. The United States, since
2014, has sanctioned eight ISIS branches, along
with more than 70 senior ISIS leaders, operatives,
financial facilitators, recruiters and affiliated money-
service businesses. We have also proposed that the
Committee established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning ISIL
(Da'esh), Al-Qaida,and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities designate senior ISIS leaders,
financiers, facilitators and affiliates for sanctions.
The Committee's list must continually adapt to the
evolving threat, such as by designating money-service
businesses, as well as ISIS affiliates and their leaders.

When the Security Council starts its regular
review this month of the ISIS and Al-Qaida sanctions,
we will support any necessary modifications to make
sure that the sanctions are adapted to this evolving
terrorist threat. Adapting our approach has been key to
preventing the flow of foreign terrorist fighters. This
has been and must continue to be a major part of our
effort to defeat ISIS. Through diplomatic engagement
and the global implementation of important Security
Council resolutions, such as resolution 2178 (2014), we
have seen significant progress, and that must continue.

INTERPOL has been essential to this effort. In the
past four years, there has been a thousand-fold increase
in the amount of information on foreign fighters shared
with INTERPOL. INTERPOL now hold the details of
more than 15,000 individuals provided by more than
60 countries, and that number continues to grow.
Strengthening this shared resource empowers global
law enforcement authorities, helping them to identify
and disrupt foreign terrorist fighter transit networks.

We are concerned as highlighted by the Secretary-
General in his report (S/2017/467), about the increasing
number of foreign terrorist fighters returning to their
countries oforiginorgoingtothirdcountries.Addressing
this issue requires a truly global approach, and that
should begin with improving information-sharing
and cooperation at the international, regional and
subregional levels. We all must get better at identifying
foreign fighter returnees. Also, all countries must enact
legislation, as required by resolution 2178 (2014), to
strengthen their ability to prosecute related crimes.

We also must respond to ISIS's stepped up efforts
to radicalize and recruit others to violence. To do so, we
are working closely with our partners to combat ISIS's
messaging and poisonous narrative. We commend the
work of the Global Coalition Communications Working
Group, which is led by the United States, the United
Arab Emirates and the United Kingdom. The Working
Group regularly brings together over 30 countries with
media and tech companies to share information and
strategies to counter violent extremist messages online
and present positive alternative narratives.

We also applaud private-sector efforts to police
ISIS-related content. Twitter has suspended more than
635,000 ISIS-related or ISIS-affiliated accounts since
2015. Facebook and YouTube are similarly removing
ISIS-related content from their platforms that violate
their terms of service. Meanwhile, Google is putting in
place new and innovative ideas to redirect those who
search for ISIS content to other content.

In closing, the United States, working in concert
with our partners, will take aggressive action to defeat
ISIS and adapt to changing threats. We call on the
United Nations to do the same, helping Member States
to strengthen their ability to counter ISIS, to adapt and
to prevent the next terrorist threat from emerging.

