Mr. Lancry (Israel): Once again, the Security
Council is meeting to consider the grave escalation of
violence in Israel and the Palestinian territories. Since
the last meeting of the Council on this issue, the
situation has, to the great consternation of most parties,
continued to deteriorate. Points of friction that had
previously been localized and contained in certain
areas have spread, engulfing the streets of Jerusalem
and other Israeli towns and cities. In the last three days
alone, two separate bombings have claimed the lives of
innocent, unarmed Israeli civilians. In an unimaginably
horrific attack in Kfar Darom, terrorists targeted
innocent children, whose only crime was in attempting
to reach their classroom.

Just a few hours ago, a car bomb exploded on a
crowded street in the Israeli city of Hadera at the
height of the rush-hour commute. Three Israeli citizens
were killed, and 41 were injured. Once again, we are
witness to the inhuman practice of terrorism, to the
senseless death of innocent men, women and children,
that does not advance the Palestinian cause.

Unfortunately, terrorism is not something foreign
to Israelis, and we have had several reminders in the
past few days of its tragic consequences. It must be
made clear that today's tragedy is a direct result of the
release of terrorist prisoners from Palestinian Authority
jails. It is not the first time that the Palestinian
leadership has given freedom of movement to terrorists
and then claimed not to be responsible for their acts.

In this regard, I would like to recall the words of
Chairman Arafat, who, in a letter to the late Prime
Minister Rabin, expressly stated his commitment to the
peace process and the path of negotiated compromise.
These words stand in such stark contrast to the words
and action of the Palestinian leadership in the past few
weeks that they bear repeating:

"The PLO commits itself to the Middle East
peace process and to a peaceful resolution of the
conflict between the two sides and declares that
all outstanding issues relating to permanent status
will be resolved through negotiations."

He further committed himself to restrain terrorist
elements from all factions. At that time, Mr. Arafat was
committing himself on behalf of all the Palestinian
people in order to ensure a calm environment
conducive to negotiations.

Indeed, the current unrest and the deplorable
response of the Palestinian leadership give rise to
serious doubts on whether the Palestinians are intent on
maintaining that fundamental commitment made in
September 1993. Yet, despite these acts and numerous
others which have transpired over the last several
weeks, no United Nations body - not the General
Assembly meeting in an emergency session; nor the
Economic and Social Council, which this morning
passed a biased and one-sided resolution condemning
Israel; nor the Security Council - has spoken one
word of condemnation of the Palestinians.

Perhaps now the international community will
take notice of the fact that Israeli lives are, as they have
been for nearly two months, continuously in peril.
Perhaps now the world is capable of understanding
that, while Palestinian lives are endangered only when
they violently attack Israeli soldiers, Israelis are
targeted for the simple fact that they are Israeli.

By failing to speak any words of condemnation of
the Palestinians, the international community has
basically lent its approval to the unspeakable acts of
the Palestinians - the lynching of two Israeli soldiers in
Ramallah, the desecration of sacred Jewish holy sites
in Nablus, the attacks on innocent children in Kfar
Darom and Hadera and the continuous incitement in
the official media. This failure will only further
encourage them to continue along this violent route. I
cannot stress this point enough.

Palestinians are sustaining injuries as a direct
result of their own violent provocations. Palestinians
are sustaining injuries when they confront Israeli
soldiers and civilians with machine guns, firebombs
and other explosive devices. Palestinians are sustaining
injuries when, at the behest of their leaders, they
brutally attack and terrorize innocent civilians.

The same is not true of casualties on the Israeli
side. Israeli civilians have been attacked as they travel
on roads, shop for groceries in the marketplace and sit
peacefully in their homes. The Jerusalem
neighbourhood of Gilo has continuously come under
fire from snipers in nearby Palestinian villages,
resulting in a number of injuries. A car bomb exploded
last week in the crowded Jerusalem market of Mahani
Yehuda, killing two Israeli civilians. On Monday,
Israeli schoolchildren were deliberately targeted by the
Tanzim, the paramilitary group that is an arm of
Chairman Arafat's own Fatah faction, killing two
civilians and critically wounding several others. A day
later, an 18-year old Israeli, Itamar Yefet, was
murdered by a Palestinian sniper. None of these
individuals, least of all the children who were attacked
have sought involvement in the current crisis.
Nevertheless, the Palestinians consider them legitimate
targets, due merely to their nationality.

The dichotomy extends to the political level as
well. Through all the recent violence, Israel has tried to
exert the maximum possible restraint and to minimize
casualties to the greatest extent possible. We have
expressed our deepest sorrow at the loss of life
sustained by both sides. The Prime Minister and
Foreign Minister of Israel and their spokespeople have
regularly called upon Chairman Arafat to restrain his
people and to return to the path of peaceful
negotiations.

In contrast, Palestinian leaders have called, and
continue to call, for an escalation of the conflict. The
attempt to assert the moral equivalence of soldiers'
defending themselves against mobs of Palestinians
calling for their blood, and Palestinians carrying out
terrorist attacks against civilians in the heart of the
Israeli cities, is nothing less than depraved. Yet, there
is no international outcry. There is no call for a
commission of inquiry to investigate Palestinian
wrongdoing. There are no resolutions passed in
condemnation of Palestinian violations. There is not
even a clear call for the Palestinians to relinquish the
path of violence and return to the only legitimate
mechanism for addressing their grievances - through
peaceful, bilateral negotiations. The only words of
outrage and condemnation that the international
community can muster are directed solely at Israel.

I should like to remind the members of the
Council of the statement of the Secretary-General,
who, after visiting the region and conducting extensive
meetings with both sides, cautioned the members of the
international community to weigh their words
carefully. I submit to you, Mr. President, that the
United Nations official language that has been used
until now has not heeded this warning. I sincerely hope
that the same will not hold true today.

The attempt by the Palestinians to give this armed
intifada the veneer of a legitimate struggle, as though it
were their only means of achieving their objectives, is
a gross misrepresentation of reality. The Oslo peace
process has provided a viable mechanism for the
Palestinians to realize their goal of self-determination.
The face-to-face negotiations conducted within that
framework have yielded several key peace agreements
and have created a situation in which 98 per cent of
Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza live under
Palestinian rule. Moreover, the Oslo process has the
potential to end the conflict once and for all, meet the
needs of both sides and prevent further bloodshed.

Chairman Arafat, however, has been unwilling to
embrace the reality of peace and recognize that the
conflict is over and that the only path to peace and
security is through negotiation and compromise. He
knows full well that an honourable and just peace was
within reach at Camp David, and yet, instead of seizing
the moment, he chose to turn his back.

In calling for the deployment of a United Nations
protection force, the Palestinians are seeking to depart
from the bilateral track which was mandated by the
Oslo agreement and to pursue their goals unilaterally.
In fact, Chairman Arafat has first and foremost to
protect himself from his own destructive initiative, the
independence intifada, which is the source of all the
suffering that has transpired in recent weeks. As I have
said before, an international force, whether of
peacekeepers or of observers, is not needed to stop the
violence, nor is it clear that such a force would even be
successful.

There is, however, a clear and direct way to end
the bloodshed. The international community must call
upon the Palestinian leadership to exert every effort to
stop the violence, the rioting, the use of live
ammunition, the use of machine guns, the sending of
children to the front lines of rioting crowds and the use
of terror against civilians. This ability is well within
their power, and I would urge the members of the
Council to call upon Chairman Arafat to see that this is
done.

We still expect that the Palestinian leadership will
fulfil its basic commitment, as expressed in Chairman
Arafat's letter to Prime Minister Rabin and in
subsequent agreements. I must emphasize that
Chairman Arafat spoke on behalf of all Palestinian
people, and that he cannot depart from this
responsibility. We can no longer accept the
reprehensible division of labour between the
Palestinian Authority on the one hand and Hamas and
the Islamic Jihad on the other.

Chairman Arafat, as the unchallenged leader of
the Palestinian people, has to assume, not only the
glory of that office but also, sometimes, the misery of
the task. Regardless of the current situation, Israel's
ultimate objective will always be to secure a lasting
and comprehensive peace with the Palestinians and
with all our neighbours. We will continue to strive
towards that goal, notwithstanding the numerous
obstacles that imperil that lofty objective.

We believe that the Security Council, as the organ
with primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, is duty-bound to
encourage the parties to return to the path of bilateral
negotiation and compromise. The Council must call
upon the Palestinians to adhere to the commitments
they have undertaken to renew security cooperation
with Israel and to call, in clear and unequivocal terms,
for an end to the violence and a return to the
negotiating table.

Were the Palestinians to take these actions, I can
assure the Council that the bloodshed would end
immediately. That is, by the way, my answer to the
question raised by the Permanent Observer of
Palestine, Mr. Nasser Al-Kidwa, who asked, "How can
we put an end to this situation?" It may sound
unrealistic, but it is that simple. If Chairman Arafat
wills it, it is not a dream.

