Mr. Safadi (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, and
the delegation of the Russian Federation for your
outstanding efforts during your presidency of the
Council for this month. I also thank Mr. Mladenov
for his comprehensive briefing. I am grateful for the
opportunity to address the Council today.

The long-standing and strenuous efforts to achieve
comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East are
today on the verge of collapse. The two-State solution,
which enjoys the consensus of the international
community as the only means to resolve the conflict
and ensure the rights of the peoples of the region to live

in security and peace, is threatened by unilateral Israeli
measures that violate the resolutions of international
legitimacy and Council resolutions, leading to despair
and stoking the flames of conflict and violence. Silence
is not an option.
Effective action is required to salvage the remnants
of hope for peace. The absence of a clear and strict
position promoting international legitimacy and the
right of the Palestinian people to live in freedom and
establish their own State, as well as the right of the
peoples of the region to live in security and stability,
will only lead to despair, the decline of moderation, the
expansion of extremism and the eruption of conflicts.
That would be an immense threat to regional and
international peace and security that must be prevented.

A lasting and comprehensive peace is an Arab
strategic choice, and the means to achieve it is clear - a
two-State solution that guarantees the establishment of
an independent Palestinian State based on the 4 June
1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, living
side by side in peace and security with the State of
Israel, in accordance with international resolutions and
the Arab Peace Initiative.

However, instead of upholding the resolutions of
international legitimacy and interacting positively
with the Arab Peace Initiative for achieving real peace
that would ensure normal relations between all Arab
States and Israel and provide comprehensive security
guarantees for Israel, in the context of a comprehensive
peace ending the occupation that began in 1967, Israel
continues to take unilateral illegal measures that
undermine the two-State solution and disregard the
tenets of the peace process.

Peace and security are a right of all the peoples of
the region and a goal that Jordan continues to seek in
cooperation with the international community and in
accordance with international law. However, peace will
not be achieved by establishing and expanding illegal
settlements, confiscating Palestinian land, demolishing
their homes or displacing their children. Peace will not
be achieved by targeting the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) or depriving more than 500,000 Palestinian
refugee children of their right to education and dignity.
Nor will it be achieved by annexing the Golan Heights,
the Jordan Valley and the area north of the Dead Sea
in the occupied Palestinian territories, which represent
about one-third ofthe occupied West Bank. Such actions
will kill the two-State solution and not achieve security.

Consecrating the occupation and deepening its
injustice will not achieve peace, guarantee security
or stability or promote development. Similarly,
violations of international legitimacy and the selective
implementation of Security Council resolutions
erode the international order and lead to chaos and
lawlessness. This is a reality that requires effective
and urgent international action in order to start serious
negotiations to save what remains of the chance for
peace based on a two-State solution and to renew
hope in that solution before Israeli violations and new
illegitimate realities dash all remaining faith and make
peace impossible.

The Security Council plays a major role in
implementing international resolutions, including
resolutions 242 (1697), 338 (1973), 478 (1980) and 2334
(2016), and in adhering to international law, which
considers the territories seized forcibly by Israel in
1967 to be occupied. International law requires Israel
to honour its obligations as the occupying Power.

The magnitude of the danger requires immediate
action by the international community to protect
security and peace. The Council and the international
community must act to end illegal settlement and its
disastrous ramifications. The international community
must reject the plan announced by the Prime Minster
of Israel to annex one-third of the occupied West Bank,
in violation of international law and threatening peace
and security. That must be stopped.

The international community must support
UNRWA and allow the Agency to continue its work
and help over 5 million Palestinian refugees to live in
dignity and allow their children to go to school and
live in hope instead of leaving them prisoners of want,
ignorance, oppression and depression.

We have a responsibility to stop Israel from changing
the historic and legal status of Al-Quds Al-Sharif.
His Majesty King Abdullah II, who is the custodian
of the Muslim and Christian holy sites in Jerusalem,
has stressed that Jerusalem is the key to peace. It is the
holy city of Muslims, Christians and Jews. It must be
a city of peace, not the scene of occupation, injustice
and deprivation.

Under international law and Security Council
resolutions, East Jerusalem is an integral part of the
Palestinian territories occupied in 1967. Protecting
Jerusalem and its historical status is protecting
international law and peace. The continuous
undermining of that status is a real threat to peace
and security. East Jerusalem is an occupied territory
that, in the context of a two-State solution, must be
liberated as the capital of the Palestinian State. This
is the only way to achieve peace. Sovereignty over the
city's sanctuaries must be Palestinian. Custodianship
over its Islamic and Christian sanctuaries is Hashemite.
However, preserving Jerusalem's historical status is a
collective responsibility we all bear, particularly in
the light of Israeli provocations and violations. The
international community must act to save the peace.

The Palestinian question remains the main issue
in our region. The Palestinian-Israeli conflict is at the
root of all the tension and instability in the Middle
East. A two-State solution is the prerequisite for
comprehensive peace and security for all. Occupation,
oppression and depriving Palestinians of their rights
will not lead to peace or security. Security for all the
peoples of the region, Palestinians and Israelis alike,
will be achieved by respecting everyone's rights arising
from our international law, principles and shared
humanitarian values.

The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan has spared
no effort to achieve comprehensive, lasting and fair
peace and is committed to continuing to work with the
Security Council and with all our friends and partners
in the international community to achieve a genuine
peace that is accepted by all peoples and fulfils their
right to a secure future.

When Jordan speaks, it does so with the credibility
of a peace broker who remains a voice of truth and
moderation and a force for peace. When we warn that
the chances of peace may completely disappear soon,
we do so with the voice of someone firmly committed
to peace. This is a clear call for decisive and effective
action now, before it is too late.

I thank you, Mr. President, and we look forward
to continuing to work with the Security Council in
order to end the deterioration and reclaim the lead by
undertaking urgent and collective international efforts
aimed at putting an end to a conflict that poses a threat
to our security and achieving a comprehensive, fair and
lasting peace which is a right for all of us.

The meeting rose at 12.25 pm.
