Mr. Jagne (Gambia): The situation in Kosovo, in
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, is a cause of great
concern to my delegation. Like all peace-loving nations,
we in the Gambia are very much attached to the
sacrosanct principle of the peaceful settlement of disputes,
as enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations.

Throughout the past year, the international
community has deployed a great deal of effort in order to
find a peaceful settlement to the question concerning
Kosovo. Unfortunately, however, many opportunities to
resolve the crisis were missed, for reasons well known to
all of us, including the latest talks in Paris.

Meanwhile, the onslaught against the ethnic
Albanian community in Kosovo continued unabated. The
international community time and again called on the
authorities in Belgrade to respect human rights and to
cooperate with the international community with a view
to settling peacefully the question of greater autonomy for
Kosovo, but to no avail.

As far as my delegation is concerned, we cannot
remain indifferent to the plight of the murdered people of
Kosovo. In recent times, the actions of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia Government in Kosovo have
caused an untold amount of suffering among the Kosovar
Albanians and have generated thousands and thousands of
refugees and displaced persons.

It is the responsibility of any Government to protect
its citizens. We speak with great regret of the fact that the
international community had to take the action it took
today. Of course, regional arrangements have
responsibility for the maintenance of peace and security
in their areas. The Security Council, however, has the
primary responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, as clearly stated in the Charter of the
United Nations.

It must be noted, though, that at times the exigencies
of a situation demand, and warrant, decisive and
immediate action. We find that the present situation in
Kosovo deserves such a treatment. The action started
today by the international community could have been
avoided, for the action could still be prevented. We

 

therefore call on those with whom the responsibility lies to
take the necessary action to prevent a continuation of this
action before it is too late.

