Ms. Rice (United States of America): Let me
begin by thanking President Thabo Mbeki, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Menkerios,
Joint Special Representative Gambari and Joint Chief
Mediator Bassole for their very helpful assessments
and briefings to the Council this morning. The United
States strongly supports their efforts to address the
situation in the Sudan.
I will focus today on three areas: the remaining
tasks for the implementation of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement (CPA), the Darfur peace process, and
the overwhelming importance of protecting civilians.

With the referendums fast approaching, all parties
must redouble their efforts to begin referendum
planning for Southern Sudan and Abyei. Referendum
commissions must be appointed immediately to begin
the difficult work of operational and budget planning,
voter registration, education, logistics and administration.
This includes resolving the difficult and sensitive issue of
who is eligible to vote in Abyei. We must also continue to
press the parties to completely demarcate the North-South
and Abyei borders, and we must continue to urge them to
prepare for popular consultations, which provide a vital
outlet for the people of Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile
to express their views on the CPA and their States'
relationships with Khartoum.

Progress depends not only on the political will of
the parties, but also on support from the international
community. We must lay the groundwork now so that
we will be prepared to provide as much immediate
assistance as possible as conditions on the ground
allow. Regardless of the outcomes of the referendums,
attention should be paid now to the steps that must be
taken to promote a sustainable relationship between the
parties to the CPA beyond July 2011. Progress must be
made towards reaching agreements on post-referendum
wealth-sharing and citizenship, among other issues.
The international community stands ready to provide
diplomatic and technical support, but the parties
themselves must be willing to negotiate in earnest to
resolve these difficult issues.

With respect to elections, let me reiterate that the
April elections were characterized by serious
irregularities, including restrictions on political
freedoms, reports of logistical and administrative
challenges, harassment and intimidation by security
forces and concerns regarding the tabulation process.
Thirty-three constituencies still need to conduct or re-
run elections, including the Southern Kordofan
legislative assembly. Without those elections, Southern
Kordofan cannot conduct its popular consultations.

We also remain deeply concerned about the
atmosphere of increasing political repression in
Khartoum by the Government of the Sudan and the
deplorable environment for civil and political rights in
the north. This includes the arrest of opposition

leaders, journalists and peaceful demonstrators. There
have been reports of restrictions on basic liberties in
the south as well. We remind the Governments of
Sudan and Southern Sudan that they must honour their
international obligations to respect human rights,
including freedom of expression, assembly and the
press.

We hope for a renewed focus on the Doha peace
process and strongly believe that the best way to end
conflict and resolve Darfur's marginalization is by
finding a comprehensive political solution. The
situation in Darfur affects the stability of the region as
a whole. We urge the international community to
continue to support the negotiation process in Doha,
and we reiterate our call on all parties to come to the
negotiating table.

Accountability and peace are inextricably bound
together. The United States strongly supports
international efforts to bring those responsible for
genocide and war crimes in Darfur to justice, and we
firmly believe that there cannot be a lasting peace in
Darfur without accountability and justice. So, we call
again on the Government of Sudan and all other parties
to the conflict to cooperate fully with the International
Criminal Court (ICC) and its Prosecutor, as required by
Security Council resolution 1593 (2005).

The Council heard a disturbing briefing from ICC
Prosecutor Moreno-Ocampo on Friday (see S/PV.6337). It
is clearer than ever that the Government of Sudan
continues to violate the Council's resolutions, including
its obligation to cooperate with the ICC under resolution
1593 (2005). We are deeply concerned by the 25 May
Pre-Trial Chamber decision informing the Council of the
Government of Sudan's failure to cooperate with the
Court.

We call again on the Government of Sudan and
all parties to the conflict to cooperate fully with the
ICC and its Prosecutor, as clearly required by
resolution 1593 (2005). Moreover, we urge all States,
including those not party to the Rome Statute, to
refrain from providing political or financial support to
Sudanese suspects indicted by the ICC.

We have repeatedly emphasized and will continue
to emphasize the need to place the highest priority on
the protection of civilians. We are gravely concerned
by the continuing insecurity and violence faced by the
civilian population in Sudan. In particular, we are
deeply disturbed by the recent large-scale offensive of
the Sudanese Armed Forces against the Justice and
Equality Movement in Darfur. The Government of
Sudan continues to conduct aerial bombardments in
Darfur. These actions kill and maim civilians and result
in the additional displacement of innocent Darfuris.

We are also deeply concerned about continued
violence in the south, including intercommunal
violence and attacks by the Lord's Resistance Army.
Since last January, 440,000 people have been displaced
in the south. The United States further deplores the
continued attacks on the personnel of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) and the Government of Sudan's continued
obstruction of access to UNAMID and other
humanitarian actors, which hinders independent
monitoring in Darfur.

Despite direct attacks on its peacekeepers,
UNAMID has played an essential role in ensuring
security for humanitarian assistance providers in
Sudan. But security is the primary responsibility of the
Government of Sudan. It must make increased efforts
to bring those who attack civilians and peacekeepers to
justice. It is important that the Government of Sudan
provide unfettered access for UNAMID. Neither
UNAMID nor humanitarian organizations have had
adequate access to areas of continued conflict in
Darfur. With the lives of more innocent civilians at
stake, that is unconscionable and unacceptable.

It is also important to redouble efforts to end the
sexual violence that plagues Darfur. During the recent
fighting in Jebel Marra, UNAMID documented nine
cases of such violence, including rape, attempted rape
and assault. That is part of a trend that has continued
for far too long. It must end. The Government of
Sudan, UNAMID and other United Nations entities, as
well as the non-governmental organization community,
must strengthen prevention and tools to respond to
sexual and gender-based violence. We urge UNAMID
to increase its reporting on sexual and gender-based
violence to the Council and call on the Government of
Sudan to ensure that such crimes are investigated and
prosecuted to the fullest extent of the law.

We urge UNAMID and the United Nations
Mission in the Sudan also to utilize the full extent of
their mandates and capabilities to protect civilians in
danger. In Darfur, accelerating the training for
community police services for the internally displaced
in camps and those voluntarily returning to their
villages of origin would help promote peace and
security.

In the south, we urge the Government of Southern
Sudan to develop a security framework ahead of the
referendum and to ensure that its capacity exists to
protect its own population. UNMIS must also increase
efforts to ensure that civilians are protected from
violence. Finally, we urge the Governments of Sudan
and Southern Sudan, and all others, to lift any and all
restrictions on the activities and movements of
UNMIS.

We have less than seven months until the
referendums, and there is still much work to be done.
But the United States remains hopeful that, with the
necessary political will of the parties and with adequate
international support, the referendums can be conducted
peacefully and successfully.

