Ms. Power (United States of America): Time and
again - at least 17 times since February - we have
gathered here to discuss the situation in Ukraine. And
time and again, we have had to dedicate significant
amounts of time to reviewing the efforts of Russia
to destabilize its neighbour and to refuting the bald
misinformation and outright fiction about what is
happening on the ground in Ukraine.

Russian rhetoric has been inaccurate, inflammatory
and self-justifying. On 17 June, just last week, Foreign
Minister Lavrov accused Ukrainian military authorities
of carrying out ethnic cleaning. Days earlier, a leader
in the Duma accused Ukraine of committing mass
genocide. My Government, the Security Council and
the United Nations take extremely seriously any reports
of ethnic cleaning or genocide. But baseless claims like
those have the effect of radicalizing Russian separatists,
escalating this horrible crisis and further eviscerating
the credibility of Russian reports from the region.

We should consider such claims alongside the facts
on the ground, such as the situation of the ethnic Tatar
community in Crimea following Russia's purported
annexation, which the international community will
never recognize. The homes of Tatar leaders have been
arbitrarily searched and editors of their main newspaper
have been threatened with prosecution. Tatars who
have participated in peaceful protests have been locked
up by the dozens, and many more insulted and harassed
for speaking their language in public. And its members
have been told that they and all Crimeans must give
up their Ukrainian citizenship or else be treated like
foreigners in their own land.

Meanwhile, in areas controlled by illegal separatist
groups in south-east Ukraine, we continue to see
Russia's extensive support for the campaign of violence
and separatist terror. The crimes committed by those
groups are methodically documented in the United
Nations monitoring mission's reports and follow a
pattern set by Russia's unlawful intervention in Crimea.
They include the violent seizure and occupation of
public and Government buildings, unprovoked lethal
attacks against Ukrainian security forces and arbitrary
arrests, torture, beatings, death threats, disappearances,
killings and other serious abuses carried out by Russian
fighters and the pro-Russian separatists.

We do not need to look very far or hard to find
evidence of that campaign. We see it in the three
T-64 Russian tanks that suddenly showed up in the
hands of separatists in eastern Ukraine. We see it in
the burned out BM-21 rocket launcher, one of many
that suddenly appeared in eastern Ukraine in the past
weeks, which photographs show recently belonged to
Russia's eighteenth motorized rifle brigade, based in
Chechnya. We see it in surface-to-air missiles that
were recently seized by Ukrainian forces after a clash
with separatists; they were still accompanied by their
official paperwork, revealing that as recently as two
months ago those missiles were held on a Russian air-
defence base in the Krasnodar region. Those are just
the type of surface-to-air missiles, I would note, that
were used to bring down a Ukrainian military transport
plane last week, killing all 49 people on board. And
we see it in the alarming redeployment of thousands
of Russian troops and military hardware along the
border with Ukraine, at the closest proximity since the
invasion of Crimea in February.

Russia has attempted - erroneously - to
characterize the events unfolding in eastern Ukraine
as a humanitarian crisis. They falsely have cast
themselves as the defender of rights and Vindicator of
the vulnerable, and the Russian army and its operatives
as a humanitarian aid agency. But this Russian aid
operation sends soldiers, not doctors. It mans armoured
personnel carriers, not relief tents. It provides
surface-to-air missiles, not meals ready-to-eat.

Russia claims that 100,000 people have fled
Ukraine for Russia. Yet Under-Secretary-General
Amos informed the Council in a briefing last week
that the real number was around 4,600. I do not for one
moment intend to minimize the very real humanitarian
consequences of the crises in eastern Ukraine and
Crimea, including the tens of thousands of internally
displaced people within Ukraine's borders. But we have
to be objective and fact-based in our claims, and candid
about what has brought about these dire humanitarian
consequences, namely, the political and military
support that Russia continues to provide to armed
violent separatists.

Yet, remarkably, even in the face of separatist
attacks and inflammatory propaganda, the Ukrainian
Government and Ukrainian people have shown in word
and in deed a sustained willingness to work towards
a peaceful solution. The Ukrainian people elected a
leader, Petro Poroshenko, who campaigned on creating a
democratic, unified and peaceful Ukraine. Since taking
office, President Poroshenko has persistently sought to
achieve that goal through dialogue and reconciliation,
even in the face of provocations and violence. He
proposed, and then implemented, a unilateral ceasefire
to allow separatists to lay down their arms. He offered
to create a safe passage for Russian fighters to return
to their country. And he proposed amnesty to Russian-
backed separatists who had not committed serious
crimes.

We welcome yesterday's reports that representatives
of the Ukrainian and Russian Governments and
separatists groups met together, leading to an
announcement by some separatist leaders that they
would respect the ceasefire. President Poroshenko and
his Government have taken steps to decentralize power,
increase transparency, combat corruption and protect
the rights of minorities. And he has put on the table a
comprehensive and just peace plan. In sum, he and the
Ukrainian people have done everything that could be
expected, in an effort to make peace in accordance with
international law and norms.

Over the last few days, we have seen more
contradictory behaviour on the part of Russia. On the
one hand, President Putin expresses his support for
President Poroshenko's ceasefire and his intention to
work towards a peaceful settlement. That is a welcome
development. Yet, on the other hand, Russia has
recently returned a significant number of its troops to
the border and has ramped up the flow of weapons and
materiel to separatists, an increasing number of whom
are Russian citizens with no personal connection to
eastern Ukraine.

President Putin has also placed Russian troops
on combat alert and launched a new surprise military
exercise. President Putin's recent statements are
welcome. But it is hard to take a little rhetoric of
reconciliation seriously when it is accompanied by
actions that are clearly aimed at stoking tension. It
is even harder to take seriously given that Russia's
track record of repeatedly breaking its commitments
to dialogue and to peace, as it did after the Geneva
statement in April and after the pledges that President
Putin made to President Obama in Normandy earlier
this month. While we welcome the more conciliatory
rhetoric from President Putin in recent days, those
words now need to be reflected in a genuine shift in the
facts on the ground. Those facts are best gathered by
unbiased reporting, like that conducted by international
monitoring missions. But the Russians and the armed
separatists that they support do not seem comfortable
with facts or with monitors.

As we sit here, eight monitors of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe are being held
captive for the crime of bearing witness and gathering
facts, actions that are dangerous only to those who
would distort those facts. The monitors have been held
captive for nearly a month - a month - by separatists
in Donetsk and Luhansk, with no justification. For
these crimes there must be consequences. There
also must be continued consequences for Russia's
consistent violations of the fundamental principles of
the Charter of the United Nations and for its ongoing
failure to meet the commitments it has made. And
there must be consequences for the widespread crimes
and abuses committed by the armed separatists Russia
supports - both because the victims of those crimes
merit justice and because, as we have seen, unless
Russia feels effective pressure to de-escalate, it will
continue to choose to escalate the crisis.

We have urged Russia to be part of the political
solution to the crisis in Ukraine. But, if it persists with
the same escalatory tactics, it must face additional
costs.

