Mr. Muhammad Bande (Nigeria): Permit me,
through you, Mr. President, to condole with our host,
the Government of the United States of America, for the
loss of their forty-first President, Mr. George Herbert
Walker Bush.

I thank the presidency of Cote d'Ivoire for
convening this open debate. My sincere appreciation
goes to Mr. Amon-Tanoh, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Republic of cote d'Ivoire, Mr. Antonio Guterres,
Secretary-General of the United Nations, Mr. Moussa
Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, and Mr. Jean-Claude Brou, Chairperson
of the Commission of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS), for their statements.

Violent conflicts fuelled by bad governance,
terrorism and the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons, among other factors, hamper socioeconomic
development, thereby keeping the populace,
particularly women and children, in perpetual misery.
Sadly, resolving large-scale conflict is often beyond
the capacity of any single country. While the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security resides with the Security Council,
conflict prevention and conflict resolution involve
a range of actors who provide distinct, but mutually
reinforcing, ways of addressing both the immediate and
deeper causes of violent conflict.

Regional and subregional organizations have been
engaged in conflict prevention and resolution and post-
conflict rehabilitation in many parts of the world. They
are able to reduce the burden on the Security Council
and to provide a key layer of legitimacy to actions taken
by the Security Council. They are also better placed to
work with stakeholders so as to facilitate dialogue and
ensure broader inclusivity.

Consequently, now more than ever, there is a need
to strengthen collaboration between the United Nations
and the various regional and subregional organizations
around the world. Central to that collaboration is the
need to ensure that effective and mutually reinforcing
mechanisms - both regional and global - that are
flexible and responsive enough to ensure peaceful
coexistence among communities are prioritized. In
addition, it is imperative to ensure that a means of
financing regional-body-led peace-support operations
that are authorized by the Security Council and
consistent with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations can be predictably and sustainably
worked out. We owe that to the millions who suffer
and are waiting for our help. In that regard, I wish to
commend the Secretary-General on the current Joint
United Nations-African Union Framework for an
Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security, which is a
step in the right direction.

In our efforts to prevent and resolve conflicts,
we need also to take due cognizance of the structural
challenges to peace and security. Those challenges,
such as climate change, the mismanagement of natural
resources, and cross-border and international crime, are
at the root of some of the worst conflicts of our time,
and they are best tackled through a broad collaboration
among States, subregional and regional organizations
and the United Nations.

As we all know, the Lake Chad region has been
facing its worst crisis ever, primarily because of the
impact of climate change. However, the Lake Chad basin
countries have worked together to obtain international
support and attention, which is paying off. An array of
countries - Norway, Germany, the United Kingdom,
the United States of America, China, Canada and
others - have joined the United Nations in providing
financial and technical support to the ongoing efforts
aimed not only at conquering Boko Haram but also
at working at the same time across all the pillars, as
that is the only way forward. Indeed, so successful
has that been, since the visit by the Security Council
under the United Kingdom presidency in March 2017
and the various pledging conferences in Abuja, Oslo
and Berlin, that we are even talking of recharging the
basin, so as to restore and/or stabilize the livelihoods
of the approximately 45 million people affected by
that unfortunate situation. Through it all, ECOWAS,
the African Union and United Nations, as was stated
yesterday by the President of Cote d'Ivoire (see S/PV.8413), have been working together to galvanize
support to that end.

In conclusion, let me reiterate my appreciation to
the organizers of this meeting and pledge Nigeria's
resolve to continue to support efforts to maintain peace
and security in all regions ofthe world, as we have done
since 1960 in the context of peacekeeping and other
joint efforts.

The meeting rose at 5p.m.
