Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I would like first
of all to express my delegation's full appreciation for
the very timely convening of this meeting to discuss
the role of business in conflict prevention,
peacekeeping and post-conflict peace-building.

I welcome the open statement by the Secretary-
General. It contains a number of key points for
reflection by the Security Council and an agenda for
future work. I would also like to extend appreciation
for the excellent presentations by Mr. James
Wolfensohn, President of the World Bank;
Mr. Heinrich von Pierer, President and Chief Executive
Officer of Siemens; Ambassador Marjatta Rasi,
President of the Economic and Social Council; and
Mr. Dumisani Kumalo, Chairman of the Ad Hoc
Advisory Group for African Countries emerging from
conflict.

This initiative of the German presidency is to be
commended, as it is a creative way of associating the
private business sector with the discussion in this
Chamber of matters that normally and primarily have
been the concern of Governments.

There is general agreement on the need for a new
partnership to strengthen efforts to mobilize increased
resources to achieve agreed international development
goals, including those contained in the Millennium
Declaration. African countries should be in the front
line of such efforts, as the most affected by conflicts,
poverty, disease and economic marginalization. The
Global Compact initiative, proposed by the Secretary-
General, the Declaration adopted at the 2002
Monterrey Conference on Financing for Development,
the G-8 summit meetings and the Third United Nations
Conference of the Least Developed Countries, among
other international conferences, demonstrated that the
need for additional resources remains as important and
urgent as when the General Assembly approved the
United Nations New Agenda for the Development of
Africa in the 1990s. We welcome the efforts
undertaken by the United Nations to promote global
partnerships and we encourage good corporate
citizenship in the belief that the resources required for
African development, especially for those countries
emerging from conflict situations, cannot be met by
domestic sources alone, nor from official development
assistance.
It is clear that without important capital flows,
particularly foreign direct investment, the long-term
challenges posed by post-conflict recovery and
reconstruction will persist and those countries might
again be faced with the dire conditions that led them to
conflict. Therefore, if the international community is to
make a real contribution to sustained and lasting peace,
a serious and determined effort must be exerted.

The main responsibility for preventing conflict
lies with the leaders and social forces of the countries
facing political and social crises. However, conflict
prevention is also a joint endeavour involving the
international community, including international,
regional and subregional organizations, States, the
business sector and non-governmental organizations.
The role played by the business sector, in particular the
large corporations, represented here by Siemens,
should be underlined. We should also recognize their
decisive contribution to formulating growth
development products in most countries affected by
economic, social and political crises, their decisive role
in job creation and their relations with the political and
social elite of those countries.

The big corporations, whose presence in some of
our countries assume quite often an almost
monopolistic position, can and should play a
fundamental role in the prevention of conflict. They
have a vested interest in the promotion of stability. To
this end, they should adopt the best international
practices in their dealings, and view business not
exclusively from the perspective of profit but also with
a view to contributing to the sound development of the
countries in which they operate. Unfortunately, the
lessons we have learned from the past do not reveal
such an idyllic reality. More often, we have witnessed
businesses, both large and small, contributing to the
forces of division and conflict.

Fortunately, we have more recently witnessed an
important process of change and we quite often see
large corporations acting as positive forces for
exchanges and progress. In this connection, the
Kimberley Process, which has been frequently cited in
this Chamber this morning, and to which my country
has been fully associated since its very beginning, is a
clear case of what can be accomplished through
partnerships involving Governments, civil society and
private companies in preventing conflict. In this
connection, we also welcome the General Assembly's
adoption, yesterday, of a resolution on the role of
diamonds in fueling conflict.
To restore facilities destroyed or rendered
inoperative by war, to reintegrate millions of people,
refugees and displaced persons, to implement
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes and to simultaneously achieve
internationally agreed development goals is simply not
possible unless the process is supported by the
international community, with the international private
sector playing a decisive role.

The Council was briefed last week on the recently
held Berlin Conference on Afghanistan, in which the
international community reiterated its commitment to
the future of that country. By securing clear political
support and approximately $8.2 billion to finance the
reconstruction of Afghanistan over the next three years,
with $4.4 billion made available for the first year, the
Berlin Conference was a model of how the
international community can effectively assist a
country emerging from conflict. Similar initiatives
should be applied to other countries in post-conflict
situations.

I would like to take this opportunity to call the
attention of the Council to the situation in my own
country, a post-conflict country. We are aware that the
creation of a favourable political and institutional
environment is a critical factor for promoting economic
life and for forging a climate conducive to the sound
operation of the private sector. Thus, with the end of
war, Angola has decisively embarked on a path of
economic reform, with the adoption of a number of
business-friendly legislative measures aimed at
progressively improving macroeconomic management
and accountability. Allow me to cite some examples of
this. Angola joined the International Monetary Fund's
General Data Dissemination System in order to make
key economic data more apparent and strengthen its
accountability. The New Partnership for Africa's
Development's African Peer Review Mechanism was
also recently adopted. With the assistance of the World
Bank, a comprehensive strategy to combat poverty has
been put in place to accelerate the social reintegration
of internally displaced persons and ex-combatants.

With these measures, the country is in a better
position to pursue dialogue and build a meaningful
partnership with the international community for the
reconstruction of the country. Both national and
international business are invited and called upon to
play a key role in this process and to instil their
characteristic dynamism in the economy. This will be a
concrete contribution to consolidating peace, stability
and the process of national reconstruction in one of the
post-conflict African countries in which the Security
Council recently played a pivotal role in managing and
ending a conflict that lasted for far too long.

This is not the place to pass judgement on the
past. Rather, we must look to the future, learn lessons
and determine how the Security Council can be
instrumental and play a leading role in building an
alliance. In this alliance, corporations such as Siemens
should be able to justly meet the challenges of creating
hope and giving people a future and a world with more
peace-building and less armed conflict.

