Mr. Lewicki (Poland): At the outset, I would
like to thank Mr. Michel Kafando, Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for Burundi, and Ambassador
Jurg Lauber, Chair of the Burundi configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), for their very
important and comprehensive briefings. Let me also to
take this opportunity to express Poland's full support
for all the efforts of the Special Envoy, Mr. Kafando,
and the PBC's Burundi configuration, under the able
stewardship of Ambassador Lauber, to ensure peace,
stability and development in Burundi. Allow me to focus
on three key issues, namely, the political process, human
rights and the economic and humanitarian situation.

First, on the political process, Poland commends
all the efforts made by the East African Community
and the facilitator, Mr. Benjamin Mkapa, to enable the
intra-Burundian dialogue. We deeply regret that the
Burundian Government did not take the opportunity to
make progress on national reconciliation and decided
not to attend the fifth round of negotiations. It goes
without saying that only an inclusive political process
can ensure a sustainable and widely acceptable solution.

It is high time for the Government to prove its
readiness for a political compromise and engage in a
real dialogue with a wider spectrum of the opposition.
It is especially important now with the presidential
elections approaching in 2020, as it is the role of the
authorities to ensure that the electoral process is free,
fair, transparent and truly inclusive.

Secondly, on human rights, let me stress that, in
our view, the issue of human rights lies fully within
the mandate of the Security Council, in line with
the Charter of the United Nations. One cannot speak
about peace and security if one omits human rights
and development. Poland remains seriously concerned
about the reports of political violence and persistent
serious human rights violations and abuses in Burundi.
We are particularly worried about the reported cases of
intimidation of members of the opposition, as well as
limitations on political space, an independent media,
civil society and non-governmental organizations.

Against that background, we urge the Burundi
authorities to improve good governance, open up the
civic and democratic space and ensure media freedom
ahead of the elections scheduled for 2020. Following
the statement made by Ambassador Lauber, we would
like to appeal to the Government of Burundi to swiftly
conclude the memorandum of understanding with the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights. We also call on the authorities of Burundi
to fully cooperate and to engage constructively with
the independent Commission of Inquiry on Burundi,
established by the Human Rights Council, as well as
with other mechanisms of the Human Rights Council,
such as special rapporteurs.

Thirdly, on the economic and humanitarian
situation, the ongoing political impasse has a negative
impact on the economy and the humanitarian situation.
We welcome the continuation of the process of
voluntary repatriation of refugees under the tripartite
agreement with Tanzania and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. However,
further efforts to create an environment conducive to
the return and reintegration of refugees into society
are necessary. Poland also commends the launching of
the national development plan for Burundi, which can
contribute to the socioeconomic development of the
country. At the same time, we praise the efforts made
by the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission in that regard.

In conclusion, Poland still believes that the Arusha
Peace and Reconciliation Agreement remains the
main instrument for peace and stability in Burundi
and in the Great Lakes region as a whole. The country
continuously requires the special attention of the
Security Council and the international community.
We therefore encourage the African Union, the East
African Community and, especially, the guarantors of
the Arusha Agreement to remain engaged in supporting
Burundi in order to find a sustainable political solution
ahead of the presidential elections and to overcome the
causes generating instability in that part ofthe continent.

