The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Council for the month of February 2014, I would like
to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the
Council, to His Royal Highness Prince Zeid Ra'ad Zeid
Al-Hussein, Permanent Representative of Jordan, for
his service as President of the Security Council for the
month of January. I am certain I speak for all members
of the Council in expressing my deep appreciation to
Ambassador Al-Hussein and his team for the great
diplomatic skill with which they conducted the business
of the Council last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199
(1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)

Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (S/2014/68)

The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Serbia to participate in this meeting.

On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Ivica Daeic, Prime Minister of the Republic of
Serbia, and I request the Protocol Officer to escort him
to a seat at the Council table.

Mr. Ivica Daeie, Prime Minister of the Republic of
Serbia, was escorted to his seat at the Council table.


The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council's provisional rules of procedure, I invite
Mr. Farid Zarif, Special Representative ofthe Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo, to participate in
this meeting. On behalf of the Council, I welcome
Mr. Zarif, who is joining today's meeting via video
teleconference from Pristina.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Hashim
Thaci to participate in this meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. I wish to
draw the attention of Council members to document
S/2014/68, which contains the report of the Secretary-
General on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo.
I now give the floor to Mr. Zarif.


