Mr. Matjila (South Africa): We are delighted,
Madam President, to see you presiding over today's
Council meeting, all the more so that something
positive is coming from Africa, from your own region
of Central Africa.
At the outset, let me join others in thanking the
outgoing Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for the Central African Republic and Head
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA), Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, and the
African Union Commissioner for Peace and Security,
His Excellency Ambassador Smail Chergui, for
their comprehensive briefings. We also express our
appreciation to the Managing Director for Africa,
European External Action Service, Mr. Koen Vervaeke.

Last but not least, we wish to thank the Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2127 (2013), Ambassador Ipo ofCote d'Ivoire,
as well as the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission's
Central African Republic configuration, the Permanent
Representative of Morocco to the United Nations, our
friend His Excellency Ambassador Mr. Omar Hilale,
for their briefings and hard work.

I would also like to offer a special welcome to
the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Central Africans
Abroad ofthe Central African Republic, Her Excellency
Ambassador Sylvie Valerie Ba'ipo-Temon, and to assure
her that she can count on the support of South Africa
as she begins the journey towards a stable and peaceful
Central African Republic.

South Africa welcomes the signing of the new
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the
Central African Republic on 6 February 2019, under
the framework of the African Initiative for Peace and
Reconciliation in Central African Republic. In that
regard, we would like to pay tribute to the President
of the Sudan, His Excellency Field Marshal Omer
Hassan A. Al-Bashir, and the President of Chad, His
Excellency Mr. Idriss Deby Itno, for their leadership
support and their role in the negotiations in assisting
Ambassador Chergui and his team in negotiating the
new peace agreement, thus contributing towards a
peaceful neighbourhood in the Central African region.

We further congratulate the African Union
Commissioner for Peace and Security for the role he
played in facilitating and overseeing the negotiations
with all relevant parties, including close cooperation
with the United Nations, especially the Under-Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, and Special Representative Onanga-Anyanga,
Head of MINUSCA, who contributed to enhanced
cooperation between the African Union and the
United Nations.
South Africa encourages all stakeholders,
including the Council, to fully support the peace and
national reconciliation agenda for restoring durable
peace, security and development to the Central African
Republic and to implement the above-mentioned
agreement. In that context, we welcome the efforts of
President of Cote d'Ivoire, His Excellency Mr. Alassane
Ouattara, towards the implementation of the agreement.

In our view, the peace and stability of the entire
Central Africa region are critical if we are to achieve
the Africa we want as outlined in the African Union's
Agenda 2063. The recently held elections in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, which were relatively
calm and peaceful, coupled with the determination of
the Central African Republic leadership during the
negotiation of the peace agreement, no doubt represent
very positive and welcome developments. The role of
the Council and relevant regional organizations is to
support the two countries in their path towards stability
and long-lasting peace.

We also note with concern, however, the dire
humanitarian situation in the Central African Republic,
with more than 25 per cent of the population internally

displaced and millions of people in desperate need of
humanitarian assistance. We urge the international
community to support the ongoing efforts aimed at
addressing the desperate humanitarian situation in
the country.

South Africa wishes to underscore the importance
of implementing disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation, as well as security
sector reform. South Africa calls on MINUSCA to
continue to assist with the above and to develop quick
impact projects that would allow for the reintegration
of demobilized elements of rebel groups into Central
African Republic society.

South Africa supports the concerted efforts by the
international community, through the African Union,
the United Nations and regional and international
partners, to continue engaging in post-conflict
reconstruction and development efforts in the country,
in particular for the establishment of critical State and
institutional capacity in support of governance, judicial
and security sector reform.

We remain concerned about the ongoing targeted
violence by armed groups and criminal gangs
perpetrated against the vulnerable civilian population
in most parts of the Central African Republic. This is
giving rise to a climate of human rights violations and
a burgeoning humanitarian crisis that are of serious
concern to South Africa. The scale of the challenge
highlights the need for the Council to ensure that
adequate funding and resources from United Nations
assessed contributions is allocated to MINUSCA in the
fulfilment and expansion of its current mandate.

South Africa would like to emphasize the importance
of peacebuilding in order to ensure a sustainable peace
and to kick-start the Central African Republic economy,
which will prevent recourse to armed conflict. In that
regard, we call on the Ambassador Hilale and the
Peacebuilding Commission to coordinate its efforts
with the African Union, development partners and
regional mechanisms to support the post-conflict
reconstruction and development efforts, especially the
provision of basic services to the population.

South Africa stands ready to assist in moving
the peace process forward through the promotion of
reconciliation and supporting the road map, including
towards the holding of elections and preparation of
a new constitution. We aspire to a stable Central
African region.

