I wish everyone a good evening from Mogadishu and Ramadan Mubarak to our Somali brothers and sisters as we approach Eid al-Fitr. Somalia, like the rest of the world, is focused on confronting the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Somalia has more than 1,500 recorded cases, although the actual figures are almost certainly much higher. The consequences for Somalia are acute. Even before COVID-19, more than 5 million Somalis required humanitarian assistance. The 2.6 million internally displaced persons are particularly at risk. Compounding the crisis, nearly | million Somalis are now affected by flooding, and the country also faces its worst desert- locust infestation in some 25 years. In addition to the medical and humanitarian effects, COVID-19 is also having a severely negative economic impact on Somalia. The Federal Government projects an 11 per cent decline in nominal gross domestic product for 2020. Revenue generation has suffered from the closure of ports and airports. Vital remittances from the diaspora have dwindled by 40 per cent. The Federal Government and federal member states have responded quickly to the crisis within their means. A national COVID-19 task force was established in early March, under the chairmanship of Prime Minister Hassan Khayre. Federal member states have created similar structures and also participate in the national- level coordination. Public-health messages are being disseminated, funds mobilized and medical and protective equipment procured. The United Nations family is working to reinforce the Government's response. United Nations agencies, funds and programmes have reoriented their activities to give priority to COVID-19. I will list just a few examples: the World Health Organization has expanded Somali hospital capacity, established isolation centres and supported testing laboratories. The United Nations Development Programme has provided generators. The United Nations Support Office in Somalia (UNSOS) and the United Nations Humanitarian Air Service have provided vital air transport and other logistical support. The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs is leading on coordination within the United Nations family and with partners. And much more is being done across all agencies, funds and programmes. Somalia's ability to respond to COVID-19 is greatly aided by its having achieved the decision point under the World Bank and International Monetary Fund Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative on 25 March. That historic milestone recognized Somalia's improved public financial management and has now enabled Somalia to become eligible for the additional grant financing urgently needed to mitigate the impact of COVID-19. The World Bank and other partners have mobilized funding for immediate preparedness needs and budget support. The World Bank and United Nations agencies such as the World Food Programme are also fast-tracking economic recovery and cash transfer investments to help shore up livelihoods and resilience. In addition to its direct response, the United Nations family has supported the Government by engaging with and coordinating help from the broader donor community. On 23 April, the United Nations in Somalia issued the country preparedness and response plan for COVID-19, which consolidated United Nations system requests in support of the Government. Prior to the global pandemic, Somalia had set ambitious national priorities for 2020. These include the holding of the first direct, one-person-one-vote elections in Somalia since 1969. As the Council noted in November (see S/PV.8671), the holding of peaceful, inclusive, credible and transparent one-person-one-vote elections would be a historic step in rebuilding Somalia and would assist with the country's continued democratic development. The coming weeks will be decisive in determining how Somalia will proceed to these elections. The parliamentary joint ad hoc committee is expected to present its recommendations for resolving the issues omitted in the electoral law passed in February. These include designating constituencies, allocating Upper House seats and guaranteeing 30 per cent of the parliamentary seats for women. Parliament must also adopt amendments to the political parties law to conform to the electoral code. The Chairperson of the National Independent Electoral Commission will also report to a joint session of the Houses of the Parliament on plans for conducting elections within the constitutional time frame: November 2020 for the Parliament and February 2021 for the presidential elections. These Somali institutions will determine the pathway to elections. Somalia's partners must then be ready to mobilize the technical support and financial resources needed for implementation. The work of the national electoral security task force must also accelerate to ensure the necessary security arrangements for voting to take place. Equally important, there will be a need for consensus-building among political leaders and across Somali society to ensure that the elections enjoy broad support and acceptance. In addition to the focus on elections, we also note the importance of Somalia making progress on other critical State-building priorities. These include the formation of the Constitutional Court, the Judicial Service Commission and an independent Human Rights Commission, as well as completing the review of the Federal Constitution. Effective democratic competition also requires an enabling environment that protects freedom of speech, assembly and organization. I call on the Federal Government and federal member states to ensure these are fully respected, especially during this critical election year. Turning to the security situation, let me first pay tribute to Somali security forces and the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) for their continued sacrifice in the pursuit of peace. AMISOM completed the reduction of its troop ceiling by 1,000 troops on 5 March, as decided by the Council. UNSOS is currently providing logistics support to 19,626 AMISOM uniformed personnel as well as to 10,900 Somali security forces, supported by donor contributions to the Somali security forces trust fund. Since my most recent briefing (ibid.), Somalia has made progress in recovering areas occupied by Al-Shabaab. On 16 March, the Somali National Army and AMISOM liberated the strategic town of Janaale, in Lower Shabelle. Somali-led forces have held the town since then, and efforts by the federal and South-West state authorities to return governance, justice, the rule of law and stability to the town are ongoing, supported by UNSOS, the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) and other partners. Meanwhile, institutional reforms have continued in the security forces, including improvements to management and personnel systems. As set out in the threat assessment undertaken jointly in January by the United Nations, the African Union and the Federal Government of Somalia, the threat of Al-Shabaab has continued to evolve. The group continues its intimidation and violence through improvised explosive devices (IEDs), mortar attacks, assassinations and other means. Within communities under its control, Al-Shabaab employs extortion and conducts illegal commercial and criminal activities. We regret that it has not embraced the Secretary-General's appeal for a global ceasefire and that its terrorist operations continue unabated. With regard to the specific threat of IEDs, Somali security forces would benefit from additional support to counter that deadly menace. In that connection, I look forward to the briefing by the Director of the United Nations Mine Action Service later in this meeting. I welcome the Federal Government's commitmentto revise the Somali transition plan by updating the timelines and identifying key tasks and gaps in response to the evolved threat from Al-Shabaab. The Federal Government has acknowledged the need for greater coordination, both internally and with international partners, as well as the need for additional non-military responses to the diffuse Al-Shabaab threat, such as addressing terrorist financing. The Government has signalled its commitment to promote a comprehensive approach to security, and we welcome that. Regrettably, COVID-19 has slowed the international partner training needed to generate forces for the fight against Al-Shabaab. That may impact operations, underscoring the need for an updated transition plan that reflects all changes to the force generation timeline. We welcome the recent inclusive conversations held among Somali security leaders and key international partners to discuss requirements and configurations for international support for Somalia's security sector in the coming years. We look forward to continuing those discussions with a view to strengthening our collective efforts. Turning to developments with regard to the federal member states, we are encouraged by recent progress on dialogue and reconciliation in several of them. Those include Galmudug, where a broadly representative new cabinet has been appointed, South-West state, where elders have selected a new Parliament, and Jubaland, where former political rivals have agreed to work together and to pursue further reconciliation. In those and other federal member states, we urge continued efforts to promote dialogue and outreach in all communities for the sake of inclusive governance in the interest of the people. With regard to Somalia-Somaliland relations, we welcome the ongoing dialogue at senior levels and are encouraged that both sides have indicated a willingness to maintain open channels of communication and pursue further discussions. We urgently call for commitment to dialogue and improved cooperation to extend to relations between the Federal Government and all of the federal member states. While relations between the central Government and some federal member states remain cooperative, we regret that it has been more than a year since the President and all federal member state leaders met. They must all work together with urgency if they are to address important national priorities in the interest of the Somali people. As directed by the Council in resolution 2461 (2019), UNSOM has supported efforts to accelerate regular high-level dialogue between the Federal Government and federal member states. The United Nations stands ready to support Somali initiatives on reconciliation and collaboration through inclusive dialogue. In conclusion, I wish to reassure the Council that United Nations forces in Somalia remain present, active and committed to delivering our mandate - despite the limitations and additional challenges resulting from the global pandemic and the ongoing security threats to our Mission. We have temporarily reduced the staff working in Mogadishu and our field offices, but our colleagues are still working remotely from all over the world, remain engaged and continue to demonstrate their determination to support the people of Somalia.
