Mr. Moriko (C6te d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes today's briefing on the progress
made in implementing the principle of accountability
for serious crimes and mass atrocities committed
in Iraq by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL). We commend Mr. Karim Asad Ahmad Khan,
Special Adviser and Head of the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (UNITAD), established by resolution
2379 (2017), for his excellent briefing, in support of the
efforts of the Iraqi authorities to collect, protect and
preserve evidence relating to acts that may constitute
war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide.

First and foremost, Cote d'Ivoire reiterates its
support for Mr. Karim Asad Ahmad Khan and his entire
team for the work they have already conducted, in spite
of the many difficulties. Cote d'Ivoire remains deeply
concerned about the ongoing complex and multiple
challenges that could hinder UNITAD's work in the
context of its cooperation with the Iraqi authorities.
Crimes within the scope of UNITAD's investigation are
taken into account by Iraqi legislation only as terrorist
crimes. Similarly, the transnational nature of ISIL's
activities between June 2014 and June 2016 requires us

to identify areas of judicial cooperation among States
in the region so that individuals detained beyond Iraqi
borders are held accountable for crimes committed
by Da'esh.

Despite those obstacles, my country remains
convinced that cooperation between UNITAD and
the Iraqi authorities will allow for the development of
consensus-based legal mechanisms that will include
the crimes perpetrated by ISIL in the Iraqi legal arsenal
so that they do not go unpunished. In that regard,
we encourage the Special Adviser to continue his
cooperation with the Iraqi authorities, affected ethnic
and religious communities and civil society, whose
contributions could further boost UNITAD's action,
while ensuring its impartiality, independence and
credibility. It also recalls the need to ensure the greater
involvement of women in investigations.

My country welcomes the excavation of mass graves
conducted to date, in particular in the village of Kojo, in
the Sinjar district. We are of the opinion that mapping
ISIL's command structure between June 2014 and June
2016 will enable us to identify the perpetrators of the
crimes committed and initiate subsequent legal action.

My delegation also welcomes the establishment
of the UNITAD witness protection strategy, as well
as its cooperation with the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq and INTERPOL. We also believe that
it is important to resolve as soon as possible differences
in interpreting resolution 2379 (2017) and address the
concerns expressed by certain members of the Council,
for which the evidence gathered by UNITAD could
lead to the application of the death penalty at the end of
the expected trials.

In spite of such differences, which should not affect
UNITAD's work, my country remains convinced that
our collective commitment to translating into concrete
actions the principle of accountability for mass crimes
committed during conflicts and by terrorist groups,
in particular, goes well beyond the Iraqi and regional
framework. Above all, it is a challenge for international
peace and security, which requires the mobilization of
the entire United Nations system and all actors involved
in the fight against terrorism.

Cote d'Ivoire therefore calls for increased
international cooperation in the fight against terrorism
and the transnational organized crime that fuels it. That
was the subject of the open debate convened by the
Peruvian presidency on 9 July (see S/PV.8569). In that
regard, my country stresses the need to find sustainable
responses to the structural causes of insecurity and
instability in our countries and regions.

Combating poverty and unemployment must
remain at the heart of our priorities as it is closely
linked to the creation of socioeconomic environments
that would ensure the well-being of populations
and that young people are far removed from radical
rhetoric and the temptation to join terrorist groups. In
that regard, there is an urgent need for national and
regional economic and social development strategies
to receive the greatest attention and support from the
international community through investments that
generate employment and provide basic social services.
That is true of the much-needed economic and social
reconstruction in Iraq, as well as that of other regions
ravaged by terrorism, cross-border organized crime
and community conflicts.

In conclusion, my delegation reiterates its support
and best wishes to Mr. Karim Asad Ahmad Khan and
the United Nations Investigative Team. My country
remains convinced that the success of UNITAD
will undoubtedly constitute a Virtuous example and
a decisive step forward in the action of the United
Nations and the international community in the full
and effective implementation of the principle of
accountability for all terrorist actors or organizations
that commit mass crimes.

