Ms. Rice (United States of America): I thank
Ambassador Takasu for his briefing today.

Less than three weeks ago, the Council sent a
strong message about Iran's nuclear programme. The
adoption of resolution 1929 (2010) reaffirms that the
Council will respond decisively to serious threats to
international peace and security. That resolution
imposed tough, comprehensive new sanctions on Iran.
These sanctions reinforced the determination not only
of the United States but of the international community
to hold Iran to its international obligations and to
prevent it from developing nuclear weapons.

The Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) plays a critical role
in monitoring and improving the enforcement of the
Security Council's resolutions. The Committee is our
principal mechanism for helping States fulfil their
obligations to implement these measures, as well as for
responding effectively when States violate
international law and fail to enforce United Nations
sanctions.

In resolution 1929 (2010), the Council expressed
its desire to strengthen that Committee and to ensure
that it has the tools it needs to be effective. The
Council specifically directed the Committee to
intensify its efforts to promote the full implementation
of all Iran-related resolutions through a work plan. We
encourage Ambassador Takasu to personally engage
with the Committee to set out an ambitious agenda in
that work programme.

An active and effective Committee will reinforce
respect for the rule of law internationally. It can also
show the potential of multilateral mechanisms to tackle
urgent proliferation threats.
10-42528

We also encourage the Committee and the
Secretariat to work together to establish the newly
created panel of experts. When fully established, the
panel will be our eyes and ears in the field. In line with
its mandate, the panel will help States to fully
implement the measures set forth in each of the
resolutions on Iran, and it will help the Committee
examine and analyse information about sanctions
violations.

The United States hopes that the panel can be
operational by the end of this summer. But the
effectiveness of the Iran sanctions regime is primarily
the responsibility of each and every Member State,
which are obligated to carry out the Council's decision.

The United States has already taken steps to
implement our obligations under this resolution, as
have other Member States. All States must do their part
to ensure rapid, effective and robust implementation.
Such action will send an unmistakable message to
Iran's leaders and directly support negotiating efforts.

The United States remains committed to pursuing
a diplomatic solution and the dual-track strategy on
Iran. As the Foreign Ministers of the countries of the
five plus one group made clear in their statement
following the adoption of resolution 1929 (2010), we
remain ready to engage with Iran to address our
concerns.

We continue to acknowledge Iran's right to
pursue peaceful civilian nuclear power, but with that
right comes the real responsibility to assure the rest of
the world of the exclusively peaceful nature of Iran's
intentions. Our goal remains to prevent Iran from
developing nuclear weapons. We will continue working
closely with our partners in this Council and the
international community towards that goal.

As President Obama has said, Iran can choose to
address these concerns and build a more prosperous
relationship with the international community based on
mutual interests and mutual respect, but if the Iranian
Government continues to undermine the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the peace
that it protects, Iran will only find itself more isolated,
less prosperous and less secure.

