Mr. Cabactulan (Philippines): The Philippines is
grateful for this opportunity to address the Security
Council on today's open debate on the agenda item
"Protection of civilians in armed conflict". The
Philippines has always considered this issue to be of
special importance, taking into account its national and
international dimensions. The Philippine Government
continues to work seriously to protect civilians in
armed conflict not only in its own national territory,
but also the overseas Filipino workers who are
sometimes caught in fighting in areas of conflict or
potential conflict in other parts of the globe. Thus,
ensuring their safety is a top priority for the Philippine
Government.

I wish to thank the various speakers this morning
for their very useful briefings. The Philippines
associates itself with the position of the Non-Aligned
Movement delivered earlier by the Permanent
Representative of the Arab Republic of Egypt.

I wish to commend you, Sir, and the United
Kingdom delegation for putting the protection of
civilians in armed conflict on top of the Council's

agenda. At the same, I commend the United Kingdom
for its able and competent chairmanship of the
informal Expert Group on the Protection of Civilians
since its establishment in January 2009. I also wish to
express our appreciation to the Security Council for its
consistent and untiring engagement on this issue, both
at the thematic level and in country-specific cases,
since the adoption of resolution 1265 (1999) in
September 1999 - the first resolution on the
protection of civilians.

The adoption of resolution 1894 (2009) on
11 November last year once again reinforced the
Council's commitment to the protection of civilians by
taking concrete steps towards this end by ensuring
humanitarian access, providing protection mandates to
peacekeeping missions, and recognizing the need for
the effective monitoring and reporting of cases.

Despite the advances achieved in recent years,
however, more challenges remain to be addressed, as
pointed out by the United Nations officials concerned
who have shared their insights on this issue. The open
debate today therefore provides a good opportunity for
us to take stock of the progress made on key issues and
come up with new approaches to resolve them.

In recent years, the various reports and
recommendations on the protection of civilians caught
in armed conflict have given us a good panoramic View
of the problems associated with this issue. Among the
relevant recommendations are the need to include the
protection of civilians in any conflict-resolution
strategy, improving humanitarian access, the role of
United Nations peacekeeping and other relevant
missions in the protection of civilians and the
establishment of commissions of inquiry to reinforce
accountability.

The Philippines has taken those recommendations
into account. In fact, we have taken appropriate
measures to integrate them in the implementation of
our national policies and work plan. I am therefore
pleased to inform the Council of the following concrete
steps that the Philippines has taken.

First, as the Philippine Government continues to
engage in peace talks with the Moro Islamic Liberation
Front and the New People's Army, it has also taken
every measure to ensure that, until lasting peace is
achieved, civilians are properly protected and those
who commit violence and wrongdoing against them are
held accountable.

Secondly, the Philippines has consistently called

for a system-wide approach where the work of United

Nations bodies - namely, that of the Security Council,

the General Assembly and the Economic and Social

Council - on this issue is effectively integrated into

the work of other entities, specialized agencies and, in

applicable cases, non-governmental organizations and
civil society.

Thirdly, the Philippines has supported a more
proactive approach through concrete efforts to protect
civilians in the face of imminent conflict. This
proactive way of protecting people will save more lives
and reduce their vulnerability to the grim consequences
of conflict. In that regard, the Philippines actively
provides protection during armed conflict, especially to
women and children, who are the most vulnerable
segment of society.

I cannot overemphasize the commitment of the
Philippine Government to ensure the protection of
civilians caught in armed conflict. We have put in place
mechanisms for investigation and prosecution to deal
with such cases. In that context, the Philippines enacted
a new law in December of last year, namely, Republic
Act No. 9851 - the Philippine law on crimes against
international humanitarian law, genocide and other
crimes against humanity - which mandates the
protection of civilians and provides for the criminal and
administrative liability of commanders and other
superiors under the principle of command responsibility.

I would also like to assure Council members that
the new Government of President Benigno Aquino III
continues to adopt measures and implement good
practices on the protection of civilians as a matter of
priority.

In conclusion, the Philippines strongly believes
that a culture of protection of civilians can be truly
instilled if there is genuine domestic ownership of a
culture of protection. In that regard, the Philippines
will continue to work with the United Nations to
promote and strengthen this culture of protection,
which is actually rooted in the sanctity of human life
and respect for the human rights of every person on the
planet, especially in conflict areas.
