Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): "War, its lessons and the search for
permanent peace" is the theme chosen by the Jordanian
delegation for today's open debate, raising the bar to an
unprecedentedly high level. This theme has boggled the
minds of thinkers for centuries, and it remains relevant
today. There are solid starting points for this discussion
as part of the existing system of historic parameters.

We are currently commemorating two events that are
essential for drawing the lessons of war and searching
for lasting peace.

Seventy years ago, we witnessed the lifting of the
siege of Leningrad, a city that never fell to the fascist
invaders - at the cost of the lives of hundreds of
thousands of its inhabitants. On 27 January, the day
of the liberation of the Auschwitz death camp by the
Red Army, we honour the memory of the victims of the
Holocaust, a heinous Nazi crime.

History's verdict, reaffirmed by the Nuremberg
Tribunal, is as resolute as the victory of the Soviet
Union-led anti-Hitlerite coalition and as unconditional
as the capitulation of Nazi Germany: Nazi
organizations, practice and ideology are criminal. It
is that understanding that transformed the victors into
the United Nations and inspired the Charter of the
Organization.

That truth does not allow for compromise. The
notion that the manifestations of Nazism do not need
to be fought against today because a healthy society
will itself reject those ideas disregards not only the
malignant nature of the phenomenon but also today's
alarming reality. Why is it that, even in some countries
with deeply rooted, long-lasting democratic traditions,
the misanthropic book Mein Kampfremains an Internet
bestseller? Why are neo-Nazi and far-right parties and
organizations getting stronger, and why are racially
motivated attacks and killings a regular occurrence?
Why is it that a former Waffen-SS legionnaire, whose
services were rewarded by the Nazis with a Knight's
Cross of the Iron Cross, was buried with State honours?
Why are attempts made, through crude revisions
of history, to depict Nazi accomplices as heroes of
national liberation movements? Why do the relevant
international institutions fail to react in a principled
manner to outrageous violent acts committed by fascist-
spirited thugs who spout direct incitement to murder?
Why does so-called political correctness prevent
some from supporting the annual General Assembly
resolution condemning new forms of racism and the
glorification of Nazism, while some others switch off
their conscience altogether and vote against it? All
those questions require honest answers. Otherwise, we
will all face an uncertain future, one which would be a
far cry from the ideas of permanent peace and widely
declared democratic principles.

An irreplaceable foundation for pursuing durable
peace today can be found in international law and its
cornerstone, the Charter ofthe United Nations. Respect
for the sovereignty and unique identity of nations and
for the prerogatives of the Security Council as the
body with the primary responsibility for maintaining
international peace and security are principles that
are essential for avoiding dangerous upheavals with
disastrous consequences. That conclusion has been
confirmed at a high cost, as proven by the history of
the past decade.

The Security Council, bearing its high responsibility
under the Charter of the United Nations, should act in
the interests of the entire international community,
and not in the interests of its individual Members, who
might be guided by their own geopolitical, economic or
ideological motives.
Decisions by the Security Council must be fully
complied with in accordance with their letter and spirit.

Whenever crises break out, including domestic
ones in various countries, it is imperative, first and
foremost, to facilitate constructive dialogue among the
parties concerned.

In addition, one must not forget that the principle
of non-interference in the internal affairs of sovereign
nations has not been abrogated by anybody. The
imposition of recipes, especially those with such strong
drugs as regime change, leads only to destabilization
accompanied by the deterioration of conflicts and the
spread of terrorist threats.

The goal of reaching permanent peace will remain
a dream unless the habit of sabre-rattling is overcome
and a strong consensus is hammered out in favour of
seeking political and diplomatic solutions to even the
most acute problems.

Despite the great complexity of today's
international relations, we are witnessing encouraging
progress in some areas. I am talking about the first
agreement reached between the P-5 plus one and
Iran regarding the latter's nuclear programme, the
decision to destroy the Syrian chemical arsenal and the
convening - at the initiative of the Russian Federation
and the United States - of a conference to settle the
devastating conflict in Syria. Those undertakings must
be successfully and fully implemented.

Such efforts would mark an important step towards
a permanent peace, which will be secured only through
more hard work by the international community,
building on the existing potential for cooperation.

