Mr. Tuy (Cambodia): Allow me to express my
congratulations to Malaysia on assuming the presidency
of the Council this month and to thank it for having
organized this very important meeting. My delegation
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for the
preparation of the annual report on children and armed
conflict (S/2015/409) and his tireless efforts in working
to improve the situation of children worldwide.

Before I deliver my national statement, I should say
that my delegation would like to associate itself with
the statement made by the Permanent Representative
of Viet Nam on behalf of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations.

We share the concerns expressed by many
delegations about the difficult situation that millions
of children face as a result of armed conflicts, and we
would like to emphasize the importance of the debate
for children who are victims of non-State armed groups.
Violence against children and attacks on their welfare
are on the rise globally and are well documented.
Abductions, rape, torture, slavery, attacks on schools
and the use of children as combatants, suicide bombers
and executioners cannot be tolerated by the international
community.
Cambodia strongly condemns all forms of violence
perpetrated against children. My delegation is deeply
concerned about the increasing trend of abductions of
children by non-State armed groups. The Secretary-
General's report notes accurately that this practice
serves as "a precursor to other violations, such as
killing and maiming, recruitment and use, or sexual
violence"; moreover, abduction is used as "a tactic to
terrorize or target particular ethnic groups or religious
communities" (S/2015/409, para. 6) The international
community must devote close attention to that
disturbing terrorist tactic, which is used to dehumanize,
humiliate and subjugate entire populations, particularly
women and children.

As a State party to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child and a signatory to its 2000 Optional Protocol
on the involvement of children in armed conflict,
Cambodia supports United Nations initiatives aimed at
protecting children in conflict.

The primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security rests with the United
Nations, and we, as the international community, must
assert the rule of law. We must strengthen existing
legal instruments on the protection of children in
armed conflict. To that end, we welcome the efforts
of the Malaysian delegation to include abduction as
an additional violation triggering inclusion of a party
within the annexes of the Secretary-General's reports
on children and armed conflict.

Children are the future; they are the future of our
progress and our civilization's development. Children
deserve to be raised in nurturing environments without
experiencing the physical and psychological trauma of
armed conflict.

In that light, I reiterate my delegation's longstanding
position that in order to protect children from violence,
slavery and the everyday horrors of war, we must
address the deep-rooted causes of conflict. Conflict
prevention is a prerequisite for sustainable peace and
respect for human rights. Poverty, discrimination,
lack of education, social exclusion and inequality only
perpetuate the cycle of violence.

Preventing the use of children in armed conflict
can be achieved only through the creation of adequate
social, political and economic conditions worldwide. We
must take careful note of that, because no sustainable
development agenda can be successfully applied
without first securing a safe and prosperous future for
our children.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that the
Royal Government of Cambodia is resolved to protect
children and their rights in situations of armed conflict.
We are committed to working with our global partners,
States Members of the United Nations and United
Nations agencies in our efforts to end the Victimization
of children by non-State armed groups. It is only
by working together that we can ensure that future
generations of children can live free and in peace.

