Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela voted against the adoption of
resolution 2285 (2016), on the renewal of the United
Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara
(MINURSO), for substantive reasons and of procedure,
which have troubled us deeply. This entire process has
been characterized by a terrible lack of transparency,
which made it difficult for us to reach the shared goal
of consensus. The results of the voting this morning
constitute a clear message that a significant number of
the members of the Security Council see that there is a
clear fracture in the different positions held by Council
members on how to resolve this issue.

First of all, I should like to point out that the
discussion of this issue was preceded by a series
of events that shaped the way this matter would be
dealt with in the Security Council. Let us recall that,
on 18 November 2015, we asked for an "Any other
business" discussion in the Security Council in the face
of the serious difficulties that Ambassador Christopher
Ross, Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General, had to
confront in order to carry out his diplomatic work in
the territory. At that time, Venezuela warned against
that attempt on the part of one of the parties - the
Moroccan side - to impede the work of the Special
Envoy. But it was not possible to count on the backing
of the Security Council in the light of our concern,
which foresaw a conflicting situation with regard to
the Council's mandate. Similarly, when the Secretary-
General tried on various occasions to visit Western
Sahara, he faced many obstacles by the Government
of Morocco, which set preconditions and reservations.
My country asked the Council for us to express our
support for the Secretary-General in carrying out his
duties. However, it was not possible to come up with
any elements, not even for the press, on the Council's
support for the Secretary-General. Finally, following
the Secretary-General's visit to the Western Sahara
territories, and given that the terrible, unprecedented
number of impediments he encountered in carrying out
his duties, Venezuela once again asked for a Security
Council analysis of the situation and a statement from the
Council, which were also not possible. In other words,
the Council was not able to anticipate a situation such
as the one produced later on by Morocco's expulsion of
the civilian component of the United Nations Mission
for the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO).

In that regard, the Security Council has been
subject to a great deal of pressure on the part of some
of its members, as well as an incredible amount of
pressure by Morocco, so that we are not able to meet
the responsibilities entrusted to us to prevent conflicts
such as the latent one in the region of Western Sahara.
Following the expulsion of the MINURSO civilian
component, already a month ago, the Council was also
incapable of expressing its position in rejection of this
unprecedented situation precipitated by a country that
ought to embrace, protect and facilitate the fulfilment
of the mandate ofa peacekeeping mission.

Previously, we also expressed our deep annoyance
and disappointment that it was not possible, as is the
practice in other cases, for the closed consultations on
this issue to be preceded by a briefing to the Security
Council, which would have made it possible to hear, here
in Hall and before the entire international community,
the views of the Head of MINURSO, Ms. Kim Bolduc,
and of Special Envoy Christopher Ross, as well as
those of former President Joaquim Chissano, Special
Envoy of the African Union for Western Sahara. Let
us recall that last year when we voted on and adopted
the resolution on MINURSO (see S/PV.7435) we asked
that former President Chissano, who is a hero of Africa
and decolonization processes, could take the floor.
That was not possible, however, because, once again,
members of the Security Council blocked it.

All of this is to say that this process was preceded
by a host of impediments, irregularities and situations
that have served to create a state of absolute lack of
transparency. Most serious of all, as we see it, is that
with so many actions the effort has been to change de
facto - as has happened on the ground - the mandate
of MINURSO. Without its civilian component,
MINURSO simply cannot take the necessary steps
to carry out the referendum, which is in fact the
mandate the Security Council established. We should
remember that carrying out a referendum was what
allowed for agreement between the parties and for the
establishment of the ceasefire. The parties put their
trust in the Security Council, and the ceasefire has
been in place for 25 years to lead to a referendum. That
solution seems increasingly far off, given the intention,
in an arbitrary way and counter to the mandate of the
Council, to forget about the referendum as the solution
for the Sahraoui people.

Against that backdrop of clear contempt, last
Wednesday at 3.30 pm. we were presented with a draft
resolution (see S/2016/401). Apparently, it had been
discussed in the Group of Friends. However, the rest
of the members did not have access to it. Thanks to the
efforts made by the President ofthe Security Council, it
was possible to extend its consideration for an additional
day. Yesterday was held the first and only substantive
meeting to discuss the matter, which did not in fact lead
to achieving consensus.

Moreover, the text before us, which was adopted at
resolution 2285 (2016), does not address the legitimate
concerns and proposals of several of the countries with
an interest in this important issue, including Venezuela.
The resolution ignores the current situation on the
ground, which has been the subject of various closed
meetings of the Council and which has produced deep
concern among Member States. It is not enough to
bemoan the situation with MINURSO, as the resolution
does; rather, it should have emphatically condemned
Morocco's unilateral expulsion of international staff

and demanded their immediate return. A Security
Council document that is not capable of stating clearly
who expelled MINURSO's civilian contingent, or
why, is a text that aims to intentionally ignore the
reality in Western Sahara. We believe we have lost an
outstanding opportunity for the Security Council to
express, via this resolution, its absolute disagreement
with the expulsion of MINURSO's civilian personnel,
which constitutes not just a harsh blow for the political
negotiating process but also a lamentable precedent for
the international community.

In addition, our attention was starkly drawn to the
fact that the resolution does include any measures to
ensure the return of MINURSO's civilian staff to the
area of operations. Regrettably, we must state that had
this involved a weaker country without the right allies
in the Council, the Security Council would not have
hesitated to impose severe sanctions, as it often does
with many brotherly African countries. We are sending
a message to the international community that is
possible to violate the decisions of the Security Council
without consequence for Member States. It was not even
possible to include a provision in the resolution aimed
at setting a 30-day period for a periodic consideration
of this issue by the Security Council. As provided by
the resolution adopted, it will be 90 days before the
Secretary-General, who by then will be about to be
replaced, informs the Security Council as to what
has happened with MINURO's civilian staff. And it
should be noted that will be only to "inform", and no
concrete actions are foreseen. This seems paradoxical:
MINURSO'S entire essential component having been
expelled, injust 72 hours, the Council does not have the
will to meet once per month to look into developments
in the situation on the ground. What is more, the
text of the resolution does not even take up the just
aspirations of the Sahraoui population, which for more
than 40 years have lived in a territory under a pending
decolonization process, or the existing concerns with
regard to protecting the human rights in Western Sahara
while taking into account the recommendations made
by the Secretary-General in his report (S/2016/355).

We believe that the status quo with regard to
Western Sahara is already unsustainable. It is for that
reason that the ambiguous language of the resolution
sends a negative signal and reflects a disheartening
message. We should not forget that MINURSO's
mandate was first set out in resolution 690 (1991),
which urged the Mission to make every effort to pursue
a just and lasting solution by undertaking a referendum
on the self-determination of the Sahraoui people. It
is that people who should choose between autonomy
and independence.

It is essential that, in dealing with the issue of
Western Sahara, the Council should act with authority,
determination and transparency, and in accordance
with international law. We are facing a situation
in which the Security Council is at risk of failing to
fulfil its mandate, and it will now be very difficult to
comply with Article 24 of the Charter of the United
Nations, which confers the primary responsibility on
the Council for the maintenance of international peace
and security on behalf of Member States. In the past,
there have been serious deficiencies in that regard,
including cases where the permanent members of the
Council have violated the Charter. Such violations of
the international rule of law must end and the Council
must live up to its responsibilities.

If the people of Western Sahara are not guaranteed
the right to determine their own future and the
Kingdom of Morocco is allowed to continue to occupy
the territory, it will be the first time since the founding
of the United Nations that the international community
accepts de facto that a non-self-governing territory,
recognized as being in the decolonization process,
would be forcibly annexed without the people's consent.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
recognizes and supports MINURSO's important
role in overseeing the ceasefire, reducing the threat
of mines and unexploded ordnance and promoting
confidence-building measures between the parties with
the aim of holding the referendum, which represents its
principal mandate. Our vote against today's resolution in
no way means that we deny the significant efforts being
made by the civilian and other personnel of MINURSO,
who even in extremely difficult conditions are trying to
do their jobs on the ground. Nor are we ignoring the
Secretary-General's efforts to mediate and facilitate,
and he has our full support in that regard, as does his
Personal Envoy Christopher Ross and Ms. Bolduc, in
holding direct talks in good faith between the parties to
the conflict. MINURSO should continue to cooperate
and to immediately re-establish its operational and
political capacities in order to ensure that it can fulfil
its mandate, so as to deal with the difficult situation
facing displaced and separated Sahrawi families and
enable them to live in dignity on the land that belongs
to them, in their own country.

The Security Council's lack of action on such an
urgent and serious issue is unacceptable. We have said
that to other Council members in our closed meetings,
and we continue to condemn it and to refuse to validate
it. The situation regarding Morocco's treatment of
MINURSO and its mandate is completely irregular
and has been validated in a weak Security Council
resolution, which we reject. With it, we have lost an
opportunity to send a strong message to the parties
demanding the restoration of MINURSO's civilian
personnel, whose work we support and appreciate as the
only means ensuring the maintenance of the ceasefire
over the past 25 years and more. We also demand
that negotiations be resumed with a view to holding a
referendum on self-determination.

Lastly, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
regrets the fact that we have lost an opportunity to
reassert the Security Council's responsibility to work
for a just solution when the people of Western Sahara
have been waiting for more than 40 years to be able
to overcome their situation, that of the last remaining
colony on our brotherly continent of Africa.

