Mr. Nyamitwe (Burundi) (spoke in French): Let
me first thank you, Mr. President, for having convened
this meeting, which is indeed very important for our
country. I should also like to congratulate you, Sir,
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of November. I also thank all other
members of the Security Council who continue to make
praiseworthy efforts that demonstrate their attentiveness
to my country, Burundi. I take this opportunity to
thank Mr. Adama Dieng and Mr. Zeid Ra'ad Zeid Al
Hussein for their efforts and good counsel with regard
to Burundi.

My statement will be structured around a few
points: the political situation, security and disarmament,
the question of refugees, relations with Burundi's
partners, economic and social development and some
recommendations with regard to the international
community.

With regard to dialogue, I must say that dialogue
and consultation are part of the traditions of our
country. It is therefore necessary and fitting that, when
necessary, Burundians should sit down at the table and
discuss the issues that divide them, or reflect more
upon the issues that unite them. This good practice
should absolutely be implemented and I believe that the
region, the African Union, the United Nations and we
ourselves are saying the same thing when we say that
it is essential that there be a dialogue with regard to
questions that are of great importance for our country.
The terms and conditions may vary, but we agree on
the whole that there is a need for dialogue. Of course,
our delegation reaffirms that dialogue will continue, as
it characterizes good governance and ensures national
cohesion. This noble task falls primarily to Burundians
themselves, even if we cannot deny the contribution of
friends seeking to strengthen national cohesion.

It is in this context also that the Head of State,
following lengthy consultations, established the
Inter-Burundian Dialogue Commission, which is
politically, ethnically and religiously inclusive and
promises to study the issues in depth, bringing together
far more people and stakeholders around a common
theme or themes. During its mandate, the Commission
will have to address issues related to politics; social
relations; the economy; the strengthening of peace
and security; even an assessment of the Arusha
Peace Agreement, which was signed 15 years ago; the
reading and understanding of our Constitution; the
Comprehensive Ceasefire Agreement; the Charter of
National Unity that was adopted by referendum 24 years
ago; education programmes and patriotic training; and
so on. The Inter-Burundian Dialogue Commission will
have a six-month mandate, which can be extended if
needed. It will issue quarterly reports to be submitted to
the Head of State for his decision and implementation.
Copies of these reports will be submitted to both
chambers of our Parliament, the National Assembly and
the Senate.

At this stage, I should like to clarify the position
of our country vis-a-vis the regional efforts of the East
African Community concerning the dialogue. We are
in permanent contact with the Ugandan facilitation,
with President Museveni, through the Minister of
Defence, Mr. Crispus Kiyonga, who was in Burundi a
little over a week ago for talks with the authorities of
my country on the path to follow in the coming days
so that Burundians and Burundian political partners
can spend more time studying the issues that currently
divide them.

From this point of view, allow me to once again
lay to rest certain misunderstandings. Our Government
is not against the dialogue recommended by the East
African Community Summit, on 6 July in Dar es
Salaam. On the contrary, as I said earlier, we may have
differences of opinion on the terms, but overall we
agree on what is most important, which is that dialogue
must take place.

On the security front, our delegation wishes to
inform the Council that the entire country is generally
calm and that citizens are going about their activities
peacefully, except for in a few well-defined areas in
certain neighbourhoods of Bujumbura. In that regard,
I would question the reliability of the information
that has been provided at this meeting by Mr. Te'te
Antonio of the African Union. I do not know if it was
the African Union Mission in Bujumbura that informed
him that insecurity was spreading to other regions
and other cities outside Bujumbura. I wish he would
inform us of what cities and give us the names of those
places that are lacking security in the country, outside
of certain neighbourhoods of Bujumbura, because that
is surprising information.

Contrary to the information conveyed by the
foreign-based radical opposition and by some
affiliated media, Burundi is not burning. The few
incidents of crime aimed at attracting the attention
of the international community are being controlled.
As the Council knows, security is the cornerstone of
everything, because in its absence no beneficial action
or development is possible. Burundians yearn for
peace and equality and are committed to maintaining
it day and night with determination. There are several
peacebuilding initiatives in various parts of the country,
but these have unfortunately been ignored by the media,
which are content to report only on the violence and
chaos that supposedly reign in the country.

With regard to disarmament, our delegation
reiterates the commitment of the Government of
Burundi to pursue its disarmament programme through
prevention and dialogue. The Council will recall
that, on 24 September, Decree 100/36 was signed,
exempting unlawful possession of firearms from
criminal prosecution, giving an extension of one month
to any person living in Burundi in illegal possession
of firearms, ammunition and/or related material, and
allowing them to immediately and voluntarily return
such material to the defence and security forces. This
act of clemency on the part of our Government to those
weapons-bearers allowed them to voluntarily surrender
their weapons and not be penalized.

Perhaps this is also an opportunity to clarify the
legitimacy of the decision to extend that time frame by
a few days. The decision was made in order to provide
an opportunity to those illegally in possession of
weapons to surrender them directly to the authorities,
because, in Burundi as elsewhere, unlawful firearm
possession is not permitted and even less so the use
of weapons against security forces or against peaceful
citizens. It therefore goes without saying that, in an
organized State, security forces must be able to fulfil
their mandate comprehensively.

The defense and security forces must therefore
continue search-and-seizure operations in order
to seize illegally held weapons. Over the course of
those operations, numerous weapons and military
paraphernalia were seized, as well as medications
and narcotics, which are put into the service of those
criminals. Two months after the Government's
commitment to restore peace to the country, the mission
entrusted to the defence and security forces was 92 per
cent successful. As of the end of October, 139 rifles,
151 grenades and other explosives, 7,151 cartridges and
151 loaders were seized. Since the beginning of the
year until the end of October, the permanent national
commission for the fight against the proliferation of
small arms and light weapons had already collected
more than 400 rifles, 440 grenades and explosives,
12,455 cartridges and 416 loaders.

Allow me to clarify, for in the framework of those
operations, and following an ultimatum that has been
misinterpreted in certain circles, what has transpired
has not been fully understood in the Council. In a spirit
of transparency, since the fall bgan such operations
have been conducted in the presence of African Union
monitors. That was done under a mandate entrusted to
them during a meeting ofthe Peace and Security Council
that took place on 13 June in Johannesburg, which was
later reinforced by a decision taken on 17 October. The
monitors are therefore part of the operations, thereby
illustrating our Government's intentions of good faith
to work with its partners.

Today, our Government calls on the perpetrators
of those crimes to renounce an approach that will lead
nowhere. The path of violence is a dead end, a waste
of time and an obstacle to the future of our youth,
who are so necessary to rebuilding our country. The
five-day extension, which expired on 7 November,
was an opportunity to put an end to the situation. I
point this out to Mr. Al Hussein. I think that we all
agree that it is important that human rights abuses be
avoided at all costs and that they do not go unpunished.
It is crucial to know how to reconcile the duty of the
State in shouldering its responsibilities in ensuring
security at the national level, but it is also extremely
important a and I fully endorse what Mr. Al Hussein,
Mr. Dieng and others have just said - that there needs
to be a demonstration of authority in the management
of those issues, and specifically disarmament, so as
to avoid violations that would undermine peace and
security in my country.

With regard to the issue of refugees, it has been
clearly established that we must do everything possible
to ensure that that those who fled the country owing
to the political situation at the time, particularly in
April, are able to return. That is the reason that the
Government is in contact with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and those
countries that welcomed our brothers and sisters, so that
we can engage the tripartite commission with the aim
of repatratriating the refugees. I would like to take this
opportunity to express our gratitude to neighbouring
countries that have hosted refugees. We know that that
is no easy task. In the past, our country also hosted
refugees for several years. We therefore understand that
it is a costly endeavour, especially when such a situation
occurs suddenly.

We also call upon our partners to take allegations
seriously. I think Mr. Al Hussein correctly addressed
that issue earlier. I cannot say enough how much we
deplore the fact that some refugee camps have become
grounds for recruiting young people to fill the ranks of
rebel groups, and who in turn will continue to disrupt
peace and security in the country. We believe that the
way the refugee camps such as the one in Mahama,
Rwanda, are being managed is extremely ill-advised.
I believe that even the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region had the opportunity on
more than one occasion to highlight that we want to
uncategorically build our region in peace and security,
and that of course entails the proper management of the
refugee camps.

With regard to rebuilding trust with our partners,
my delegation would ask our traditional and
non-traditional partners to continue to focus on the
future of the country. I believe that this morning's
meeting with the Chair of the Burundi configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission was once again an
opportunity to ask him to plead in my country's favour,
so that we can all move towards the future together.
Our country still needs its friends. We will not be
able to rebuild our country without the contribution of
traditional partners, with whom we have had a bitter-
sweet relationship but who nevertheless came back to
support us after we obtained our sovereignty, in 1962,
so that we could offer more opportunities to participate
with others in the world in the new era of globalization.
We therefore believe that threats by some of suspending
development assistance runs counter to the noble goal
of building a more equitable and just world. For we
think that the Burundian people have the same rights
as everyone else.

To certain members of the Security Council and
others of the European Union, we would like to clarify
that we did receive the request from that organization to
open consultations with Burundi on the basis of article
96 of the Cotonou agreement. That concerns human
rights matters, the state of democracy and governance.
We have received that correspondence and are in full
consultations so as to willingly provide an appropriate
response within the set time frame to our partners. In
any case, our intention remains one of maintaining
increasing beneficial cooperation among our people
and European and other partners.

Within the framework of rebuilding confidence,
my delegation humbly requests that countries in the
North, as well as in the South, that continue to harbour
individuals accused of reprehensible international and
national crimes, such as those who were implicated
in the coup of 13 May 2015 - as well as other
wrongdoers - that they cooperate with our Government
so that they can be prosecuted. I believe that that is not
just a matter of human rights. Other parties need to
cooperate too. That is very important.

In upholding the Charter of the United Nations we
also would ask that certain individuals, who are part
of destabilizing activities after the elections of 2015
and the coup d'etat, would stop being supported and
disseminating destabilizing messages from their host
country, as those are not acts apt to favorize friendly
relations and cooperation among countries. For its part,
the Government of Burundi is committed to pursuing
peaceful diplomacy with its partners on the principle
of reciprocity. We have seen that unfriendly actions
by neighbouring countries and others is extremely
destructive. On that account, I would like to state that
it is noteworthy that we have demonstrated peaceful
gestures towards our neighbours and will continue our
policy of good-neighbourliness whatever situation we
happen to encounter.
Over the years, my country has always demonstrated
restraint. There have been no notable acts of aggression
against its neighbours, and we shall maintain that policy
of good-neighbourliness, despite the turbulence that we
are currently experiencing. We intend to establish a
new framework for growth and combating poverty. We
would therefore request the support of our traditional
and our non-traditional partners in carrying out the far-
reaching project of eliminating poverty in the context
of the post-2015 development agenda. The Burundi
configuration will play a key role therein, just as it has

a key role of mobilizing resources in other post-conflict
countries. That role will become crucial. within the
framework of establishing a bridge between Burundi
and its partners in the restoration of trust between the
parties.

I should like to make a few of the most important
recommendations to the international community
concerning the current situation in Burundi.

First, the end of the electoral process provides an
opportunity to evaluate the evolution of the democratic
culture in the country. It is also a good time to note
the strengths and weaknesses that will allow all players
to draw lessons learned so as to better prepare for the
future.

Secondly, there is a vital need for investment in
the economy and in community-rebuilding through
generous financing for projects that create employment
for youth, women and other vulnerable individuals,
which will offer them an alternative to violence.

Thirdly, to the extent possible, it is important to
avoid resort to sanctions, which are ineffective in many
ways. They not only affect the most vulnerable, but they
also radicalize base positions on the political situation.

Fourthly, support for the inter-Burundian national
dialogue at all levels is a sound approach that will have
the positive effect of encouraging the Government and
the opposition to act together in the interests of the
country. The dialogue will allow citizens to share their
views on questions that divide the Burundian people,
and to find lasting solutions for lasting reconciliation,

Fifthly, it is vital to cooperate and engage in
dialogue with the Government of Burundi and other
stakeholders instead of hardening positions by issuing
contradictory press communiques and adopting
selective sanctions vis-a-vis certain players in Burundi.
The head-on confrontation with our partners of the past
few days must stop. It is essential to rebuild trust in
good faith together through frank and sincere dialogue.
By way of conclusion, allow me simply to state
to all those who have taken the floor that while
we understand those of their concerns that may be
justified, the Government nonetheless remains ready
to work further with its partners at the regional and
continental levels. Our first priority is to allay any fear
ofthe genocide that has been widely touted in the press.
We must do our utmost to ensure an end to the flow of
Burundian blood. Even one death in the country is a
national tragedy.

