Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I would like
to thank Staffan de Mistura for his briefing and his
unrelenting efforts to secure a political solution to the
conflict in Syria. He has our continued full support.

Despite his efforts and those of the Security
Council and the international community, the people
of Syria have been denied a political solution for more
than six years. They have suffered over six years of
ever-increasing and ever-escalating barbarity, failed
ceasefires and full storms. For more than six years, the
Council has been held to ransom by Russia's shameless
support for the Al-Assad regime - support, which the
regime is flaunting. Throughout that time, we have met
in this Chamber to discuss atrocity after atrocity, while
hoping that Al-Assad had finally reached the depth of
his cruelty and would finally see the need for dialogue.
Yet every time without fail he just plunged to new lows.

Chemical weapons scientists in the United Kingdom
have analysed samples obtained from Khan Shaykhun.
Those have tested positive for the nerve agent sarin or
a sarin-like substance. The United Kingdom therefore
shares the United States assessment that it is highly
likely that the regime was responsible for a sarin
attack on Khan Shaykhun on 4 April. That sickening
use of chemical weapons - weapons that Al-Assad
had agreed in 2013 to destroy - is just the latest in a
long list of abhorrent attacks. With that attack, he has
made clear that he is not committed to a ceasefire or the
Astana process, thereby ruining Russia's credibility.
As we mourn the victims of the chemical attack on
Khan Shaykhun, we must not forget the 13.5 million
people who, thanks to Al-Assad, are in urgent need of
humanitarian assistance and a long overdue peace. It is
clear today as it has been for some time that there can
be no place for Al-Assad in Syria's future.

There is however a way to end the nightmare that
the Syrian people continue to suffer. The 2012 Geneva
communique (S/2012/522, annex) and resolution 2254
(2015), which we unanimously adopted, chart the way
to peace in Syria. We have a Special Representative in
Staffan de Mistura who is rightly determined to keep
the political process alive and pursue a renewed United
Nations-facilitated effort. We have in our position
prepared to take a pragmatic approach to discussions,
and we have millions upon millions of Syrians inside
and outside the country crying out for long overdue
peace. Yet we are still here in this Chamber with the
regime showing no interest in peace, encouraged by
Russia's support in the Council to continue dropping
bombs and using chemical weapons.

Russia has repeatedly abused its use of the veto
to protect the regime and defend its use of chemical
weapons. What has Russia received in return for its
use of the veto seven times during six years? Let me
tell everyone. Russia's initiative in 2013 to dismantle
Syria's chemical weapons has been exposed as a
shambles. Russian pride in the Astana process has been
turned into humiliation, and Russia's credibility and
reputation throughout the world have been poisoned
by its toxic association with Al-Assad. It has chosen
to side with a murderous barbaric criminal rather than
with its international peers. It has chosen the wrong
side of history. However, it is not too late for Russia to
change course. It is not too late for Russia to fulfil its
responsibilities as a permanent member of the Security
Council. It is not too late for Russia to use finally its
influence over the regime to end the conflict.

Those efforts must begin meaningfully with
attempts to end the use of chemical weapons and
barrel bombs - real efforts to bring about a ceasefire
and ensure proper humanitarian access. In doing so,
Russia can establish the space needed for a renewed
push on the physical process that leads to that political
transition to a Government that represents all Syrians.
Should it do so and choose that path, we stand ready
to work with Russia to preserve Syrian institutions
through the political transition. We Stand ready to find
ways of cooperating with Russia to counter Da'esh
and other international terrorist threats. We stand
ready to engage with Russia as a constructive partner
on the Council. While Al-Assad offers Russia only
shame and humiliation, we offer Russia something
else - the chance once again to work with the
international community as a credible member.

Finally, the Syrian people have waited for more than
six years. Hundreds of thousands have died. Countless
hospitals, schools and homes have been destroyed. Now
more than ever, the international community must come
together to end that senseless conflict. That is why we
stand shoulder to shoulder with the United States and
its decision to take military action against the Sharyat
airfield from where last week's attacks were launched.
We stand shoulder to shoulder with our allies from the
Group of Seven and all those who are committed to
deter the future use of chemical weapons and finally
bring peace to Syria.

