Mr. Seger (spoke in French): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for inviting me to address the
Security Council in my capacity as Chair of the Burundi
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission.

First, I would like to congratulate the representative
of Burundi on his country's 50 years of independence,
which it celebrated recently. We wish him all the best
and a prosperous future for his country.

I should like to structure my remarks around three
main points.

First, my most recent trip to Burundi in mid-April
confirmed my view that overall the political situation
has stabilized and that some degree ofprogress has been
made towards strengthening peace. Today, the greatest
concern for the people of Burundi is the socio-economic
situation and rising prices.

Secondly, within the Peacebuilding Commission's
country-specific configuration on Burundi, we are
compiling our conclusions and recommendations for
the annual review of the outcome document, which
defines the respective peacebuilding commitments of
the Burundi Government and the configuration.

Thirdly, I would mention the Burundi development
partners conference, which will take place on 29
and 30 October 2012 in Geneva for the purposes of
supporting the second Growth and Poverty Reduction
Strategy Framework.

As I have already sent a report to the Security
Council on my most recent visit to Burundi in April, and
as the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
has just given a very comprehensive overview of the
political and economic situation in the country, which
I fully endorse, I will depart from my written notes to
confirm that the general developments over the past
few months give me hope. We must now maintain the
still-fragile progress and support those who are seeking
help in the preparation of peaceful and inclusive
elections in 2015.

In that regard, the Burundi country-specific
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
has continued to support as best it can the work of the
United Nations Office in Burundi (BNUB), and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
particular, in support of Burundi in its efforts to build
peace.

Secondly, I would like to inform the Council that
the Burundi configuration plans to adopt on 18 July its
latest conclusions and recommendations, which will
define the respective peacebuilding commitments for
the next 12 months between the Government of Burundi
and the configuration. The dual-track approach that we
have used until now - involving political, institutional
and socio-economic tracks - will be maintained.
Since all aspects of peacebuilding will from now on
be contained in the first of the four pillars of the new
Growth and Poverty Reduction Strategy Framework,
we have agreed that future reviews will be based on
that monitoring and evaluation structure.

We call on the Government of Burundi to continue
to promote political and institutional progress, in
particular by engaging in active and inclusive dialogue
with all political actors with a view to the 2015
elections. We furthermore encourage Burundi to take
stronger measures against human rights violations,
political violence and impunity, strengthen the National
Independent Human Rights Commission, establish
transitional justice mechanisms, intensify the fight
against corruption, and implement the socio-economic
reintegration programme. This will be the main thrust
of the new shared framework.

The States members of the Burundi configuration
undertake to continue to assist Burundi to generate
support and mobilize resources to promote a culture of
democracy, political dialogue, good governance, human
rights and the rule of law. Furthermore, in the run-up to
the partners conference, which we support and promote
politically, we will maintain our efforts to develop close
partnerships with all key peacebuilding players, such as
the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP),
the World Bank and the African Development Bank.

Thirdly, the Burundi development partners
conference will be held on 29 and 30 October in Geneva
for the purposes of generating financial support for the
Growth and Poverty Reduction Strategy Framework.
The conference is being organized under the supervision
of the Office of the Second Vice-President and the
Ministry of Finance. In our View, it is important at this
point for the Government to define its Strategy priorities
and determine a timeframe for its implementation.
The substantive preparations and organization of the
conference must be speeded up, but I remain confident
that the Government is able to make the commitment
required for the conference. I applaud the great efforts
that have already been made to ensure that it is well
organized.

Switzerland will provide the conference facilities
and give the organizers every possible support,
specifically by contributing to a common basket
fund managed in Burundi by UNDP. In addition, the
configuration and I will put all of our efforts at the
disposal of Burundi in the coming months in order to
promote the Geneva conference.

Bujumbura's expectations for the conference are
high. I urge Burundi to demonstrate a sense of realism
in order to avoid a potential boomerang effect. The
financial situation of many donor States is critical.
Taking that reality into account, I shall continue working
with my Burundian colleagues to increase the number
of partners by generating interest in Burundi with
so-called non-traditional donors. As far as possible, we
will also be approaching philanthropic organizations
and the private sector.

In that respect, substantive progress in the area
of peacebuilding would considerably ease my task.
Indeed, it is only if Burundi increases its efforts in
the political and institutional areas that its partners
will feel sufficiently confident to commit to the
country and provide their support for the Strategy.
Without political and institutional progress, there can
be no socio-economic progress, and vice versa. One
strengthens the other.

Burundi fully deserves our support. Having only
recently emerged from a bloody conflict, that small
country has made considerable progress, as I have
already said, and needs the Council's help if it is to
make further progress. A stable prosperous Burundi in
an unstable subregion of Africa is in the direct interest
of the Security Council.

Let us also not forget that Burundi has contributed to
stability in the Horn of Africa by sending peacekeeping
contingents. I would take this opportunity to ask all
Council members to consider supporting the Strategy
and to actively participate in the conference in Geneva
in late October.

I cannot conclude my statement without presenting
my most sincere compliments to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Karin
Landgren, for her excellent work during the time
we worked together. I wish her every success in her
future post in Liberia. Once again, I personally rue her
departure, but I also recognize the opportunities that
her future work in Liberia will afford her.

I also wish to welcome the future Special
Representative, Mr. Parfait Ononga-Anyanga, whom I
see seated in the back of the Chamber today. I wish him
every success in his new post, and I look forward to
working closely with him.

The PBC is comprised of Member States, which
makes it possible to exercise considerable influence
within the United Nations, for example by transmitting
important political messages. In the light of the
complementary role of the PBC, it is deplorable that
the country-specific configuration was not involved in
or even informed about the setting of criteria for the
transition of BNUB into a country team. In the future, I
would be grateful if the configuration could be closely
associated with the discussions that will take place on
such a transition, which should, in my opinion, be done
in close cooperation with the PBC.

Only a few days after celebrating the fiftieth
anniversary of its independence, Burundi can look
with pride upon its success and new-found stability.
The ground is fertile for peacebuilding. We will
follow the next steps with great interest, including the
measures announced by the President of the Republic to
implement transitional justice mechanisms and revise
the electoral code and the Constitution.

