Mr. He Yafei (China) (interpretation from Chinese):
Rwanda is situated in the middle of Africa, is rich in
natural resources and its people are renowned for their
industry. As a result of the tireless efforts of the
Government and people of Rwanda - and with the
assistance of the international community, including the
United Nations - that war-ravaged country has finally set
out along the path of peace, reconstruction and
development. Its industrial and agricultural outputs are
gradually returning to normal, and its public transportation
and water and electricity systems are being restored. In this
regard, the United Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda
(UNAMIR), in the two years of its existence, has, in
cooperation with the Government of Rwanda, made its
contribution to the restoration of peace and stability.

The core issue now for Rwanda is the achievement of
national reconciliation, in which the repatriation of refugees
remains the most important element. We should like to
express our appreciation of and support for the efforts being
made by the Government of Rwanda and the countries of
the Great Lakes region in this regard.

At the request of the Government of Rwanda and in
accordance with the provisions of the relevant Security
Council resolutions, UNAMIR is about to withdraw from
Rwanda. After it does, and with the consent of the
Rwandan Government, the United Nations will establish a
political office, through which the United Nations will
support the Government's efforts to promote reconciliation,
strengthen the judicial system, facilitate the return of
refugees and help rebuild the country's infrastructure. We
believe that this change is in the interests of the Rwandan
people.

The Government and people of Rwanda are still
faced with extremely difficult tasks. By relying first and
foremost on themselves, they can facilitate the repatriation
of refugees through national reconciliation. Also, the
international community should continue, through the
various means at its disposal, to show its concern for the
people of Rwanda and should continue to help them
achieve political and social stability. The draft resolution
before the Council reflects this basic issue and, in line
with our consistent position of supporting the peace
process in Rwanda, the Chinese delegation will vote for
it.

The people of Africa have had more than their share
of conflict and turmoil and need a peaceful, united and
stable internal and external environment. China has
always followed developments in Africa very closely and
believes that a stable and developed Africa is in the best
interests of peace and stability for the whole world. China
attaches great importance to Africa and supports the
people of Africa in their struggle for self-reliance; for a
peaceful environment and good governance; and for the
reconstruction and development of their economies. And
that is why we actively support the peace process in
Rwanda.

