Mr. Burian (Slovakia): At the outset, I would
like to join previous speakers in thanking the Assistant
Secretary-General, Mr. Kalomoh, for his briefing and
for his valuable observations.
Slovakia fully aligns itself with the statement that
will be delivered shortly by the representative of
Austria on behalf of the European Union. I will
therefore limit my statement mainly to a number of
points, made in our national capacity.

Slovakia remains strongly committed to the
principles outlined in the road map. We take this
opportunity to reaffirm our support for a just,
comprehensive and lasting settlement of the Middle
East conflict, based on all relevant Security Council
resolutions and on negotiations between the two sides.

Slovakia supports the two-State solution to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. To achieve progress in
implementing the vision of two democratic States,
Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace and
security, both parties must accept previous agreements
and obligations, return to constructive dialogue and
take concrete actions aimed at building and
strengthening mutual confidence and trust.

For that reason, we believe that it remains
necessary for the new Palestinian Government, formed
and led by Hamas, to accept previous obligations and
agreements, including the road map. In order to
become a partner in the peace process, Hamas must
recognize Israel's right to exist and renounce violence
and terror. We are convinced that such a step would
significantly contribute to creating the conditions
necessary for the continuation of a dialogue on a
resolution of the Middle East conflict.

In this regard, we support the efforts and
leadership of President Mahmoud Abbas. We hope that
he will continue to exercise his authority and that good
working and personal relations will be established
between him and the new Prime Minister and members
of the Government, based on a mutual commitment to
a platform of peace, including the principles of the
road map and previous agreements and obligations.

We are also all aware of the developing
difficulties about financial and material support to the
Palestinian people, as well as to the Palestinian
Authority. We wish to stress that we cannot and should
not abandon the Palestinian people. We need to
continue international humanitarian aid and to find the
best way to do it effectively and transparently.

Two days ago Israeli voters approached polling
stations to elect a new Knesset and to form a new
Israeli Government. We share the view that the
outgoing Israeli Government has taken decisions that
were not easy and has implemented difficult steps
towards peace in the region. We hope that the future
Israeli Government will take advantage of and
reinforce the peace momentum already gained. In this
regard, we welcome the reconfirmed commitment of
Prime Minister Olmert to peace in the Middle East. At
the same time, we hope and expect that Israel will
refrain from steps and activities that might be
contradictory to the principles and agreements laid
down in the road map and that might threaten the
implementation of a solution based on the coexistence
of two viable States.

As for daily developments on the ground, we
remain concerned about the continuing violence and
loss of innocent lives. We urge both parties to exercise
utmost restraint.

With respect to Lebanon, Slovakia fully supports
the efforts of the Lebanese authorities to extend their
sovereignty and regain full control over the entire
territory of the country. We perceive the completion of
the investigation process into the assassination of
former Prime Minister Rafik Hariri as imperative for
the stabilization and reconciliation process, not only in
Lebanon but also in the wider region. In this regard,
Slovakia supports the creation of a tribunal of an
international character that would bring the
perpetrators to justice.

We welcome the ongoing efforts of the
international community aimed at assisting Lebanon
and helping it to overcome its difficult past. In this
context, we fully support the work of the United
Nations and its contribution to the process. We agree
with Mr. Kalomoh's observation that the beginning of
the national dialogue in Lebanon is a truly historic and
positive development that should be commended and
supported by the international community.

