We will remember 2020 as the year when the virus engulfed our planet. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has caused great harm and added to geopolitical tensions. But it has also made evident the value of international cooperation. The virus, climate change, violent conflicts - we can defeat those challenges only if we join hands across countries and continents and when multilateral organizations, such as the United Nations and the African Union (AU), are at the heart of our response. That is why today's debate is timely, and I thank President Ramaphosa of South Africa for organizing it. Germany strongly supports closer cooperation between the United Nations and the AU. We advocate a bigger role for Africa in the United Nations - particularly through Security Council reform, with a permanent seat for Africa - and remain one of the largest bilateral supporters of the African Union. I see three areas for even closer cooperation between the United Nations and the African Union. First, I see it in the fight against the virus. The AU's Centres for Disease Control and Prevention, the World Health Organization (WHO) and United Nations agencies have done a remarkable job in bolstering Africa's response to the pandemic. They will now be crucial to making vaccines true public goods on the African continent. To that end, the AU can team up with the Access to COVID-19 Tools Accelerator and its vaccine pillar, COVAX. Germany has been supporting the WHO and Africa throughout the pandemic. We have just donated more than 120 million medical masks to the WHO, of which a large part will go to African countries. Secondly, we welcome even closer United Nations-AU cooperation in ending violent conflicts, including at the level of the Security Council and the AU Peace and Security Council. There is hope for progress and there is work to be done in the Sudan, where we are committed to supporting the peace process and the transition to democracy; in Libya, where we have made considerable progress towards a political solution and in Ethiopia, where the United Nations, as a first step, has been allowed access to Government-controlled areas in the Tigray region. Mr. President, we highly appreciate your commitment, as the current AU Chair, to making this possible. Let me reiterate our support for the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire. I urge all countries to act on resolution 2532 (2020). The fighting around the world must stop. Germany also strongly supports the AU's Silencing the Guns initiative. We have partnered with the AU to cut the flow of weapons into conflict areas and to train arms-control experts. As a member of the Council, Germany has made it clear that real peace and reconciliation are impossible without accountability, respect for human rights and the equal participation of women. That is why we must all stand by the commitments we made in resolution 2467 (2019) to protect and empower survivors of conflict- related sexual violence. Thirdly, the AU and the United Nations are natural partners in the fight against climate change. The consequences of climate change for peace and security are real, particularly in Africa. From the Sahel to Somalia, droughts, hunger and displacement are catalysts for conflict. Germany has therefore firmly placed climate change on the Council's agenda, with the support of virtually all its members. We have established an informal expert group of members of the Security Council on climate and security. The Niger and Germany co-chaired the group's first meeting last month, in which we looked into the effects of climate change on the security situation in Somalia. The pandemic, violent conflicts and climate change are challenges that will stay with us next year. But by working together, we can make 2021 the turning point towards building back better in Europe, Africa and around the world. The United Nations and the African Union will be key in this endeavour, and Germany stands ready to provide its support.
