Mr. Elaraby (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic):
The Security Council is meeting today to examine a draft
resolution submitted regarding the establishment of the
United Nations Civilian Police Mission in Haiti
(MIPONUH) which will replace the United Nations
Transition Mission in Haiti (UNTMIH) after it has
successfully fulfilled its Security Council mandate. In this
regard, the delegation of Egypt would like to pay tribute
to the Secretary-General and to his Special
Representative, Mr. Enrique ter Horst.

My delegation has reviewed the report of the
Secretary-General [S/1997/832 and Add.1], which clearly
reflects the great achievements of the Mission and the
technical assistance it has provided to the Haitian
National Police, especially in the areas of rapid
intervention, investigation and the professionalization of
the work of the Haitian National Police in the operational
sphere. The draft resolution before the Council today
comes in response to the appeal addressed by President
Preval of Haiti to the Secretary-General for continued
United Nations assistance to the Haitian National Police
after the end of the mandate of the Transition Mission.
That appeal also coincided with the sensitive situation
perceived by the United Nations in Haiti. All that

 

prompted the Secretary-General to send a Special
Representative to assess the prevailing situation in Haiti,
which led to the recommendation by the Secretary-General
to set up a Civilian Police Mission in Haiti in order to help
supplement the support and training of the Haitian National
Police.

In view of Egypt's perception of the important and
vital role of the United Nations and the significance of its
operational activities in bringing stability and providing
support for national institutions that operate in the
developing countries in the sphere of national
reconciliation, we stress here the relevance of supporting
the efforts of President Preval to overcome the political
crisis facing Haiti, and that attainment of final resolutions
of the main areas of dispute among the political actors,
namely, elections, economic reform and the appointment of
a new Prime Minister. However, Haiti's political problems,
as emphasized in the report of the Secretary-General and
the provisions of the draft resolution on which we are about
to vote today, underscore once again the need to address
the economic problems facing Haiti. Therefore, the efforts
of the United Nations Development Programme, as well as
those of other United Nations agencies and programmes,
will be crucial in achieving real economic growth rates
which would eventually lead to political stability in Haiti.
All of this will hinge upon the financial and technical
assistance rendered by the international community to the
process of development. Therefore, the delegation of Egypt
appeals to the international community to respond to the
call made by the Secretary-General to expedite the
provision of voluntary contributions for the economic
reconstruction of Haiti.

Finally, we recognize that the reference made in the
draft resolution to special arrangements accorded to the
United Nations Civilian Police Mission in Haiti
(MIPONUH) will not constitute a precedent for other
operations of the same nature which the United Nations
may deal with in the future. In accordance with our
understanding, such arrangements arise from the particular
nature of the current situation in Haiti at this time, and the
requirements of dealing with it. Accordingly, Egypt will
vote in favour of the draft resolution.

