Mr. Sen (India): We are appreciative of the fact
that you, Sir, are personally presiding over this
meeting. We also congratulate Denmark on its
exemplary handling of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of May.

We welcome this opportunity to participate in this
debate to discuss the current policy and institutional
and financial challenges in post-conflict peacebuilding
without duplicating the General Assembly's
deliberations on the possible modalities of a
Peacebuilding Commission. In order to keep to the
time scheduled, I will confine myself to essential
points. Any consideration of the issue in the context of
the role of the United Nations in post-conflict
peacebuilding today cannot realistically be divorced
from the proposal of the Secretary-General.

India's approach towards post-conflict
peacebuilding is determined by its role as a major troop
contributor to United Nations peacekeeping operations
and as an emerging non-traditional donor for
reconstruction activities. As such, India has a keen
interest in the issue, as it does in ensuring that the
concept and implementation of a Peacebuilding
Commission are well-defined from the very inception
of the process.

We believe that the main functions of the
proposed Peacebuilding Commission should be to
ensure greater coordination between the international
community and donor countries on the one hand, and
national authorities on the other; to promote a sense of
ownership among national authorities for the policies
and programmes that are supported by the international
community and donor countries; and to provide assured
funding for the activities that are agreed upon as
priorities by the national authorities and the
international community.

Regarding its functions, in our view the
Secretary-General's decision to restrict the scope of the
Peacebuilding Commission's work to post-conflict
peacebuilding, as opposed to the wider mandate,
beginning with structural prevention, proposed by the
High-level Panel, is rational and pragmatic. The main
advantages of a narrower, better defined area of
activity are that it would allow the Peacebuilding
Commission to concentrate its resources, both personal
and financial, in an optimal way. We also agree with
the Secretary-General that the Peacebuilding
Commission should not have an early-warning or
monitoring function.

The proposal relating to core membership of the
Peacebuilding Commission is not clear in terms of the
proportion of representatives from the various interest
groups - the Security Council, the Economic and
Social Council, donors, troop contributors - identified
by the Secretary-General. Moreover, it is implicit,
though not explicit, that members will be individuals
nominated by their respective Governments - as in
the case of the Commissioners of the United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission,
for example. No mechanism to determine the
chairpersons of the core bodies or country-specific
meetings has been specified.

The institutional structure of the Peacebuilding
Commission needs to be defined clearly. The
Secretary-General has proposed that the Peacebuilding
Commission advise the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council in sequence, depending
on the state of recovery. While this is functionally
tenable, it does not take into account the fact that that
important body would be answerable only to
organizations with a select membership, not to the
general membership. It is essential that the
Peacebuilding Commission be made accountable to the
General Assembly. That can be done without prejudice
to its normal functioning, through periodic reports in
which it must seek the guidance and approval of the
General Assembly on policy issues.

Criteria on the basis of which a particular country
under the Peacebuilding Commission would move
from the Security Council to the Economic and Social
Council need to be formulated. For example, the
transition could begin from the time the Council starts
a review of the force size of a peacekeeping mission.
Ideally, the General Assembly could decide the
transition through a review. It is somewhat unrealistic
to set the transition from the Security Council to the
Economic and Social Council only after the situation in
a country is no longer on the agenda of the Security
Council, as a country remains at times on the agenda of
the Security Council for several years before it is
removed on a no-objection basis.

We await the outcome of the Secretary-General's
consultations on the participation of international
financial institutions. Time and again, the best
intentions and programmes for peacebuilding have
been undermined by a lack of funds. The programmes
are often based on commitments made by donor
countries that do not translate into actual cash. The
Standing Fund for Peacebuilding potentially offers a
solution. The mechanism for sustainability of the
Standing Fund and accountability for the contributions
made to it need to be outlined carefully and agreed
upon. It is, however, not clear whether the Standing
Fund for Peacebuilding is solely meant to cover the
gaps in funding, or would become the regular source
for financing peacebuilding projects.

It is important to highlight the role of the
proposed Commission in the context of proposing
overall priorities, and to ensure that those priorities
reflect country-based realities and to avoid repeating
and reinforcing the existing paradigm of externally
formulating policies and programmes for countries
transitioning from conflict to post-conflict
peacebuilding. The country-based realities component
is perhaps the most important aspect of setting priority
goals in order to avoid the same sequence in structure.
The international community is setting goals which
cannot be implemented, owing to a lack of
understanding of the realities on the ground. It is
therefore important to utilize the expertise of national
authorities, in whatever nascent form it is available, to
set priorities that the international community can
support. In some cases, those priorities also have to be
appropriately modified. That should be perceived as an
essential part of the process of capacity-building as
well.

The Peacebuilding Commission is required to
perform the vital role of ensuring system-wide
coherence. Any peacebuilding effort involves a number
of actors, including representatives of the United
Nations system, bilateral donors, troop contributors,
regional organizations, international financial
institutions and the like. However, in any post-conflict
situation, there are a very large number of non-
governmental organizations (NGOs) and relief
agencies involved as well. One of the main drawbacks
cited in post-conflict peacebuilding situations is the
lack of coordination among the plethora of NGOs that
compete for scarce resources, inevitably overlap in
areas of activity and divert local assets, such as
interpreters, trained personnel, etc., for their own
projects, sometimes by paying extravagant sums, thus
driving up the market rents and salaries. Perhaps the
Commission should be mandated to attempt to provide
a systemic coherence to all such post-conflict
peacebuilding activities.

I have confined my statement to a few
suggestions on the concept of a Peacebuilding
Commission in the United Nations. Undoubtedly, this
issue will be discussed at some length at the General
Assembly, where different views on the modalities of
the proposal will be aired. However, there is little
doubt that the Secretary-General's proposal has sought
to fill what he has described as "a gaping hole in the
United Nations institutional machinery". There is also
little doubt about the imperative need for and utility of
such a body. India is fully supportive of the proposal
and will be happy to engage constructively in
discussions in the General Assembly on its
establishment.

