Mrs. Cordova Soria (Plurinational State ofBolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We are grateful for the briefing
delivered by the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Yemen, Mr. Martin Griffiths, whose presence we
wish to take advantage ofin expressing our full support
for his tireless efforts to achieve a solution through
dialogue to the conflict in Yemen. We are also grateful
for the briefings delivered by Mr. Mark Lowcock,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Emergency Relief Coordinator; Mr. David Beasley,
Executive Director of the United Nations World Food
Programme; and Ms. Rasha Jarhum.

The effect of the words of all the briefers cannot
be called anything other than shame. The international
community should be ashamed of the degree of
suffering we have allowed, which continues in Yemen
to this day. The historians of the future will be able
to see the case of Yemen and will be able to study in
this case everything that is wrong and failing in the
economic, political, commercial and international
relations mechanisms of the first decades of the twenty-
first century. If we allow this country to continue on
that course of destruction, suffering and death without
taking effective and immediate action today, I believe
that all of us will have many reasons to feel shame.

My delegation expresses its deep concern about the
alarming escalation of violence in Yemen, especially
the bombing and air strikes that have resulted from
military campaigns in the city of Al-Hudaydah, which
to date have generated more than 445,000 internally
displaced persons. It is disturbing that, while by
the end of 2017 the number of fatalities resulting
from the conflict amounted to more than 10,000
people - according to official data published by the
World Health Organization -at present, even without
an official update, that number could have quintupled.
Moreover, that statistic is dwarfed if we take into
account the victims of diseases and hunger that this
fully man-made humanitarian crisis is generating. On
that point, it is worth reflecting on the technology and
the origin of the weapons, missiles and bombs that are
deployed in Yemen, which are being used in attacks
against hospitals, markets, public spaces, buses full
of children and even wedding celebrations and are
costing the lives of thousands of innocent civilians. If
we want to talk about resolving the conflict in Yemen
peaceably and through dialogue, then those transfers
and sale of arms, missiles and bombs must stop. We
appeal to the sense of humanity and responsibility of
the international community in that regard.
We also regret that, as a result of clashes, access
to the port of Al-Hudaydah has been compromised,
while the planting of antipersonnel mines jeopardizes
the integrity and safety of port workers as well as the
humanitarian assistance that enters through the port.
Due to this serious situation, several humanitarian aid
agencies, including the World Food Program and the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, can access neither the 51,000 metric tons of
wheat that are stored in the Red Sea Mills nor to the
warehouses where humanitarian assistance goods and
articles are stored.

Also, according to a report by the United Nations
Population Fund, the lives of more than 1,500 of the
10,000 pregnant women trapped in the middle of the
clashes in the city of Al-Hudaydah could be put at
risk if the only hospital in the city that can provide
emergency care becomes inaccessible. We would refer
to the Al-Thawra hospital, which was struck by the
remains of a missile last week and which, despite the
violence, continues to provide its services, including to
59 children, 25 of them in intensive care.

We remind the parties that any attack or military
campaign that targets civilians, public spaces,
homes or medical and educational centres, as well
as the launching of missiles and the deployment of
antipersonnel mines, run counter to international law
and international humanitarian law. As such, those
actions could constitute crimes against humanity that
can be investigated and sanctioned by the corresponding
international tribunals. On the other hand, we see
with great concern that armed forces that are part of
the coalition and have bases on Yemeni territory are
repressing and causing fatalities among civilians who
oppose their presence, as occurred in the Al-Mahrah
governorate in recent days.

We reiterate that an attack or military campaign
against the city and port of Al-Hudaydah would not
only seriously affect the more than 22 million people
currently in need of humanitarian assistance; it
would also increase the number of such people to an
unsustainable scale, thereby dangerously increasing the
number of people at risk of famine from 8 to 13 million.
We therefore call on the parties involved in the conflict
to refrain from attacking or jeopardizing the security,
integrity and operability of the port and the city of
Al-Hudaydah, as well as restricting or preventing
the deployment of humanitarian assistance. We also
call on the Yemeni authorities to avoid restrictions or
administrative obstacles affecting the entry of imports
of essential foods such as wheat, rice, sugar and milk,
among others. The military and military actions in
Yemen only transgress and weaken the efforts that
our Organization, and the Special Envoy in particular,
has been making to establish a dialogue that brings
the parties closer to achieve a negotiated solution to
the conflict.

The Council must therefore emphatically reiterate
to the parties that compliance with its resolutions,
particularly resolution 2216 (2015), is mandatory. We
therefore call on all of the actors and parties involved
to end the violence immediately and engage in all the
Special Envoy's initiatives to relaunch the dialogue to
reach a political a solution that will satisfy the demands
and aspirations of the Yemeni people, with respect
for their sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity. To that end, the commitment of the parties
without preconditions is essential.

In conclusion, we reiterate our delegation's support
for the consultations and dialogue process initiated
by the Special Envoy as an important step to steer
the political negotiation process towards a peaceful
resolution of the situation in Yemen.

