When the United States openly steals 200,000 oil barrels from the Syrian oil fields on a daily basis and also steals 400,000 tons of cotton and sets fire to thousands of hectares of wheat fields, when it steals 5 million heads of livestock, bragging about dividing Syria and deliberately weakening the value of the Syrian pound, when it imposes economic coercive measures aimed at suffocating the Syrian people, when it occupies parts of the Syrian territories and protects its Turkish partner, who occupies other territories, and when my colleague the Permanent Representative of the United States then talks about the Administration's concern about the deteriorating living conditions of Syrian citizens, attributing that deterioration to what she calls "the regime", then the legitimate question becomes: Does that not indicate an acute illness? Are these not the symptoms of political schizophrenia? On 31 May, my country, Syria, submitted a formal complaint to the Secretary- General and to the President of the Security Council against the Governments of some of Member States, at the forefront of which are the United States, the United Kingdom, France and Turkey. Over the past nine years, the Governments of those countries have supported, financed and armed multinational terrorist organizations, groups with multiple loyalties and labels and separatist proxy militias. Furthermore, they have deliberately intervened militarily in my country through unilateral and tripartite acts of aggression, the occupation of parts of Syrian territory, murder, destruction, displacement and demographic change, the looting of natural and historical resources and riches, including oil, gas, antiquities and agricultural crops, burning and destroying what they cannot steal, and the imposition of further unilateral coercive economic measures on the Syrian people. These practices and gross violations of the principles of international law and the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations highlight a contradiction in those Governments' vision of multilateral international action and a return to the perspective of the League of Nations, which legitimized aggression and occupation, thus dooming itself to failure. These practices are blatant attempts at destructive intervention in the political process facilitated by the United Nations through the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, with the aim of diverting the process from a path based on the inter-Syrian national dialogue, Syrian-owned and -led, to a form of imposition of those countries' will and dictates on the United Nations at the expense of Syria's sovereignty and resources and the well-being and security of its people. In the light of the statements we just heard, I find myself obligated to clarify a few points. First, the policies of blockade and the imposition of unilateral coercive economic measures have been, and continue to be, an integral part of the West's blind and prejudiced policies and the other side of terrorism that has reaped the lives of Syrians and destroyed their achievements. Harming the Syrian people by targeting their national currency, medicine and livelihoods and obstructing the ability of State institutions to meet the people's basic needs and continue to provide public services negates any Western claims of humanitarian concern. The latest example of the attempts to harm the Syrian people is manifested in the burning of humanitarian food shipments by some Lebanese parties. Those shipments have been regularly provided by the World Food Programme to Syrians in need through Lebanese territory. Secondly, the United States Administration and the European Union have flouted all international demands to put an end to the unilateral coercive economic measures imposed on the Syrian people, including the calls of the Secretary-General and his Special Envoy to Syria. Moreover, they have renewed and intensified the effects of those measures, in parallel with the entry into force of the United States so-called Caesar Act. All of the above shows the disregard of the American Administration and the European Union for all the achievements of humankind in the field of international law and is an attempt to impose American and European law on the world. Thirdly, James Jeffrey's recent statement represents an explicit recognition by the United States Administration of its direct responsibility for the suffering of Syrians. Such an irresponsible statement reaffirms that the Administration views the region through Israeli eyes as the demands that Jeffrey is talking about are renewed, old Israeli demands aimed at shaping the region in a way that achieves its hegemonic agenda. Fourthly, the responsibility to maintain international peace and security, with which the three Western permanent members of the Council in particular are supposed to be entrusted, is not in line with the way these same countries and other Western Governments, as well as their tools, turn a blind eye to the practices of their North Atlantic Treaty Organization ally Turkey, whose crimes in Syria, Libya and other countries they fully endorse and defend. That responsibility is also inconsistent with ignoring the American-Turkish occupation of parts of my country, shamelessly sponsoring terrorism and separatist militias there and holding meetings between representatives of those two countries' Governments and terrorist organizations on our territory, as recently demonstrated by the infiltration of the Turkish Ministers of Defence and the Interior into the Syrian territory of Idlib governorate. They have taken advantage of the calm that has prevailed since the Moscow agreement to reinforce the presence of the Turkish occupation forces and their affiliated terrorist groups operating in that area. Moreover, the Turkish regime is currently seeking to replace the Syrian national currency with the Turkish currency in the areas it occupies. It also persists in its attempt at the Turkification of those areas. In that regard, Erdogan's forces are identical to Israel's in their occupation of my country's territories. The Turkish and Israeli occupations are complementary and harmonious in serving their American operator. Furthermore, the responsibility to maintain international peace and security is not in line with the resolve of the three Western permanent members of the Security Council to not eliminate the terrorist organization of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS), as they mobilize its remnants in Iraq and Syria whenever their interests so require. In my statement delivered on 19 May (see S/2020/427), I referred to the confessions of ISIS terrorists captured by the Syrian Arab Army, in which they stressed the fact that they were trained by the American occupation forces in the Syrian occupied region of Al-Tanf. Recently, an ISIS terrorist named Mohammad Hussein Saud confessed that British intelligence forced him, along with other terrorists, to work for them and tasked them with gathering information on Syrian and Russian military locations and institutions in Syria. In its official complaint, my country requested the Secretary-General and the Security Council to put an end to the hostile foreign interventions in its domestic affairs and to call on all Member States to refrain from engaging in any practices aimed at undermining the independence and course of the political process and which affect the interests and choices of the Syrian people, the safety and stability of Syria and my country's regional and international relations. Syria also requested the Secretary-General to mandate the specialized legal bodies of the Secretariat to immediately prepare a report on how the American and European laws imposing an economic embargo on the Syrian people are in line with the provisions of the United Nations Charter and relevant Security Council resolutions. Such as report should also highlight the catastrophic impacts of those measures on the lives of the Syrian people. My country looks forward to the Secretary-General's response to those requests and to being informed as soon as possible of the procedures being implemented, in keeping with his mandate and capacity, to facilitate the political process in the Syrian Arab Republic. We have always been a victim of Western score-settling; therefore, we are good readers of history. The problem with our enemies and rivals is that we read history differently. In that regard, it would be suitable to recall what a wise social politician once said - only fools defy history. In conclusion, I would like to say to my colleagues the representatives of the Western countries in the Council: take your pressure off Syria, let the Syrian people breathe.
