Mr. Falouh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Let me begin, Mr. President, by thanking you
for convening this meeting. My thanks go also to the
former Permanent Representative of friendly Turkey
and his delegation for the excellent and wise manner in
which they guided the work of the Security Council
last month. I thank Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco,
Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for
his briefing.

The experience of the past - remote or recent i
shows that those who take the path of war or the use of
force to achieve political goals face only destruction.
That is the case with Israel today. Israel continues to
insist on using force to impose occupation, illegality,
oppression and injustice upon peoples. When we say
"today", we refer not only to six decades of
occupation, but also to the 17 years that have elapsed
since peace negotiations began in Madrid. Those
negotiations have only damaged and dimmed the
prospects for peace. The only positive contribution of
the peace process is that it has revealed the obvious
truth that Israel is the principal obstacle to achieving
the long-awaited peace.

Syria, as an Arab State, believes that peace is a
strategic objective encompassing the restoration of all
rights and the return of all occupied territories. While
the Arab States sought to achieve peace by adopting
their Arab Peace Initiative seven years ago at the 2002
Beirut summit, Israel, rather than responding
positively, went on to commit further crimes,
expanding its construction of settlements and its
aggression against Palestinians, Lebanese and Syrians;
undertaking extensive, repeated and provocative
military manoeuvres on its borders; creating espionage
networks in Lebanon and repeatedly threatening war
there. In his most recent speech, Prime Minister
Netanyahu clearly rejected the objective requisites of
achieving peace in the Middle East and all the bases of
the peace process identified by the international
community over the 20 years since that process was
begun. His repudiation of the need for peace on all
tracks reaffirms Israel's lack of genuine will to
establish peace in the region and the absence of an
Israeli partner in the peace process.

The Palestinians have lived under the yoke of
occupation for more than six decades, during which
they have endured the worst manifestations of injustice
and subjugation and Israel has pursued its escalations
and aggressions by confiscating land, building the
racist separation wall, continuing its settlement
activity, and attacking Palestinian farmers and
international activists. In spite of all these illegal and
immoral acts, Israel enjoys an impunity that Arab and
international public opinion finds hard to understand.

Our meeting today coincides with the fifth
anniversary of the adoption by the International Court
of Justice of its advisory opinion enshrining the
illegality of the separation wall and calling on Israel to
destroy it. Israel continues to reject all international
appeals to that end, and occupied Jerusalem is
experiencing the most painful moment in its history as
Israel's Vicious aggression threatens its very existence
and its Muslim and Christian identities, including
excavations under the Al-Aqsa mosque and the
campaign to destroy Palestinian homes. What can we
say when confronted with the image of Palestinians
forced to destroy their own homes and expelled in the
name of Israeli control and Judaization of Jerusalem?
Nearly 2 million Palestinians have been expelled in
this new campaign of ethnic cleansing, which, under
cover of what Israeli politicians call the "Jewishness"
of the State of Israel, represents the darkest pages of
human activity that we had hoped closed forever.

The Palestinian inhabitants of Gaza continue to
suffer under the blockade. Following the thousands of
casualties claimed by the Israeli aggression there, my
delegation studied the report compiled by the
independent Board of Inquiry dispatched by the
Secretary-General to Gaza on Israel's crimes against
United Nations property and Palestinian civilians,
including women and children. The report noted
Israel's use of white phosphorous and its responsibility
for deaths and injuries inside United Nations buildings
and for damaging those buildings, all of which
constitute war crimes, including the Board's findings
with respect to Israel's use of Gazan women, children
and the elderly as human shields and its intentional
destruction of United Nations infrastructure in Gaza.

The international community and the Security
Council in particular must therefore call for the
immediate lifting of Israel's unjust blockade of the
Palestinian people in Gaza and the removal of all
border crossings into Gaza. It should also recognize the
need for international guarantees that Israel will not
destroy the infrastructure facilities and buildings that
have been or will be rebuilt, pursuant to the
recommendations of the Board of Inquiry led by
Mr. Ian Martin. The leaders of Israel must be held
responsible for their repeated crimes, legally classified
as war crimes, crimes against humanity and crimes of
genocide.

Israel continues to refuse to restore the occupied
Golan Heights to its homeland, Syria, and to implement
the decisions of the international community, including
resolution 497 (1981). Israel's practices in the occupied
Syrian Golan exceed all legal and moral bounds,
including the recent forcible detention of the 2-year-old
Fahd Louay Shker under the pretext that he had been
born outside Israel while his parents studied in Syria.
Israel is pursuing its terrorist and oppressive policies
against Syrian citizens, confiscating their land,
imprisoning them, expanding settlements and planting
landmines. We recall that Israeli mines in the Syrian
Golan have resulted in 531 casualties, of whom 202
died, many of them children, and have permanently
disabled 329 for life.

Israel continues to refuse to allow Syrian citizens
in the occupied Golan Heights to visit their homeland
through the Quneitra crossing. This is at a time when
Israel, which claims to be a democratic State and to
respect human rights, has held many Syrian citizens in
its prisons for more than a quarter of a century, along
with 11,000 Palestinians.

Added to this are the various hostile declarations
by Israeli leaders which run counter to peace. The
question that arises is this: can Israel, with its past and
current Governments - the latter the most extremist in
Israel's history - having both openly and secretly
blocked any possibility of reaching a peace agreement
since the beginning of the peace process, be a partner
in the peace process?
We just heard the statement by the Israeli
representative with respect to the need to put an end to
arms smuggling at the Syrian-Lebanese border. But
then we see the Secretary-General's report on the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1701
(2006) (S/2009/330), reports of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon and reports by Lebanese
authorities which contradict what the Israeli
representative said. All of this is something everyone
knows today.

This is a desperate attempt by Israel to distract the
attention of the international community from the
crimes it has committed in occupied Palestine, in the
Golan Heights and in Lebanon. It is also an attempt to
conceal its 4,268 documented violations of Lebanese
sovereignty and of resolution 1701 (2006) since 2006.
These are not only flagrant violations of resolution
1701 (2006); they are also a threat to peace and security
in the region. This is why the Security Council must
hold Israel to account for these violations and must take
the necessary measures to put an end to them.

Syria has opted for a just and comprehensive
peace. This was a strategic choice based on well-
known terms of reference established in resolutions of
international legitimacy. This means the return of all
occupied Arab lands, including the occupied Syrian
Golan, up to the borders of 4 June 1967 and the
creation of an independent Palestinian State with
Jerusalem as its capital.

The continued occupation runs counter to peace
and necessitates taking all possible measures to put an
end to it.

