Mr. Hunter (United States of America): The United
States welcomes the outcomes ofthe Geneva Ministerial
Conference on Afghanistan, held three weeks ago,
where the international community reaffirmed its
long-term commitment to a peaceful, prosperous and
self-reliant Afghanistan. At the Geneva conference,
Afghanistan's international partners underscored their
commitment to supporting the peace process. We also
agreed on the need to look beyond peace negotiations
to begin planning for the broader economic agenda
required for lasting peace.

Underscoring the priority President Trump places
on achieving a durable peace agreement in Afghanistan,
Secretary of State Pompeo appointed Ambassador
Zalmay Khalilzad as the United States Special
Representative for Afghanistan Reconciliation to lead
the efforts of the United States Government to bring an
end to the Afghan conflict. In appointing Ambassador
Khalilzad at this time, the United States is sending a
clear message that we believe peace in Afghanistan is
possible. Now is the time for the parties to the conflict
and the broader international community to seize this
opportunity for peace.
While we are regularly reminded of the challenge
security environment in Afghanistan and the heavy
toll of the ongoing conflict on the Afghan people,
we have also seen some encouraging signs that point
to prospects for peace. We call on the Taliban to
establish an authoritative team of negotiators to engage
in inter-Afghan talks with the Afghan Government
and other Afghans. To fully seize that opportunity,
we welcome the decision taken by Afghanistan's
partners - and reflected in the Geneva conference
joint communique - to accelerate our collaboration
on the socioeconomic requirements for peace. We urge
all of our fellow donors, development partners and all
stakeholders to prioritize the development on an action
plan for a broad-based programme of post-settlement
economic initiatives. That includes a return of Afghan
capital, increased Afghan and foreign investment, job
creation and enhanced regional economic integration.
We thank the World Bank for its key role in working
to make the plan a reality. Such a commitment requires
broad-based collaboration and can be sustained only
through effective burden-sharing among donors,
Afghan stakeholders and the broader international
community

In addition to lending support to Afghanistan's
peace process, the United States also remains committed
to supporting preparations for the presidential elections
to ensure that they are transparent and credible. We
were pleased to witness millions of Afghans exercise
their right to vote in October's parliamentary elections
despite the security challenges. In advance of the
presidential election, we believe it will be important
for the Independent Election Commission to address
technical issues based on lessons learned from the
parliamentary elections. We also note the importance
of conducting credible investigations into allegations of
electoral fraud. The United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan plays a critical role in supporting
Afghanistan's electoral process and coordinating donor
assistance. We urge the Mission to continue to prioritize
its efforts to bolster the capabilities of the Afghan
Election Commission to ensure that the presidential
election is as credible and transparent as possible.

Regardless of which candidate ultimately
prevails, the United States will remain committed to
working with the Afghan people and the next Afghan
Government on areas of mutual interest, including
the fight against terrorism, promoting the rule of law
and inclusive democracy, protecting human rights and
increasing economic prosperity.

On security, the United States is deeply concerned
that violence in parts of Afghanistan remains at
unacceptably high levels. Despite the challenging
environment, the United States and our NATO
partners remain committed to strengthening the
professionalization and ability of the Afghan security
forces to protect the people of Afghanistan. Indeed,
building that capacity in a way that prioritizes long-
term sustainability and ensures that Afghanistan's
security forces are inclusive and representative of the
Afghan population is an essential element in laying the
groundwork for long-term peace.

The United States also supports the work of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1988 (2011) and encourages Member
States to fully implement their sanctions obligations.
Implementation is key for sanctions to be an
effective tool for achieving peace and reconciliation
in Afghanistan.

We also thank the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime for again providing a valuable report on the
status of opium production in Afghanistan. Despite
the reduction in production in 2018, it is clear that the
opium challenge in Afghanistan remains acute and
will require dedicated focus in the months and years
ahead. Our collective approach to addressing that
complex challenge must remain broad. Direct efforts
to scale back production, including eradication, must
be part of the solution. At the same time, we must
also focus on supporting Afghan law enforcement
and criminal justice agencies, increasing access to
evidence-based treatment for substance abuse, and
perhaps, most importantly, supporting efforts to help
Afghan farmers develop alternative, licit livelihoods.
We encourage the Government of Afghanistan to
advance the implementation of its national drug control
strategy and national drug action plan. We also ask our
fellow donors to consider ways in which we can support
those efforts.

The United States welcomes this opportunity to
reaffirm our commitment to the long-term peace and
prosperity of Afghanistan and to the Afghan people.

