The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Australia, Cuba, India, Israel,
Liechtenstein, New Zealand, Peru, Switzerland, the
Syrian Arab Republic and the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend invitations under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Ambassador Ellen
Margrethe Loj, Chairman of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) concerning counter-terrorism; Ambassador
Cesar Mayoral, Chairman of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and
associated individuals and entities; and Ambassador
Mihnea Ioan Motoc, Chairman of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004).

It is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

I would like to draw the attention of the members
of the Council to document S/2005/421, which
contains the text of a letter dated 29 June 2005 from
the Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
transmitting the Committee's sixteenth 90-day work
programme.

At this time, we will hear briefings by the
Chairman of the 1373 Committee, the Chairman of the
1267 Committee and the Chairman of the 1540
Committee.

I now give the floor to Ambassador Ellen
Margrethe Loj, Chairman of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) concerning counter-terrorism.


