Mr. Pfanzelter (Austria): It is for me a great
privilege to speak on behalf of the European Union
(EU) and those countries aligning themselves with this
statement.

We welcome today's open debate, since it is
taking place at a time when the Great Lakes region is at
an important crossroads.

I should like to draw the Council's attention to
the written statement that is being distributed at this
time. I shall therefore limit myself to highlighting the
most salient points of our statement.

Never before have we been so close to a
settlement of the conflicts in the region. Since the
creation of the African Union, Africa has increasingly
taken up its responsibilities. The African Union has
fast become a reliable partner, which is essential when
we talk about strengthening our collaboration between
the United Nations and African partners at the regional
and subregional levels. The European Union sees itself
as a key ally in that effort. Now, with the European
Union's Africa Strategy, we want to make a
contribution to a peaceful, prosperous and democratic
Africa, in close cooperation with the African Union,
the United Nations.

Substantive progress has been made in recent
years in the Great Lakes region. Burundi last year
witnessed the successful conclusion of the transition
process. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, too,
the successful holding of the referendum on the
Constitution and the strong support for it bear witness
to the desire of the people for a new beginning. The
adoption of the Declaration on Peace, Security,
Democracy and Development at the first Summit of
Heads of State and Government of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, held in Dar es-
Salaam in November 2004, represented a landmark in
regional relations. Member States are expected to adopt
the Pact on Security, Stability and Development later
this year. It is important that all countries live up to the
commitments contained therein.

That progress would not have been possible
without the dedication of the staff of the United
Nations missions in Burundi and in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, especially the peacekeepers,
who risk their lives on a daily basis. Just this Monday
we were tragically reminded of this when eight
Guatemalan peacekeepers lost their lives in an ambush
by suspected Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) elements
in Garamba National Park. The European Union
expresses its sincere condolences to the families of the
victims and to the Government of Guatemala and pays
tribute to the contribution of the thousands of men and
women who have been working with the United
Nations for peace in the region.

Progress has been made possible first and
foremost because of strong African ownership, whether
through the South African mediation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo or the regional initiative in
Burundi. Furthermore, the way in which all international
partners worked closely together with African partners
and the United Nations ensured coherence in their
support for the transition in the region.

The European Union's contribution to this effort
has been substantial. Our involvement dates back to
1996, when Mr. Aldo Ajello, who is here with us, was
appointed EU Special Representative for the African
Great Lakes Region. To this day, the EU is deeply
involved at the political level, as the recent visits by
High Representative Solana and Commissioner Michel
to Kinshasa show. But we have also taken very
concrete, practical steps to help in the stabilization of
the region. In 2003, the EU deployed Operation
Artemis, the first-ever European Security and Defence
Policy (ESDP) mission outside Europe, to the city of
Bunia. The determined military effort by the European
Union stabilized the situation until the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) was able to take control of the
area, and thus helped to save the peace process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo from collapse.

In Burundi, the EU was actively involved in the
Arusha peace process and was part of the Commission
de Suivi of the Arusha Agreement. The European
Union also supported the deployment of the African
Mission in Burundi, which, again, paved the way for
the subsequent takeover by a United Nations mission.
Therefore, that African Union mission represented the
first successful test of AU-United Nations-EU trilateral
cooperation in African peacekeeping.
We are also heavily engaged in the humanitarian
and political fields. The EU has contributed more than
80 per cent of all the funds required for the election
process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Recently, we have been opening new avenues by
supporting the crucial restructuring of the security
sector, in line with our common goal of providing
security to all Congolese. The European Union security
mission to the Democratic Republic of the Congo has
been providing advice and assistance for security
sector reform since June 2005.

The EU civilian police mission - the European
Union Police Mission in Kinshasa - is assisting the
Congolese authorities in setting up, training and
monitoring, on a daily basis, an integrated police unit
in charge of the protection of State institutions and the
main political leaders.

However, much remains to be done. In Burundi,
the problem of the Forces Nationales de Liberation
(FNL) must be solved. Burundi will need continued
international assistance after the gradual and careful
phasing out of the United Nations Operation in
Burundi. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
delay in the adoption of the electoral law is
jeopardizing the electoral calendar and the conclusion
of the transitional period by June 2006. Also, a
solution has to be found urgently for the problem of the
negative forces in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo - be they Congolese or foreign in origin -
including the Forces democratiques de liberation du
Rwanda (FDLR). The activities of the Lord's
Resistance Army are reason for considerable concern,
not just because of the humanitarian crisis of immense
proportions in northern Uganda. As recent events
show, the LRA's activities have intensified in southern
Sudan and have spread to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo as well, causing more insecurity and
threatening the peace processes under way in these
areas.

For lasting progress to be achieved, international
partners need reliable, democratic partner
Governments. It is important that political systems be
democratic and inclusive and that they create a climate
of trust and participation by all. Good governance and
the rule of law will create an environment that is
conducive to reconstruction. It is, therefore, essential
to take decisive action against corruption, ensure
respect for human rights, strengthen the rule of law and
fight against the climate of impunity. The International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and the International
Criminal Court have a central role to play in the efforts
to bring to justice those responsible for serious human
rights violations, war crimes or crimes against humanity.

The international community's support for
reconstruction efforts has to be well coordinated and
coherent. In particular, we need to think now about the
post-transitional phase and how best to support
reconstruction and institution-building. This is an area
where donors need to work harder and where the
Peacebuilding Commission could add particular value.

The provision of security is pivotal in all these
efforts. The question of disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration, repatriation or resettlement of the
various armed groups is a central issue in the
stabilization of the whole region. The European Union
welcomes the robust action undertaken by MONUC in
the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo in
support of the Armed Forces of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Equally, the EU welcomes the
fact that the Security Council has recently given more
attention to this specific question and its regional
implications. We also need to ensure that the arms
embargo is implemented in good faith and that
measures are taken against the illegal exploitation of
natural resources. We believe it is important that the
international community not disengage too rapidly and
that an adequate United Nations presence be
maintained in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
after the elections. Phasing out the United Nations
missions in Burundi and in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo should follow clear established benchmarks.

The future of the countries in the region must be
built on good-neighbourliness and regional
cooperation. The proposed Security, Stability and
Development Pact, which is to be adopted at the
second Summit of the International Conference on
Peace, Security, Democracy and Development in the
Great Lakes Region, to be held in Nairobi later this
year, will be the basis and reference point for all these
efforts. We believe that, given the recent history of the
region, the peace and security cluster of the Pact
warrants the most urgent attention.

All the elements I have outlined are intertwined.
The transformation of the Great Lakes region into an
area of lasting peace, stability and prosperity requires
sustained, coordinated efforts by all parties involved.
The European Union stands ready to play its part and
to continue its support for this collaborative effort.

