Mr. Sen (India): It gives me great pleasure to
participate in this open debate on the theme of peace
consolidation in West Africa. This initiative of the
Ghanaian presidency of the Security Council is timely
and meaningful, and we welcome it. It was to be
expected from a nation that has consistently made
noteworthy contributions to peace, not only in its own
region, but internationally as well. For me personally
and for my country, it is an added pleasure to address
the Foreign Minister of Ghana presiding today, given
our traditionally close bilateral relations and our
experience of the wisdom and insight that Nana Akufo-
Addo has always brought to any international forum he
has graced with his presence. I have also been asked by
our Minister of State, Anand Sharma, to convey to you,
Sir, his personal greetings and warmest good wishes.

To save time, I shall not adhere entirely to my
written text.

The history of conflict in West Africa has shown
that stability can be imposed for a while by force of
arms and the determined involvement of the world. But
history also tells us that such stability is often short-
lived. Peace achieved through force of arms is often, to
quote the Secretary-General, a situation that is stable
but fragile.

Indeed, recent World Bank studies emphasize that
countries that have suffered conflict in the recent past
are also likely to see conflict return: the risk that the
country will fall back into conflict within the first five
years of the end of a conflict is nearly 50 per cent. That
worrisome statistic is made worse by the fact that
armed conflict inevitably increases military
expenditure in the countries involved. Such
expenditure not only crowds out other public spending
but, on a worldwide basis, has come to exceed
spending on international development assistance.
Furthermore, given the current international economic
order, the advantages obtained through employment
generation in parts of Africa have been squandered
through negative resource flows, low commodity
prices, a lack of access to international markets and the
debt trap. In other words, global conditions make it
likely that the vicious circle of conflict-peace-conflict
becomes self-sustaining. Thus, the creation of peace
has rarely ensured that peace will endure.

The overarching question before the world today
is how to find ways to consolidate peace. In other
words, how can regional organizations and the United
Nations prevent States emerging from old conflicts
from lapsing into new conflict situations? We agree
that, in this context, we must promote sustained,
equitable and employment-driven economic growth, as
that is an inextricable part of the process of building
durable peace. The effort to achieve these goals needs
to be managed institutionally and driven
internationally. It is this that gives relevance to the
newly established Peacebuilding Commission.

We believe that conflict prevention must include
operational prevention efforts, which include responses
to immediate and pressing crises through preventive
diplomacy and structural prevention, which implies
long-term structural preventive measures to prevent
crises from arising or prevent them from recurring. The
latter often involves a long-term commitment to help
vulnerable and poor countries develop human and
institutional resources through increased development
assistance. While peacebuilding focuses on preventing
conditions that foster conflict, development focuses on
the structural conditions that prevent growth and equity
and thereby provide breeding grounds for conflict.
Peacekeeping and peacebuilding must be part of the
same continuum, if peacekeeping is to succeed.

Interestingly, studies show that military
interventions in conflict-ridden areas are actually more
expensive than preventive approaches. Estimates show
that the international community spent approximately
$200 billion on seven major interventions in the 1990s,
while it is estimated that a successful preventive
approach would have cost nearly $130 billion less.

Fundamental to a successful and long-term
preventive approach are sound macroeconomic policies
promoting sustained employment-driven growth.
Expenditure on social sector programmes of poverty
eradication, education - in particular the education of
women - immunization and basic health and basic
infrastructure creates conditions for sustained
economic growth.

In that context, I am tempted to note that
developing societies such as ours do not live on bread
alone, but equally on solidarity. India and others have
written off the debt of the seven highly indebted poor
countries. India will continue its economic and
scientific initiatives, such as the Techno-Economic
Approach for Africa-India Movement (TEAM. 9),
which involves a concessional credit of $500 million
along with technology transfers to countries in the
West African region; further cooperation with the New
Partnership for Africa's Development; and the satellite
and fibre-optic connectivity mission for the entire
African continent, announced by our President.

Another essential pillar of the process of
economic transformation involves the development of
effective mechanisms to resolve social tensions arising
from the legacy of conflict. Such mechanisms include
rehabilitation, reconciliation and reconstruction. It also
includes the development of credible institutions of
governance; stable political structures, including
political parties; and credible strategies to effectively
mobilize human and material resources. Hence the
Peacebuilding Commission must not only work with
the Security Council but also, and above all, take into
consideration inputs from other United Nations bodies
and work under the overall guidance of the General
Assembly. Effective coordination and consultation with
regional groups and organizations must be encouraged
as part of that effort.

Another key element for peace consolidation is
the development of an overall country strategy
framework to deal with post-conflict recovery and
reconstruction. What is crucial here is national
ownership, as many speakers before me have pointed
out. It is the only pragmatic answer to a practical
problem. In order to ensure that peacekeeping blends
into peacebuilding, it may occasionally be necessary to
operate without clear-cut national authority. But, in
spite of that, it is essential that embryonic national
ownership be respected through clear guidelines for
ascertaining and respecting the views of civil society
and community representatives.

That brings me to good governance. Strong local,
regional and national institutions are fundamental for
societal transformation. Without legitimate laws,
justice cannot be effective; without minimum standards
of social equality, one cannot guarantee principles of
justice and fairness. Thus, it is essential that good
governance prescribed for recipient countries should
also be practiced by the international institutions doing
the prescribing. The two speakers before me pointed to
success stories in, for example, Liberia, Sierra Leone
and Guinea-Bissau. We are engaged in Guinea-Bissau
and, to some extent, in Sierra Leone. But it is also
important to look at the recent past. There, one finds
that - to cite one example in West Africa - Sierra
Leone, which collapsed in civil war in 1990, was under
an extensive International Monetary Fund (IMF)
programme from 1994 to 1998. When civil war broke
out again, it had spent 83 per cent of the period under
an IMF programme. Therefore, the reform of
international institutions - in particular the Bretton
Woods institutions - to increase the voice and
participation of developing countries is absolutely
essential.

Lastly, it is essential that the process of peace
consolidation be implemented at various levels. At one
level, the Peacebuilding Commission will implement
its mandate of proposing integrated strategies for post-

06-46 124
conflict peacebuilding and recovery, ensuring
predictable financing and developing best practices for
cooperation among relevant actors and stakeholders. At
another level, effective regional initiatives are
essential. In that context, we fully support the efforts of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and the African Union in cooperating to
address questions related to peace and security in West
Africa. Finally, there is the national level, where it is
essential that international institutions and partners
support the efforts of countries emerging from conflict
through highly concessional aid; debt waivers;
assistance with the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of former combatants; employment
generation strategies; and the extension of appropriate
technologies. It is only through integrated action at all
these levels that the consolidation of peace can be
made effective and durable.

