Mr. Holmes: I thank you very much, Sir, for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council on my
mission to Somalia and Uganda from 11 to 16 May.

I Visited Somalia to assess at first hand the
humanitarian situation and to discuss with the
authorities the key issues of access, protection of
civilians and security of humanitarian operations. The
recent massive displacement has further compounded
one of the most difficult humanitarian situations in the
world, in a country affected not only by long-running
internal conflict, but also by chronic food insecurity,
alternating droughts and floods, and endemic disease.

I visited Uganda to understand better and discuss
with the Government the challenges and opportunities
we face in northern Uganda in helping displaced
people in camps, those moving back towards their
homes and others already returning home, against the
background of some optimism about the Juba peace
talks.
My mission to Somalia was the first United
Nations visit by someone at my level since the early
1990s. I had intended to spend two days there - first
in Mogadishu, to discuss with the Transitional Federal
Government ways to improve the humanitarian
response, to see the level of destruction caused by
recent fighting, to visit settlements of internally
displaced persons (IDPs) and to meet some of the war-
wounded; and secondly, to visit newly displaced and
rural communities in Jowhar for a first-hand
assessment of their conditions.

Unfortunately, a roadside bomb exploded a few
minutes after my arrival in the Somali capital, killing
three Transitional Federal Government Security
officials. Two other roadside devices exploded shortly
afterwards, while the Africa Union Mission to Somalia
(AMISOM) defused a fourth. All those bombs were on
or near the routes we had planned to take.

I do not think that I - or the United Nations or
the wider humanitarian community - was the prime
target of those attacks. Rather, I suspect that they were
aimed at discrediting any view that the conflict was
effectively over. In any case, the bombs reduced my
planned movements around Mogadishu and the
resulting security and transport problems meant that I
was unable to go on to J owhar.

Let me take this early opportunity to thank again
the Ugandan contingent of AMISOM. for its
professional help in accompanying my visit. It was
encouraging that its presence in the streets seemed to
be welcomed by the people of Mogadishu. That makes
last week's loss of four Ugandan peacekeepers
following a further roadside bomb all the more tragic. I
repeat my condolences to the Ugandan Government
and armed forces and the families of the victims.

As I told the Security Council on 24 April, we
believe that the intense and deadly burst of fighting in
Mogadishu in late April not only resulted in hundreds
of deaths and injuries, many of them innocent civilians
caught in the crossfire, but also caused up to 400,000
inhabitants to flee the city. While some return is taking
place, mainly from the outskirts of Mogadishu and
mainly of people trying to re-establish their livelihoods
because they have no assets and are living without
support, the vast majority of those who fled have not
yet come back to the city.

Factors inhibiting larger-scale return include
difficulties of movement, continued fear of violence,
07-35031
warnings by the Transitional Federal Government to
long-standing IDPs in Mogadishu not to return to so-
called public buildings, and the fact that many people
from areas badly damaged by the fighting now have no
homes to return to. Many of those concerned continue
to live in deplorable conditions in the open
countryside, sheltered only by trees and with minimal
or no access to food, basic sanitation, clean water,
shelter and medical care. One particular concern is the
plight of pregnant women having to deliver without
medical help. Meanwhile, over 30,000 cases of acute
watery diarrhoea and associated cholera have now been
recorded in southern Somalia, including almost 1,000
related deaths.

In late April, harassment and intimidation of
humanitarian staff, closure of strategic airstrips and
administrative directives by the Transitional Federal
Government were greatly obstructing humanitarian
efforts. Over the last few weeks, progress has been
made in delivering assistance, thanks in part to
increased cooperation with the authorities.

Around 290,000 displaced people have so far
been reached with non-food items, while the health and
sanitation response has involved support for hospitals,
provision of medicines and chlorination activities. The
World Food Programme (WFP) and CARE have
together distributed food supplies to around 180,000
people. However, the plain fact is that so far, assistance
has not remotely matched the needs. There are pockets
of South-Central Somalia which have remained
inaccessible and obstacles to humanitarian access
continue.

Unfortunately, piracy is also hindering the World
Food Programme's ability to move food by sea, while
private contractors hired by humanitarian agencies to
deliver aid are having problems with land convoys.
There are, for example, checks every 10 kilometres in
some areas, with so-called taxes of up to $100 per
checkpoint.

During my visit to Mogadishu, I discussed with
President Yusuf Ahmed and Prime Minister Gedhi the
urgent need to increase relief efforts, for example by
establishing better mechanisms for liaison and
resolution of problems between authorities and the
humanitarian community. I also urged the Government
to issue instructions to control actions of armed groups
at checkpoints; to ensure that visa, permits and customs
problems were minimized; and to make clear publicly
07-35031

that all possible assistance should be given to agencies
and non-governmental organizations engaged in
providing humanitarian relief.

The President and Prime Minister assured me that
they were fully committed to helping. However, our
discussion was complicated by disagreement on the
severity of the crisis. They suggested that only 30,000
to 40,000 people had been displaced by the fighting in
Mogadishu and that half of those had already returned
to the capital. They also strongly underlined the need
for relief organizations to cooperate more with the
authorities and to relocate rapidly from Nairobi to
Somalia.

In turn, I raised the fate of the approximately
250,000 long-standing urban displaced in Mogadishu, a
significant number of whom are from the Hawiye clan
and many of whom have fled the city. IDP sites which
were situated in areas of high-intensity conflict have
been abandoned, while those IDPs who were living in
public buildings are unable to return, given the
Government's stated intention to repossess those
buildings. The Government has not yet suggested an
alternative sustainable solution other than to suggest a
return to the areas of origin. While I understand the
Government's need to reinstate public institutions, it is
imperative that alternative solutions be identified for
that highly vulnerable segment of the population.

After the meeting with the Transitional Federal
Government, I was able to visit briefly a site where
some of the IDPs have lived for up to 17 years. The
building, by pure chance the former British embassy in
Mogadishu, currently hosts over 150 families, the
majority of them pastoralists who lost their assets in
the early 1990s and moved to the capital in search of
work. As I walked through the narrow spaces between
still incredibly makeshift huts built with scraps of
material and sticks, I tried to imagine the daily life of
the children following me and the future in store for
them. Frankly, not enough has been done to provide
those people with the basic conditions of human
dignity.

I told the Council on 24 April that I had been
particularly concerned by reports of severe breaches of
international humanitarian law during the recent
fighting, with indiscriminate use of massive force in
civilian areas, apparently by all sides. There have also
been many reports of major human rights violations,
including abductions and unlawful killings, and there
3
are concerns over the apparently arbitrary detention,
deportation and disappearance of individuals. When I
raised those concerns, President Yusuf rejected any
allegations of Transitional Federal Government
involvement. He nevertheless accepted my proposal of
a Visit to Somalia by the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights to look into
those claims. I hope that such a Visit can take place
soon.

During my short stay in Mogadishu, I was also
able to meet with representatives from civil society,
including elders and women's groups. They conveyed
to me their concerns about the intimidation of civil
society and the local media. Several also expressed
their conviction that the United Nations and the
international community in general had abandoned
Somalia and were not interested in the fate of the
Somali people. I assured them that this was not true
and that my own presence in Mogadishu was a symbol
of the deep concern of the United Nations, political as
well as humanitarian. We all have a responsibility to
ensure that this is indeed the case, and not to turn our
backs on Somalis in this latest hour of desperate need.

As I speak, United Nations and non-United
Nations relief organizations are doing all they can to
step up further humanitarian relief efforts. Besides
providing emergency food supplies, UNICEF is
targeting 180,000 people in south central Somalia for
shelter and other non-food items. The Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) is aiming to provide emergency shelter, non-
food items and support to basic services for 90,000
people. I have already made clear that $10 million is
available from the Central Emergency Response Fund
(CERF) for those and other projects. But I urge other
donors to increase their response also, including
through support for NGOs working hard to increase
their presence and activities in Somalia, some of them
for the first time.

The biggest single contribution to humanitarian
relief efforts would be the establishment of genuine
stability, which would enable people to return home
freely and to begin to re-establish their lives. That
cannot come from a military solution but from
inclusive political dialogue and reconciliation across
the main political and other groups, which the
international community has been demanding. These
efforts need to be redoubled if there is to be any hope
of a lasting peace, with Ethiopian forces withdrawn

and the African Union force fully deployed. Otherwise,
I fear, on the basis of what I saw and heard during my
visit, that the chances of more long years of conflict,
degradation and poverty are high. Meanwhile, it is of
the utmost importance that the impartiality and
independence of the humanitarian response be
preserved and that the Transitional Federal
Government and other Somali actors be fully
supportive of it.

I would like to conclude by expressing my
appreciation for the efforts of United Nations and other
humanitarian national staff in Somalia who, despite
extremely difficult and dangerous conditions, continue
to run vital operations. Many from Mogadishu have
become IDPs themselves but, despite having to care for
their displaced families, still travel for hours every day
into the capital to carry on their work. It is mainly
thanks to them that we are able to maintain at least
some assistance to the Somalis who are in such
desperate need.

Let me now turn to northern Uganda, and a more
encouraging picture. I have returned from my visit
there with the belief that the Ugandan Government and
the international community now have the opportunity,
through supporting the political process in Juba and
continuing humanitarian aid and in the transition from
relief to recovery, to resolve one of Africa's major
humanitarian emergencies - but that a major
international effort is still required on all those fronts.

The situation in the conflict-affected districts of
northern Uganda is improving, as security has
increased with the major decline in attacks by Lord's
Resistance Army (LRA) and as the efforts of the
Ugandan Government and the international
humanitarian community to help the displaced have
borne some fruit. There is a degree of optimism in the
air. Night commuting to avoid abduction by the
LRA - once the most tragic face of northern Uganda,
affecting over 20,000 children - has largely ceased.
Nevertheless, there is a long distance still to travel and
serious obstacles in the way. Camps still hold 1.6
million displaced people, though that number is
significantly down from its height of 2 million three
years ago.

A recent UNHCR report shows that a number of
displaced people are tentatively moving out of the
camps towards their places of origin. Some have
already moved back home permanently. But that
movement is not yet massive or irreversible. In the
Acholi subregion, nearly three quarters of the 1.1
million IDPs remain in their original camps. One
quarter are now in new settlement sites nearer their
homes, often commuting daily to their villages of
origin. But so far only one per cent, or just over 7,000,
have permanently returned to their places of origin. In
the Lango subregion, further from the sensitive border
area, the situation is more encouraging still. Only one
quarter of the 466,000 displaced people remain in
camps, while the remainder - over 350,000 - have
already returned home. It is important that the process
of return continues to depend on free and informed
choices by the people themselves.

In Kitgum district in the Acholi subregion, I
visited the new Labworomor settlement site for those
who have left a large neighbouring camp and are
moving towards their homes. The residents told me
clearly that they would not feel safe enough to return to
their homes for good until a final peace deal with the
Lord's Resistance Army was reached, ending the 20-
year conflict. Their desire for peace was strong and
palpable. They were clearly following every twist and
turn in the Juba talks with a mixture of anticipation and
anguish. They also said that a full return would not be
possible until there were basic services such as water,
health care and education in their original home areas.
I was given similar messages in the nearby Namokora
IDP camp, home to some 17,000 displaced people,
where I spent the night after discussing the situation
with camp elders around the traditional evening fire.
They brought home to me their fears for their culture
and their way of life if the conflict is not resolved soon
so that they can finally return to their normal lives.

The situation - with most people still in camps,
some in half-way house satellite areas and others
already beginning to return home - presents us with a
triple challenge, which I was able to discuss with
President Museveni and members of his Government.

First, we need to go on providing vital
humanitarian assistance to the 1.6 million people still
in camps. Secondly, people who have either moved to
new settlement sites or are commuting to their places
of origin from their existing camp continue to need
basic food and household items, but they also require
access to services such as water and sanitation, health
services and education in their new areas. Thirdly,
those who have returned to their homes require a basic
support package for the early stages, but more

importantly, they need a large amount of development
and reconstruction help to re-start their normal
agricultural livelihoods, with re-established
infrastructure and social provisions. Those three phases
will coexist, often in close proximity, creating a
complex situation which demands a flexible and highly
coordinated approach. We must also take into account
important and difficult issues such as land rights; the
continued demobilization and reintegration of ex-
combatants; the fate of extremely vulnerable groups,
such as the elderly, disabled and orphans, who are
unable easily to return home; and the disposal of
landmines and unexploded ordnance left over from the
conflict.

If the current positive trends continue, we can all
see clearly the coming challenges and opportunities.
We have to effect a seamless transition from relief to
development, not something the international
community has always been distinguished for. The
Government of Uganda, with the support of the World
Bank and the international aid community, is working
up a peace, recovery and development plan. This
strategy, which should be implemented progressively
in parallel with the continuing humanitarian relief
efforts, will need the full commitment of everyone if it
is to succeed. We cannot afford to fail, and we will
have no good excuses if we do.

But none of this will be possible without
continued generous levels of funding. In 2006, the
Consolidated Appeal for Uganda was 90 per cent
funded. Worryingly, this year's Appeal is projected to
be funded at only 50 per cent of its $303 million target.
The World Food Programme has already had to reduce
its ration to IDPs from 60 per cent to 40 per cent of full
requirements. I therefore urge all concerned not to
relax their efforts and their provision of resources just
at the moment when they are most needed.

The success of the peace process is the immediate
key to this opportunity. The Juba talks, with the
mediation of the Government of Southern Sudan and
the facilitation of President Chissano, are beginning to
produce some results. At the same time, we are all
aware that the process is fragile and that the issue of
the International Criminal Court warrants will have to
be properly addressed in a way that satisfies the
requirements of both peace and justice. No one is
following this with more intense concentration than the
displaced of northern Uganda, who want above all to
see reconciliation and lasting peace. That was, for
example, the clear message from a group of former
child abductees I met, despite their appalling
experiences.

For our part, the United Nations will continue to
support the Government of Southern Sudan through the
Juba Initiative Project, helping in practical and
political ways the Peace Secretariat and the Cessation
of Hostilities Monitoring Team. I believe that these
talks also deserve full support from the wider
international community and from key regional
Governments. The stakes are high, both for northern
Uganda and for Southern Sudan.

I also raised with President Museveni and the
Government the situation in Karamoja, in the north-
east of Uganda. The Government is engaged there in a
process of removal of the many illegally held weapons
in that long-troubled region. This is, of itself, necessary
and legitimate. For example, many displaced people in
Acholi raised with me their rising fears of Karamojong
cattle rustlers, responsible for several recent killings
and violent incidents. However, there have also been
many concerns about excessive use of force by the
Government and other human rights violations, for
example as detailed in the latest report from the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights. I urged the Government to take these concerns
seriously and to step up their development efforts in
parallel with the disarmament process.

I have described today two very different
situations, but both deserve close attention and help
from the international community in general and from
the Security Council in particular. In Somalia, the
immediate humanitarian needs are huge and largely
unmet so far. Little real improvement can be expected
unless there is a satisfactory and fully inclusive
internal political settlement. Otherwise, I fear the
worst.

In Uganda, on the other hand, the United Nations
and the international community, working closely with
the Government of Uganda, have the chance to bring to
a peaceful end one of the most intractable conflicts in
Africa and to make a real success of the return to their
homes of the displaced people of northern Uganda.
These people are poised between hope and fear: hope
that the day of their definitive return home may be
close, and fear that if the peace talks break down,
renewed Violence could again wrest this prize from
their grasp. I urge all concerned to do what they can to
ensure that this perhaps unique opportunity is not
missed.

