Mr. Michon (France) (spoke in French): I should
like to begin by thanking Ambassador Joanna Wronecka
for her briefing on the activities carried out in 2018 by
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1591
(2005), concerning the Sudan, and to commend her work
as Chair of that sanctions Committee for the past year.
The initiatives and meetings she mentioned, in particular
that with Ms. Patten in October, have contributed to the
Council's joint process of reflection aimed at ensuring
the proper implementation of the sanctions regime.
France supports her fully and commends her personal
commitment to peace in Darfur.

France is following very closely the events currently
taking place in the Sudan, not only in Khartoum but
also in the provinces. In the context of the current social
protests, we call on the Sudanese authorities to ensure
the freedom of assembly, the freedom of association
and the freedom of expression, in accordance with
their international commitments. All parties must show
restraint and abstain from any further violence in order
to ease the situation.

We recognize that overall the security situation
in Darfur has improved. However, we deplore the
resumption this year of clashes in Jebel Marra, which
lead to the displacement of persons, civilian casualties
and human rights violations by all parties to the
conflict. The Sudanese authorities and armed groups
must absolutely move forward with the peace process.
This requires not only putting an end to hostilities
but also addressing the root causes of the conflict,
in particular the issues of land ownership, access to
natural resources and the restoration of the rule of law.

In that connection, I welcome the signing on
6 December in Berlin of a pre-negotiation agreement
between the Government and certain armed groups.
That is a step in the right direction.

We remain deeply concerned, however, by the issue
of sexual violence, and, in that connection, I commend
the valuable contribution of Ms. Pramila Patten, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Sexual
Violence in Conflict. The detailed information that
she provided to the Committee has allowed us to better
understand the scope of sexual violence in Darfur.

I regret in that connection that we did not reach
consensus on reflecting in her report the full content of
her statement to the sanctions Committee, but we have
taken note of all of that information and fully support
her recommendations, in particular the recommendation
that sexual violence be set up as a standalone listing
criterion. Those responsible for such violence must be
held accountable. We must encourage victims to file
reports, and we must also ensure that investigations and
prosecution follow. This is a priority for us.

We are also gravely concerned by the issue of
humanitarian access. A robust, lasting ceasefire regime
must be put in place in order to allow safe humanitarian
access and unimpeded access to those territories and
peoples that require it.

Finally, the withdrawal of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID),
a subject on which the Council recently expressed
itself, should take place gradually, in keeping with the
security situation on the ground, and take into account
in particular the situation of displaced persons, respect
for human rights and the issue of sexual violence. If
those conditions are met, as we hope they will be, it
will be important that following the exit of UNAMID,
human rights observers have access to the entirety of the
country's territory, in particular the most remote areas.

To conclude, I should like to say that the sanctions
regime for the Sudan remains a key instrument, with
respect to both the arms embargo and individual
sanctions, for providing support during this
transitional phase, during which we must remain
particularly vigilant.

