Mr. Wali (Nigeria): Once again, I thank you for
convening this meeting. I also thank the Secretary-
General, Mr. Kofi Annan, for his continued
engagement in conflict resolution in Africa and in
particular in the situation in Somalia.

The situation in Somalia continues to engage the
attention of the international community and our
organization since the early 19903. We recall that in a
presidential statement, issued in July 2004, the
Security Council reiterated its firm support for the
Somali national reconciliation process and the ongoing
Somali National Reconciliation Conference in Kenya,
launched under the auspices of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD), and commended
the IGAD leaders and, in particular, the Government of
Kenya for their efforts in the search for peace in
Somalia.

The Council also commends the international
observers for their active engagement in the process.
The Council further welcomes the launching of Phase
III of the Somali National Reconciliation Conference,
and asks all parties to continue their efforts to move the
process forward and agree on a durable and inclusive
solution to the conflict in Somalia and the
establishment of a Transitional Federal Government of
Somalia.

The African Union reaffirms its support for that
statement. It is gratifying to note that the Somali
National Reconciliation Conference, with the support
of IGAD leaders, has succeeded in establishing a
Transitional Federal Government in Somalia. The
African Union commends this achievement and
reiterates its commitment to the peace process. We pay
special tribute to the President and leaders of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
particularly to President Kibaki and the people of
Kenya. Their dedicated and tireless peace initiatives in
Somalia have led to the establishment of the
Transitional Federal Government. We also
acknowledge and commend the efforts and support of
the United Nations, the African Union, the League of
Arab States, the Organization of the Islamic
Conference and the European Union for this
breakthrough.

In this connection we recall the communique of
the eighteenth meeting of the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union, which welcomed the
election of Mr. Abdullahi Yusuf Ahmed as President of
the Transitional Federal Government of Somalia. We
call upon all Somali parties, including civil society, to
extend their full support to the new Somali
Government. We support the request by the new
Government to the European Union, the League of
Arab States, the United Nations and the international
community as a whole to provide all necessary support
to ensure its effective establishment in Mogadishu. In
particular, we welcome the call for assistance for the
disarmament, demobilization, rehabilitation and
reintegration programme, as well as for reconstruction,
in Somalia.

We call on the international community to assist
the Somali Government in finding its feet after many
years during which the country has suffered without an
established, credible Government. We also recall the
earlier appeal by the Assembly of the African Union in
its third ordinary session at Addis Ababa in July this
year for the Security Council and the international
community to support the Government of Somalia that
would result from the Nairobi conference, with a view
to the implementation of disarmament, demobilization
and reconciliation. We therefore call on the
Transitional Federal Government of Somalia and other
stakeholders to reach out to all Somalis to effect broad
national reconciliation. We believe that all Somalis,
who are stakeholders in the search for peace in their
country must put aside all factional considerations and
fully embrace dialogue.

On the issue of the humanitarian and
development situation in Somalia, the most recent
report of the Secretary-General (S/2004/804) is
disturbing. The cumulative effect of four years of
drought in the S001 Plateau in northern Somalia has
destroyed livestock belonging to the local inhabitants.
That has resulted in the decimation of livelihoods,
indebtedness and the general stagnation of the
economy. As a consequence, 667,000 people are in
need of urgent assistance. Of that number, 261,000 are
categorized as facing a humanitarian emergency and
more than 355,000 are considered to be facing a
livelihood crisis. These Somalis are likely to fall into
the humanitarian emergency category if external
assistance is not provided.
Although United Nations agencies and non-
governmental organizations have expanded their
humanitarian operations to the drought-affected areas,
much needs to be done. Increased international
assistance will enable the Transitional Federal
Government to address this humanitarian and
development challenge effectively. We therefore urge
the Security Council, particularly the international
community, to contribute and to fulfil their pledges to
the Somali Trust Fund, as that would ameliorate the
complex humanitarian situation in the country.

The African Union welcomes the activities of the
World Bank and the United Nations Development
Programme, particularly in the area of creating an
enabling environment for livestock and the meat
industry, as well as in capacity-building, governance
and support for urban sector improvement and city
planning.

We note with grave concern the gloomy picture
painted by the Secretary-General's report that the
security situation in Somalia remains disturbing and
alarming. As a result, Somalis in Mogadishu and north
of the city continue to suffer as a result of violence,
despite the end of the hostilities. We appeal to the
parties concerned to lay down their arms and join the
Transitional Federal Government with a view to
rehabilitating their country.

Now that the United Nations and the international
community have come this far in their efforts to usher
in peace in Somalia, let us continue to lend our firm
support and encouragement to the interim
administration. We call on the United Nations to
mobilize a massive peace-building, demobilization and
rehabilitation programme for Somalia and to make
adequate funds available for that purpose.

These are hopeful times for Somalia. The United
Nations and the international community have waited
for over a decade for this moment. We must not allow
this opportunity to slip away. Somalia must never again
be allowed to witness the horrors of the recent past. We
therefore call on all Somalis to bury the hatchet in the
spirit of reconciliation so as to ensure peace and
stability in their country.

