The President (spoke in Chinese): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, in which he requests to be invited to participate
in the consideration of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the consideration of the
item, without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ileka
(Democratic Republic of the Congo) took a seat
at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Chinese): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council expresses its deep
concern at the deteriorating security situation in
the east of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, in particular in North and South Kivu.
The Council is particularly concerned about the
serious humanitarian consequences of violent
actions of foreign armed groups, in particular the
Forces democratiques de liberation du Rwanda
(FDLR), and military activities of the 'mixed'
brigades.

"The Security Council urges all actors
involved to refrain from any action leading to a
military confrontation, that could result in further
tension and aggravate the ongoing humanitarian
crisis in the Kivus, and to seek a solution to the
current crisis through political and diplomatic
means.

"The Security Council calls on the mixed
brigades and their commanders to integrate into
the Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (FARDC) and to stop recruiting
activities. The Council condemns the recruitment
of children in violation of applicable international
law and urges the above-mentioned elements to
release all children associated with them.

"The Security Council reiterates its grave
concern at the continued threat that the foreign
and Congolese armed groups in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo pose to the
local population and security in the region. It
reiterates its demand that those groups lay down
their arms and engage voluntarily and without
preconditions in their demobilization,
repatriation, resettlement and reintegration, as
appropriate.

"The Security Council invites the
Government to develop in close coordination
with the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC)
a global plan to ensure security in the eastern part
of the country, particularly by making further
progress in the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration of Congolese combatants and the
disarmament, demobilization, repatriation,
resettlement and reintegration of foreign
combatants, and by ending impunity, promoting
reconciliation, social cohesion, recovery and
development in the region. It notes with concern
the significant number of internally displaced
persons and emphasizes the need to reassure the
population and promote effective State
administration in the region. The Council
welcomes the intention of the Congolese
authorities to facilitate an inclusive dialogue in
the Kivus and looks forward to its
implementation.

"The Security Council encourages MONUC
to continue, in conformity with its mandate, to
support the FARDC integrated brigades with a
view to disarming recalcitrant foreign and
Congolese armed groups in order to ensure their
participation in the disarmament, demobilization,
repatriation, resettlement and reintegration
07-43447
process, as appropriate. It encourages the
Congolese authorities to develop, in close
consultation with MONUC, the necessary
planning to that end and stresses that any
operation which may require MONUC'S support
should be jointly planned with it and in
accordance with international human rights,
refugee and humanitarian law. The Council
requests the Secretary-General to keep it
informed of this planning process. It also
underlines the importance of continued efforts by
MONUC, in implementing its mandate, to
provide protection to civilians and contribute to
the improvement of the security conditions in
which humanitarian assistance is provided.

"The Security Council strongly encourages
the Government to carry out the reform of the
security sector nationwide as a matter of priority,
by pursuing its efforts to consolidate the reform
of the police and to integrate the armed forces. In
this context, the Council acknowledges the
concerted efforts of the Government and its
partners towards convening a national roundtable
on security sector reform, scheduled for October
in Kinshasa.

"The Security Council expresses its deep
concern about the recruitment of combatants,
including children, in violation of applicable
international law, inside and outside the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, especially by
forces loyal to Laurent Nkunda.
07-43447

the

"The Council urges the neighbouring States
concerned to further facilitate the effective
reintegration of returning former combatants and
to prevent all recruiting activities within their
territories. The Council recognizes that good
regional relations, in particular relations between
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Rwanda, are an important factor in solving the
crisis in the Kivus. It encourages both
Governments to continue to cooperate to solve
their common security concerns, to improve their
diplomatic relations, and to support the voluntary
return of refugees, in consultation with the High
Commissioner for Refugees.

"The Security Council encourages
MONUC, in conformity with its mandate, to
assist the Government, including through the
provision of good offices, in its efforts to find a
lasting solution to the crisis in the Kivus through
promoting reconciliation and political dialogue."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2007/28.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 11.45 am.

