The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Italy.

On six occasions, the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint
Investigative Mechanism (JIM) has certified the use of
chemical weapons in Syria by the Syrian Government
andDa'esh. Many other allegations are being investigated
by the Fact-finding Mission of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) in the
Syrian Arab Republic. We believe that the Security
Council has the responsibility to address that serious
trend, upholding the integrity and credibility of the
crucial long-standing norms of our collective security
and preserving paths for accountability. Preventing
the recurrence of violations should also be a common
priority for all Council members. The OPCW-United
Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism is a critical tool
in that regard, and Italy fully supported the renewal of
its mandate.

The draft resolution under consideration today
(S/2017/962) was the result of an open negotiation in
which Council members made a collective effort to
strengthen the implementation of the JIM's mandate.
A number of delegations suggested ways to ensure
that the JIM. operates more effectively, and the draft
resolution included a number of those suggestions.
At the same time, as many of us requested, the draft
resolution protected the Mechanism's independence,
preserved the integrity of its mandate and upheld the
credibility of its past investigations. We believe that
the draft resolution and the negotiations that led to
it - and we thank the delegation of the United States
for its continued efforts in that respect - embodied a
willingness to find compromise and achieve common
ground, meeting the concerns and principles expressed
by all delegations.

We are deeply disappointed, therefore, by the result
of the voting today, as it deprives the international
community of a crucial tool for fighting impunity for
some of the most heinous and unacceptable crimes
committed in Syria. The international community is now
weaker, and our collective security architecture shakier,
as a result of today's vote. But the outcome is difficult
to accept. That is why we will continue to work with
the other Council members on the issue - hopefully,
immediately after this meeting - mindful of its crucial
importance for the non-proliferation regime and the
principle of accountability. We hope that collectively
we will be able to return to the positive trend of
cooperation and consensus on this crucial issue that we
have been developing in the Council since 2013.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.

