Saint Vincent and the Grenadines thanks the United States of America for its efforts in preparing resolution 2521 (2020). Saint Vincent and the Grenadines voted in favour of the resolution. My delegation welcomes the decision by the South Sudanese leaders to form the Revitalized Transitional Government of National Unity. The spirit of compromise exhibited by the South Sudanese leaders is commendable. Undoubtedly, a difficult road lies ahead, with impediments that may appear insurmountable. Nevertheless, we remain optimistic that South Sudan is on the path to peace and prosperity. The leaders of South Sudan are demonstrating a level of seriousness and political will to advance the peace process, which was not exhibited during previous peace initiatives. This heightened commitment towards peace is reflected in South Sudan's admirable and resolute approach of hosting peace talks in Juba between the Sudan leaders. At this critical juncture in South Sudan's history, the renewal of sanctions, without any cogent effort towards eventually lifting them, could have grave ramifications for the delicate peace process. Not only do we recognize this, but regional and subregional organizations, such as the African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, which are duty-bound to ensure that peace reigns throughout Africa, are echoing the same sentiments. My delegation believes it is appropriate that the Council consider the calls from the regional organizations that are closest to the problem and have taken up the challenge of silencing the guns in Africa. My delegation remains steadfast in its principled position that sanctions regimes should be continually reviewed and amended; and, once the purposes for which they were created are fulfilled, they should be effectively terminated. In this respect, we stress that the current sanctions regime on South Sudan does not align with the existing political and security situation in the country. We acknowledge, however, that the resolution at hand endeavours to initiate the process of evaluating the sanctions imposed on South Sudan, while acknowledging the ongoing positive developments in the country. My delegation therefore looks forward to the sanctions review process later this year, with the hope that these measures will be relaxed. In view of the foregoing, we voted in favour of resolution 2521 (2020), as it sets in motion the sanctions review process, while sending a positive message to the South Sudanese leaders that the international community continues to support the country in its nation-building efforts. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines remains in solidarity with the people of South Sudan and is reminded that peace never comes with ease. It comes through hard labour and toil. As the youngest nation among us, we must continue to accompany South Sudan as they usher in this new dawn.
