Ms. Espinosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I would also like to express my
gratitude to your country for its initiative to convene
this special meeting on the report (S/2009/l29) of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). This is an issue of
great importance not only to Ecuador but to all of Latin
America and the Caribbean. I also take this opportunity
to congratulate the Permanent Mission of Costa Rica
for its effectiveness and dynamism during its
leadership of the Security Council group to assess this
organ's resolutions on MINUSTAH.

Showing solidarity with Haiti has been a
permanent feature of Ecuador's foreign policy. That
has been especially true at times when that sisterly
Caribbean country has suffered the devastating effects
of hurricanes and tropical depressions, which have
increased the vulnerability and affected millions of our
Haitian brothers. My delegation takes this opportunity
to express its support for MINUSTAH and for Mr. He'di
Annabi, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and head of MINUSTAH, for their efforts to
improve stability and the political situation in Haiti.

The latest report of the Secretary-General, issued
on 6 March 2008, highlights the progress made in
implementing the mandate of the Mission established
by the Security Council and in fulfilling all the relevant
resolutions. My country has joined the international
community and the United Nations in committing itself
to actively cooperate in peacekeeping and the
maintenance of peace and security through an ongoing
rotation of military engineers, resources and equipment
to MINUSTAH. Ecuador's military contingent in Haiti
is thereby providing support to the Government of
Haiti with a view to establishing a security
environment that will make it possible to sustainably
re-establish democratic institutions, fully restore the
rule of law and put in place the framework necessary to
promoting the economic well-being and development
of that sisterly Caribbean country.

With regard to peacekeeping operations,
Ecuador's policy is not limited to sending troops. A
whole host of measures have been adopted that reflect
a comprehensive policy on security. For instance, five
years ago, Ecuador established a school unit on peace
missions. The education given to Ecuadorian Blue
Helmets helps them to address problems associated
with displaced persons, refugees and humanitarian
disasters. It also trains them to resolve problems that
may arise with civilian populations.

Ecuador is also proud to be part of the
Consultative Group 2 x 9 on Haiti, which supports
achieving the benchmarks that the Secretary-General
conveyed to the Security Council in his August 2008
report (S/2008/586) to strengthen stability in Haiti:
promoting political dialogue and elections, extending
State authority, establishing a sustainable security
mechanism, the rule of law and human rights. We hope
that the social and economic development benchmark
will be met in the near future. Ecuador believes that
social inclusion and ending poverty are among the
major challenges facing the sisterly Haitian country.

Ecuador also welcomes the extension of
MINUSTAH's mandate. We also commend the Senate's
confirmation, in December 2008, of Mrs. Michelle
Duvivier Pierre-Louis as Prime Minister at a time of
emergency in order to address the various crises from
which Haiti is suffering. Ecuador very much hopes that
the upcoming elections for the Haitian Senate will take
place in a free, fair and inclusive manner and in an
atmosphere of openness and peaceful debate that
allows for decisive progress on the institutional
reforms that are needed.

Haiti continues to suffer from food insecurity,
high levels of poverty and unemployment, and a fragile
humanitarian situation. My Government hopes that the
Group of Friends of Haiti, donor countries and Haitian
Government officials will succeed in agreeing on a
long-term stabilization programme that will facilitate
and accelerate the reconstruction and development
process of that sisterly country. Ecuador also hopes
that the donor conference to be held on 14 April in
Washington, DC, will be an opportunity for countries
friendly to Haiti put in place the necessary mechanisms
to lay the foundations for achieving the stable and
lasting economic and social development that the
Haitian people so long for and deserve. My country
reiterates its unwavering commitment to contribute to
building a better future for Haiti, our sisterly Caribbean
country.
