Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): My first words must be to
express appreciation to Under-Secretary-General Le Roy
for the guidance he has provided for this debate,
particular in organizing the Force Commanders. I want
to warmly welcome the presence of the Force
Commanders in the Council. The clarity and
incisiveness of their perspectives on the issues under
consideration bear out the wisdom and importance of
this interaction, which aims to foster greater synergy
between the field and the Security Council. Let me
commend them especially for their immeasurable
sacrifices in leading the various peace missions.

Since our last engagement with Force
Commanders, in August 2010 (6370th meeting), there
have been several important developments throughout
the United Nations system toward making our
peacekeeping efforts more effective. We have seen a
more purposeful implementation of peace agreements
and maintenance of ceasefires, We have established
two new peacekeeping missions - the United Nations
Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) and, following the
closure of UNMIS, the United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei (UNISFA).
However, major challenges remain in such
critical areas as civilian protection, bridging the gaps in
capacity in human and material resources, and capping
troop casualties. The topics under consideration this
morning are therefore apt and responsive to trends in
contemporary peacekeeping discourse.

My point of departure this morning will be the
key issue of the conditionality policy of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
examined by General Prakash.

We share his assessment and views, and we
remain convinced that it is prima facie
counterproductive for MONUSCO to provide support
to or carry out joint operations with the Forces armees
de la Republique democratique du Congo (FARDC)
where the latter has known human rights violators in
strategic and command positions. Indeed, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Roger Meece,
once noted, "the conditionality policy has resulted in
the removal of some of such FARDC commanders
involved in the perpetration of crimes against civilians
in the regions where MONUSCO has a strong
presence".

To strengthen such positive assessments, the
conditionality policy must be adequately
complemented by sustained efforts to build the
capacity of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
maintain internal security through disarmament,
demobilization, repatriation, resettlement and
reintegration - and, of course, security sector reform.
With structural fragmentation, absence of clear
command and control, operational weakness and
improper discipline, FARDC is often unable to
effectively provide protection for civilians. In debating
the conditionality policy, therefore, my delegation
prefers a strategic alliance between MONUSCO and
FARDC that will complement the capacity of FARDC,
retain MONUSCO's relative oversight and ultimately
boost the operational effectiveness of the Force.

The primary expectation of civilians in the
communities where peacekeepers deploy is that they
will be afforded appropriate protection. Protection of
civilians is therefore at the heart of the mandate of
most United Nations peacekeeping missions, including
the African Union-United Nations Mission in Darfur
(UNAMID).

With reports of aerial bombardments, artillery
shelling and heavy fighting between the Sudanese
armed forces and armed movements, particularly in the
areas of Shangil Tobaya in Northern Darfur and Djebil
Mara in Western Darfur, deterring attacks on civilians
remains a daunting challenge in Darfur. Although the
primary responsibility to protect civilians rests with the
Sudanese authorities, greater cooperation between the
Government of the Sudan and UNAMID will
undoubtedly ensure better protection of civilians.

My delegation commends UNAMID for
employing a more robust posture to protect civilians
and for increasing active patrolling in Western Darfur.
In particular, we welcome its enhanced logistical
support to humanitarian organizations and support for
the child protection mainstreaming agenda.

Since the adoption of Council resolution 1701
(2006) and the deployment of troops of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), south
Lebanon has gradually moved toward stability. The
progress can be partly attributed to UNIFIL's close
coordination with the Lebanese armed forces and the
Israeli Defense Forces (IDF). However, the security
situation remains very fragile. The deadly incident of
15 May along the Blue Line and the terrorist attacks on
27 May on six UNIFIL peacekeepers call for further
reflection. Yesterday there was another attack on five
peacekeepers at Sidon.

My delegation unequivocally condemns these
attacks. We call on the parties - the Lebanese armed
forces and the IDF - to fulfil their obligations under
resolution 1701 (2006) to ensure the safety and
security of UNIFIL personnel. Indeed, the parties must
leverage the regular tripartite meetings convened by
the UNIFIL Force Commander to strengthen
confidence and reinvigorate hope in the UNIFIL forces.

United Nations peacekeeping is at a critical
juncture. Meeting the demands for peacekeeping
operations has stretched the Organization's capacity to
the limits, exerting enormous pressure, enormous
strain, on its peacekeeping efficiency. Our
peacekeeping operations are increasingly
multidimensional, requiring greater coordination and
cooperation between the various constituents,
including the military, civilian police and regional and
other, informal, organizations. The challenges have
been varied, ranging from preventing the appearance of
conflicts to restoring peace when the conflicts
eventually do appear.

Deploying troops with the necessary training,
equipment and logistical support to effectively
undertake the complex and potentially dangerous task
faced by peacekeepers remains a key determinant of an
operation's success. In that connection, my delegation
reiterates that adequate emphasis be placed on the
deployment of troops with the capacity to respond
adequately to the cultural nuances in each field station.
That, from our point of view, should also be a priority
when considering inter-mission cooperation, as was
recently seen in the United Nations Mission in Liberia
and the United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire
(UNOCI).

The early resolution of peace across many of our
missions is increasingly dependent on the work of
civilian experts in key areas such as the rule of law,
human rights and child protection. Recent
developments in UNAMID and UNOCI lend further
credence to the significance of building sustainable
national capacities in these areas. In this regard, we
encourage the Office of the Rule of Law and Security
Institutions to coordinate its activities with relevant
actors within and outside the United Nations, including
the non-governmental organizations that inherently
have the capacity to remain in the field well after the
conclusion of a United Nations peacekeeping mission.

As we continue to confront the diverse challenges
to peacekeeping, we must leverage the lessons learned
from previous experiences. We can begin by
identifying the issues that have most often held
missions back from assuming their full range of
capabilities. An effective early warning system can
forestall conflict, limiting threats to international peace
and security. Member States and regional bodies
should seek more effective strategies to identify and
address the deep-rooted causes of conflict within their
countries and regions. That will ultimately help to
ensure that when peace comes, it will be deeply rooted
and sustainable.
I want to affirm that Nigeria remains fully
committed to collective security, as enshrined in the
United Nations Charter. While paying tribute to those
who have paid the ultimate price in the line of duty so
that others may live in peace, let us take this
opportunity to renew our resolve as peacekeepers to
respecting and preserving the fundamentals of United
Nations peacekeeping.

