Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): Today we have been
discussing the work of the Group of Experts on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo extended pursuant
to resolution 2293 (2016). Tragically, their report (see S/2017/672/Rev.1) comes in the wake of the murder
of two United Nations human rights experts, Michael
Sharp and Zaida Catalan.

I am glad that we are meeting in the open today.
This is not an issue to discuss behind closed doors. We
owe it to the families of Michael and Zaida, and their
interpreter Betu Tshintela, to speak loudly and clearly
in the Chamber, express our deepest condolences and
reiterate our firm resolve to see their killers brought to
justice. That is a message that needs to go far beyond
the Chamber - indeed, far beyond the borders of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo - because it was
we in the Council who asked for the information that
Michael and Zaida went to gather. We asked them
to be our eyes and ears. Wherever in the world the
men and women of the United Nations are murdered,
wherever in the world they are harmed and abducted,
we cannot stay silent and we cannot stand aside. We
must ensure that the perpetrators of such crimes face
the fullest consequences of their actions. We need to
ensure accountability.

We took the first step to that end through resolution
2360 (2017), with new designation criteria for those who
kill United Nations personnel. The Secretary-General
took the second step by commissioning a Board of
Inquiry, which has uncovered more details. But more
needs to be done. I therefore welcome the Secretary-
General's call in his letter to the Council for a follow-
on mechanism, and we urge him to take action swiftly
towards a further investigation so that we can uncover
the truth for Zaida and Michael and for the safety of
all United Nations personnel around the globe. Five
months after the murder of Michael, Zaida and Betu,
accountability is yet to materialize. Those who ordered
their killings remain at large.

Zaida and Michael were two of the most pre-eminent
experts on the Kasai regions. Tragically, it appears that
their very expertise made them a target. The violence
they sought to eliminate was brutally turned against
them. Let there be no mistake: they were killed for
shining a light on the horrific human rights situation in
the Kasais, and we must not let that light go out.

First and foremost, that means recognizing the
link between the political and security situations.
Uncertainty and inertia over the implementation of the
31 December agreement is only fuelling instability and
violence. With the Vice-Prime Minister and Foreign
Minister of the Democratic Republic of the Congo here
today, let us all agree that the December agreement must
be fully implemented. If implementation continues
to falter, we worry about what will happen next. We
need only look to the first half of this year and the 430
officially recorded human rights violations linked to
the electoral process. That figure is higher than that for
the whole of 2015.

As the report of the Group of Experts (see S/2017/672/Rev.1) shows, such violence is fuelling
further violence. I am appalled at the reports of child
rape in Kavumu. I am glad that some of the militia
responsible have been caught and put on trial; that is
welcomed. But without political stability, the tide could
turn and those positive trends could be reversed.

There are already clear warning signs, such as
the growing reports of widespread sexual violence,
including by the Forces arme'es de la Republique
democratique du Congo in the Kasais, of the widespread
recruitment of children by the Kamuina Nsapu militia
or of continuing violence in the east. We should all be
concerned that armed groups continue to fund their
hateful crimes by stealing natural resources. Such
crimes must stop and those responsible must be held
to account.

We need to recognize that we have tools at our
disposal to help that happen, such as the sanctions
already imposed by the Council. They must be fully
implemented if they are to be effective. We also have
a responsibility to keep sanctions under close review.
Those who engage in or support acts that undermine the
peace, stability or security of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo can and, if needed, will be sanctioned by
the Council. The Human Rights Council international
investigative mechanism will also play a crucial role
in the Kasais. Let us therefore all urge the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to cooperate fully with its work.

I would like to thank the Committee that you chair,
Sir, for its work and for the report. I would also like to
thank you personally for the sensitive and effective way
in which you have steered our work.

Finally, we owe it to Zaida, Michael and the rest of
the Group of Experts to continue to use their reporting
in our decisions. As we have heard so clearly today, it is
reporting for which the highest price has been paid and
it must not be a price paid in vain.
