Mr. Grunditz (Sweden): I thank you, Sir, for
convening this open debate on the critical situation in
Somalia. Sweden aligns itself with the statement of the
European Union and would like to put forward the
following supplementary observations.

In this final phase of the transitional period, it is
high time that the Transitional Federal Institutions
(TFIs) demonstrate unity, determination and the
capability to act. A realistic, implementable and
prioritized plan of action is required. The international
community should be ready to support the early
implementation of such a plan with clear, identified
benchmarks. Adequate financial mechanisms, with
clear accountability and transparency criteria, should
be readily available if such a plan is to be timely and
effective.

The development of a constitution for Somalia
has proven to be a contentious and divisive exercise.
Genuine popular consultations are necessary to allow a
broad segment of Somali constituencies to voice their
views and expectations. The delay in this process is
regrettable and a missed opportunity for reconciliation
and peace. The TFIs should therefore accelerate the
consultative process.
11
The mechanisms provided for by the Djibouti
Agreement should be used more effectively, and we
support the efforts of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Mahiga, in this regard. The
high-level committee to be chaired by the United
Nations could be better used for reaching out to
regional administrations and other stakeholders. A
dialogue on priorities for the political process,
including on constitution-related matters, is needed
immediately and should preferably take place inside
Somalia.

We welcome the valuable contribution of the
Joint Security Committee on security and rule of law
matters. We want to stress that effective security
structures of the Transitional Federal Government
(TFG) cannot be established without a national security
strategy. A defectors' programme is also required.

The role of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) is indispensable. We express our sincere
condolences to the families of the soldiers from
Burundi and Uganda who have lost their lives in battle
in Somalia. We welcome the fact that the United
Nations Support Office for AMISOM. has established a
presence in Mogadishu to make its support to
AMISOM. as effective as possible. Sweden is pleased
to note that AMISOM. is taking measures to improve
the enforcement of international humanitarian law,
including by the troops of the TFG.

Sweden's contribution to AMISOM. includes
support for quick impact projects that directly benefit
the civilian population and their livelihoods in
Mogadishu. We hope to see the TFG taking initiatives
for such activities and other ways of winning peace
dividends in areas under their control.

The piracy problem needs a multipronged
response. It requires joint initiatives and cooperation
among the entities in Somalia, including Somaliland.
The opportunities that the Kampala process presents
should be further captured and additional areas for
cooperation identified. Some of the areas and activities
in this process could prevent the recruitment of persons
for piracy activities. A comprehensive approach to
addressing the piracy problem through activities on
land needs to be well informed of the livelihood
patterns, income opportunities and dynamics on the
ground.

We welcome the fact that United Nations Political
Office in Somalia is establishing presences in
Mogadishu, Puntland and Somaliland. An integrated
strategic framework for the combined role of the
United Nations throughout Somalia, including in
Somaliland, should be put in place and facilitate the
harmonization of the overall international response. All
United Nations activities concerning Somalia, inside or
outside the country, need to be well coordinated in
order to avoid duplication and ensure an effective and
efficient use of resources. We also believe that the
work of the international Contact Group, under the
leadership of Special Representative Mahiga, should be
made more productive.

