Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Let me first of all thank
France for convening this meeting and congratulate
you, Sir, on assuming the presidency. You may rest
assured that my delegation will cooperate very closely
with you during your presidency.

I would also like to thank the presidency of
Equatorial Guinea last month.

I would like to welcome the Chairperson-in-Office
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE), Minister Miroslav Lajcak, to
the Security Council and thank him for his very
comprehensive briefing.

Considering the positive contribution of the OSCE
and other such organizations from other regions,
Indonesia would like to stress three points.

First, Indonesia welcomes the aims of the Slovak
OSCE 2019 chairmanship in promoting dialogue,
trust and stability in the OSCE area. Indonesia also
appreciates the three emphasis areas identified by the
Slovak chairmanship, namely, preventing, mediating
and mitigating conflict and focusing on the people
it affects; providing for a safer future; and effective
multilateralism. It is only through those measures
can we together overcome such increasingly complex
challenges as counter-terrorism, climate change,
women and peace and security and others. As we
live in a highly interdependent world, we have an
unshakeable belief in the virtue of multilateralism in
finding solutions to global challenges and promoting
sustainable peace and development. The United
Nations itself is a manifestation of multilateralism
and outstanding proof that it can uniquely deliver on
solving challenges when everyone is fully committed to
the Organization's purposes and principles.

Secondly, full respect for non-interference,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of States is
fundamental in the relations among nations, and each
United Nations State Member must abide by those
principles. It is equally essential that everyone respect
the principle of refraining from the threat or use of
force in the resolution of conflicts. We sincerely believe
in the value of dialogue and the need to settle disputes
amicably, as also rightly emphasized by Minister
Lajcak. Political will to that end may not always be
a given, but with sustained dialogue, mutual respect
and credible peace efforts it can be nurtured. While
each conflict is unique, insufficient State capacity and
institutions often constitutes a critical impediment to
peacebuilding. Indonesia therefore also emphasizes
the need to adequately support affected countries, with
assistance being guided by their identified priorities.

Thirdly, Indonesia firmly believes in the pivotal
role of regional arrangements. Regional organizations
and countries, through their bonds of history, shared
culture and understanding, can have unique insights
into solving conflicts peacefully. We underscore the
continued attention by the United Nations to more
meaningfully profit from the regional entities, with
a view to promoting world peace and prosperity. The
Charter of the United Nations also highlights the
importance of regional arrangements in the maintenance
of international peace and security. Chapter VIII
of the Charter is specifically dedicated to regional
arrangements, underlining that the Security Council
shall encourage the development of pacific settlements
to local disputes through regional arrangements.

In our part of the world, we have the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN). Since its
inception in August 1967, ASEAN member countries
have shared the responsibility of strengthening peace,
stability and security in the region, free from foreign
military interference and undue pressure. ASEAN also
contributes to the promotion of peace and security in
the wider Asia-Pacific region. In that regard, ASEAN
has and will continue to engage with its dialogue
partners. We believe that genuine dialogue among
countries in the region, as well as beyond the region,
including interregional dialogue, will always provide a
solid base for a durable solution to any situation that
can be acceptable to all parties.

Let me conclude by wishing Minister Lajcak every
success during his term as Chairperson-in-Office ofthe
OSCE in implementing its noble aims and programmes,
as highlighted in his briefing.

