Mr. Obradovie (Serbia): It is my great privilege
and distinct honour to speak to the Council as the
representative of the Republic of Serbia today.

Before I proceed to make my statement, allow
me to welcome Judge Carmel Agius, President of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY), and congratulate him on the assumption
of that important office. He can always count on
Serbia's cooperation and support. I also welcome
Judge Theodor Meron, President of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, and
Judge Vagn Joensen, President of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, and thank them for their
semi-annual reports (see S/2015/585 and S/2015/577).
My welcome is also extended to the two Prosecutors,
Mr. Serge Brammertz and Mr. Hassan Jallow. Aware of
their intense and informed scrutiny, I shall undertake
to discuss my country's contribution to the completion
strategy of the ICTY here today.

Serbia remains firmly committed to the principles
and system of international criminal justice and their
role in fighting impunity. Its cooperation with the
Tribunal continues faithfully, in particular in the
cases of Goran Hadzie and Vojislav Seselj, who are on
provisional release. The ICTY Prosecutor expressed,
in his written report (S/2015/874, annex II) and today
also, his satisfaction with that cooperation, especially
in processing the requests for assistance of his Office,
as well as in maintaining direct dialogue with my
country's governmental and judicial authorities.

My Government follows the ICTY activities
with great attention and interest, particularly those
concerning the completion of its long-lasting trials
of Serbian citizens. In that regard, let me remind the
Council that, on 23 February 2016, the Seselj case, still
in the first instance phase, will enter its fourteenth
year. Notwithstanding that anomaly, Serbia continues
to be fully supportive of the ICTY's commitment,
spelled out again in the report, to completing the
trials expeditiously, while ensuring that all judicial
proceedings are conducted in a manner consistent with
the fundamental principles of due process and fairness.
In that context, my country supports the new President
and his intention to implement measures to expedite
the work of the Tribunal and calls, at the same time,
on the Security Council to accord its attention to the
completion strategy of the two ad hoc Tribunals, in
particular to the measures regarding the staff attrition
proposed by President Meron in his report.

War crimes proceedings in Serbia are ongoing
and proceeding in parallel with the ICTY completion
strategy. A national strategy on war crimes issues is
being drafted and charged with the responsible task of
chairing a working group established by the Ministry
of Justice to draft that document. I expect it to be
published in a couple of days. It will include a road map
of activities and improvements needed to investigate,
prosecute and try heinous crimes committed in the
former Yugoslavia in the 1990s, measures to improve
the protection of witnesses and support victims during
criminal proceedings, some general improvements in
the defence ofthe accused, cooperation with and support
to national, regional and international commissions on
missing persons, and measures to advance regional
cooperation in processing war crimes. The national
strategy will also contain the positions and measures
designed to improve the overall social milieu in relation
to war crimes, their investigation and prosecution. The
key challenges identified in the reports of the ICTY, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
and other relevant stakeholders have been taken into
account, while due respect is paid to the domestic legal
system and the independence of the judiciary.

The Government of the Republic of Serbia firmly
believes that domestic prosecution of the core
international crimes committed in the armed conflicts
of the 19905 in the former Yugoslavia is one of the most
important steps in the process of reconciliation. It is
the collective duty of the countries of the region to
investigate and prosecute those responsible without any
discrimination against the perpetrator or the Victim on
the basis of national, ethnic or religious origins. Justice
must not be allowed to be hobbled by selectivity.

With that in mind, I would like to remind the
members of the Security Council of my statement at
the Council's meeting in June (see S/PV.7455), in which
I said that, notwithstanding the recognition by both
the ICTY and the International Court of Justice that
Croatian Government forces killed many civilians of
Serb ethnicity in Operation Storm in 1995, thejudiciary
in Croatia has passed only one final conviction for the
commission of the war crime of murder. And although
the revisiting of ultimate tragedies that befall innocent
people is a painful and sad exercise and there is nothing
to like about it, I still would like to have heard from
the representative of the Croatian Government what is
being done to bring justice to the Serbs, many of whom
were gunned down on the threshold of the doors of
their homes or strafed from the air in helpless refugee
columns as they fled their ancestral homes during and
after the Operation.

The Government of my country expects that the
monitoring by the ICTY Prosecutor, or the Prosecutor
of the Mechanism in the future, of the domestic
prosecution of war crimes will be expanded to
include the Croatian judiciary as well. For the report
before Council members carries only the monitoring
observations of the domestic trials of war crimes in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia and not ofthe trials
in Croatia.

Yet the Government of Serbia is obliged to
Mr. Brammertz and his hard-working team for their
constant support and advice to the Serbian War Crimes
Prosecutor. The provision of information and evidence
in ICTY cases is a commendable example of two-
way cooperation; it benefits both the fight against
impunity domestically and the completion strategy of
the Tribunal. This process has to be intensified by the
Serbian side, all the more so in View of the statement
in paragraph 39 of the report of the ICTY Prosecutor.
He states, inter alia, that Serbian judicial authorities
must process war crimes cases that do not exclusively
involve Serbian nationals suspected of committing
crimes against nationals of other States. That statement,
as my Government understands it, is supportive of the
existing scope of jurisdiction of the Serbian judiciary
which, unfortunately, was recently impugned in the
European Parliament. My Government also welcomes
the joint European Union/Tribunal Training Project
for National Prosecutors and Young Professionals, as
well as the workshop organized by the Office of the
Prosecutor of the Mechanism.

Last but not least, Serbia thanks the ICTY Prosecutor
for the efforts that were invested in improving regional
cooperation on matters of war crimes and welcomes
his stated intention to closely monitor further
developments. That is also my country's request. In
the Djukie case, the competent Serbian authorities will
respond appropriately to the request, received recently,
of Bosnia and Herzegovina for the enforcement of
the sentence in Serbia, in accordance with a bilateral
agreement.

Let me also reiterate the interest of my country
in future dialogues on questions related to the ICTY
archives and reaffirm its previous humanitarian request
with respect to the enforcement of sentences and the
possibility that convicted persons may serve their
sentences in Serbia.

Allow me now to respond very briefly to the
statements that we heard today concerning the
reported non-compliance of Serbia's Government in
the execution of the arrest warrants in the Tribunal's
cases of contempt against Jojic et al. Owing to the
confidentiality of the submissions of the Government
of the Republic of Serbia to the ICTY Trial Chamber
in that case, I am not at liberty to discuss the matter
in detail. Moreover, the matter is still sub judice at the
ICTY, and it would be inappropriate for me to discuss it
now in this forum. However, the issue of arrest warrants
will be resolved in cooperation with the Tribunal.

Before I conclude my statement, let me make two
very pertinent remarks.

Twenty years ago, almost to the day, a Peace
Agreement was signed in Dayton, Ohio. It put an end
to the armed conflicts and horrific atrocities in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and Croatia. The three Presidents who
signed the Agreement - Alija Izetbegovie, Slobodan
Milosevic and Franjo Tudman - were subjected to
ICTY investigations soon thereafter. Only one of them,
Slobodan Milosevic, was indicted. The other two died
before the victims of the acts for which those men were
being investigated could ever be given the satisfaction
of seeing them indicted and arraigned.

Twenty years later, my country is hard at work,
developing good-neighbourly relations and establishing
lasting peace in a region that was once ripped apart
by suffering and war. This year, my Prime Minister
Visited Srebrenica on two occasions in an effort to
promote reconciliation and offer cooperation to the
community that had suffered the kind of calamity that
only inter-ethnic and interreligious wars can provoke.
We must not be deterred in our efforts to bring about
reconciliation and cooperation, and that includes by
trying those responsible for crimes in domestic courts.
The victims will not be forgotten and the crimes must
not be allowed to be repeated.

