Mr. Patten (Liberia): It is a privilege for me to
participate in a meeting of the Council on the work of
the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL). I wish
to convey the deep gratitude of the Government and the
people ofLiberia to the Council for its continued support
ofpeace and stability in Liberia. In the same vein, I wish
to commend Mr. Farid Zarif, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, and the entire UNMIL
family for the many contributions they are making in
the consummation of peace and stability in Liberia. I
wish to further thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for his statement, which has given
further insights into the work of UNMIL.

Similarly, I wish to thank the Chair of the Liberia
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC),
Ambassador Olof Skoog, for his statement. The work of
the PBC has been critical to sustaining peace in Liberia.
The statement draws on the collaborative efforts
of all stakeholders on the new statement of mutual
commitments. We endorse the recommendations in
the statement.

I also wish to thank the Executive Director of
UN-Women for her statement. We appreciate the
ongoing attention and support that the women of Liberia
continue to receive from UN-Women.

Thirteen years after the civil conflict, significant
progress has been made in Liberia in the areas of
peace and security, with the support of UNMIL. With
stability established, focus has now shifted to economic
and social development and governance reforms. The
thirty-first progress report of the Secretary-General
(S/2016/l69) provides a fairly accurate report of the
situation in Liberia and a level of preparedness of
Liberian security institutions to assume from UNMIL
the full security responsibilities of the country come
30 June. As of 15 March, the Government of Liberia has
assumed full responsibility for six of the eight UNMIL
responsibilities. We therefore thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the support
of UNMIL in furtherance of the implementation of the
Government's transition plan.
I wish to affirm that UNMIL has been a significant
and dependable partner, creating a platform for
continued dialogue and assistance as we implement the
transition. Steady progress has been made in the areas of
training and capacity-building of the Liberian National
Police, the Bureau of Immigration and Naturalization
and other security institutions, and the deployment of
officers to various countries has begun. As of January,
additional Liberian National Police officers, including
emergency response and police support units, have been
deployed in eight border counties to address threats
to peace, including cross-border threats. Additional
logistical support, including vehicles, communication
equipment and uniforms, has been supplied.

Not only is it important to enhance the numerical
capacity of both the police and immigration services,
but renewed focus has also been placed on the quality of
training they receive. The ability of the national police
to plan and carry out training is essential to bolstering
the capacity of the police. The protection of human
rights and civilians, which remains paramount to the
work of the security institutions, has gained added
traction by planners and training being made available
to the relevant institutions in this area. Other aspects
of the training being provided by the institutions are
focused on leadership and management, border-control
management, human trafficking, immigration law, and
so on. The Liberian Government is optimistic that all
activities under UNMIL that have not been taken over
by the relevant security institutions will be taken over
by 30 June.

We acknowledge that corruption remains a challenge
and a threat to governance. However, the Government
of Liberia is not relenting in the fight to defeat it,
through the support of the Liberia Anti-Corruption
Commission and the Ministry of Justice. Since our
previous statement in the Council (see S/PV.7519),
a number of Government officials - including the
Managing Director of the National Port Authority,
the former Minister of Commerce and the former
Managing Director of the Liberia Petroleum Refining
Company - have been indicted on corruption charges.
Last week, the President dissolved the board of
directors of the Liberian chapter of the International
Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies,
in relation to the expenditure of funds donated for
the Ebola disease. In a case of economic sabotage
related to private use permits, convictions have been
obtained against the former Managing Director of
the Forestry Development Authority, Moses Wogbeh,
and other senior managers, who were convicted and
sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment and ordered to
pay approximately $6 million in restitution. The former
Comptroller of the National Drug Service was found
guilty of economic sabotage and theft of property,
sentenced to five years' imprisonment and ordered to
pay $179,000 and LRD 958,000 in restitution. There is
also a case involving the former board of directors of
the National Oil Company of Liberia and some senior
officers. Currently ongoing at the Temple of Justice is
the corruption case involving the suspended Managing
Director of the National Port Authority, Matilda W.
Parker and the former Comptroller Christina Palay.

Liberia's transformative agenda also remains on
course. This vision is firmly embedded in the resolve
of the Government to introduce extensive changes in
the areas of governance, the rule of law, education,
infrastructure and health care. Following the submission
of its report to the President, the recommendations
from the work of the constitutional review process are
now before the national legislature. A number of bills
have been submitted to, and are under consideration by,
that body, including the local Government act, the land
rights act, the police act and the immigration act, as well
as many other bills that are earmarked for enactment
into law, including bills related women. While there
have been some delays in taking action on those bills by
the legislature, the Government of Liberia is confident
that they will soon be passed into law.

It has been a couple of months since Liberia
was declared Ebola-free. Now safe as a result of the
global efforts that were exerted to defeat the scourge,
thousands more Liberians could have succumbed to the
pandemic. Even though Ebola has been overcome, the
direct consequences of the disease, exacerbated by the
global economic decline and the decrease in prices of
the country's main export commodities - rubber and
iron ore - have devastated the economy, leading to
a reduction of over $70 million in projected revenues
for the 2015-2016 fiscal year, and budget cuts across
all levels of Government. That has made it difficult for
the Government to fully implement its transformation
agenda as planned.

When the Security Council requested that Liberia
assume full security responsibility by June 2016,
Liberia did not expect that the financial burden for
that transition would be borne by it alone. Since the
adoption of the plan by the Council, only Sweden
and the European Union have contributed directly to
it, in spite of the appeal by the Council for support.
Liberia wishes to therefore call on the international
community, donors and partners to lend their support
to this worthy cause.

Let me now turn to the letter written by President
Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf and her Ivorian counterpart,
President Alassane Ouattara, to the Security Council.
Concerns have been raised by many Liberians about
the security of the country as we approach the 2017
elections. Those concerns, which find support in many
quarters, are based on the perception that the departure
of UNMIL would create a security vacuum. That
negative perception has been reinforced by the recent
terrorist attack in neighbouring Cote d'Ivoire, the news
of the relocation of the United Nations rapid response
force stationed in the United Nations Operation in
Cote d'Ivoire from Abidjan to Mali, and the planned
presidential elections in 2017.

While it is the view of the Government that State
security institutions are being prepared to carry out
their duties during such a critical time, it is important
to address that negative perception. The Government of
Liberia proposes that the Council consider maintaining
a deterrent force in Liberia - not troops on the ground
to engage in combat but a force sufficient to provide
psychological support and a cushion up to the 2017
elections. The force could be a subregional force.
The presence of a United Nations force on the ground
coupled with community policing will help create an
enabling environment for peace, the conduct of general
elections and the seamless handover to an elected
Government. It is therefore desirable, in the light of
the prevailing environment, for the Security Council to
give some thought to the issues raised in the letter by
the President.

In conclusion, it is important to stress that the
terrorist attack that took place in C6te d'Ivoire over the
weekend has led to cause for concern in Liberia. Given
the fragility of our security institutions, we call on the
international community to urgently lead coordination
efforts with the relevant stakeholders, including
regional and subregional groups, on how to ensure that
terrorists do not find a foothold in the region.

