Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): My delegation would like to join in the
expressions of thanks and appreciation made by
previous speakers. I pay special tribute to the Foreign
Minister of Mauritius for his generous contribution not
only to the meeting devoted to the situation in Africa,
but also during the discussion and adoption of some
important decisions in the Security Council. We believe
that his presence imparted greater importance and
emphasis to those debates and decisions.

We also wish to thank your entire team, Sir, for
the way in which it assumed the responsibilities of
leading the work of the Council and of consulting other
members. It is difficult to underline all the important
missions you have undertaken since assuming the
presidency of the Council. They have indeed been
numerous and great. I shall try my best, while seeking
to avoid repeating what other speakers have said, to
stress the most important among them so as to point to
those issues that are of the greatest interest.

Obviously, this is Syria's first month as a Council
member and we feel that this meeting is the right
opportunity to assess it. We believe that it was a rich
and productive month, thanks to careful planning by
the presidency and to the fact that all points of view
represented on this Council were taken into account. I
must say that we are satisfied by the work undertaken
by the Security Council, particularly vis-a-vis the
situation in Africa and the importance accorded to that
issue. This emphasis has restored the question of the
situation in Africa to the international arena. The
Security Council has also monitored the situation in
areas of tension in Africa through close follow-up and
correct decisions taken vis-a-vis the situations in
Liberia, Sierra Leone, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and neighbouring countries, in addition to
completing the preparations for the Security Council
mission to Ethiopia and Eritrea.

We express our satisfaction that, for the first time,
the Security Council, under your presidency, Sir, has
convened regular formal briefings on the Middle East.
For years, we looked forward to such an opportunity to
discuss the situation in that explosive region, which
represents a true threat to international peace and
security. The Security Council has a special
responsibility vis-a-vis developments in the region. We
believe that the briefing by Mr. Roed-Larsen, the
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process
and Personal Representative of the Secretary-General,
was very informative and encouraging and gave the
Security Council additional information that accurately
reflects the situation on the ground. Mr. Roed-Larsen,
after all, works in the region and is most
knowledgeable about developments there.

We feel that such briefings, as well as the
important subsequent discussions, are a first step on the
road towards correcting the Security Council's work in
this regard. In many countries, the Council is often
accused of employing double standards in debating and
considering issues pertaining to the Middle East and in
assuming its responsibilities towards that region.

My delegation believes that the open debate of
the Security Council on the activities of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee was successful. It offered an
opportunity to all Members to express their opinions
and positions on terrorism and the appropriate means
for eradicating it through the promotion of joint
international action. The open debate was also a
valuable opportunity for many delegations to express
their views on such sensitive matters as the need to
define the terrorism we are combating and to
distinguish between it and the legitimate struggle
against foreign occupation.

Mr. President, your achievements this month have
indeed been considerable, but we had hoped that
another area would have been added to these
achievements, namely greater transparency in the
working methods of the Security Council and in its
interaction with non-members, in keeping with the new
formula that we have discussed on a number of
occasions in Council meetings. We are confident that
the first steps taken in the context of this formula by
your successor, the Permanent Representative of
Mexico, will provide further opportunities for States to
express their views and opinions on the proceedings in
the Security Council. The members of the Council thus
can become more aware of shortcomings in the
Council's work and of areas that might require further
attention.

We had also hoped to conclude the discussions
that we began on the report of the Security Council to
the General Assembly, taking into consideration
Singapore's proposals in this regard, which, we
believe, take into account all of our aspirations in its
current form.

Of course, we support close cooperation between
the Council and the Economic and Social Council. The
participation by the President of the Economic and
Social Council in the debate on the situation in Africa
was most welcome. We should like to draw the
Council's attention to the fact that last year Syria
participated very actively in efforts to enhance
substantive relations between the two bodies in a
manner that would respect their spheres of activity and
their competences within the United Nations. We
believe that continuing debate and dialogue on this
issue will allow us to achieve the desired result.

Mr. President, I wish to extend to you our
gratitude and appreciation. In addition, before closing,
allow me to highlight the Security Council's activities
vis-a-vis Afghanistan and East Timor, as we believe
that those efforts, which we deeply appreciated, were
most valuable. The future of Afghanistan and East
Timor is very important not only to Asia but also to the
world, and we hope that the effective steps taken by the
Security Council will promote peace, progress and
development and enable the people of East Timor in
particular to achieve independence and begin to build
their future. We thank you once again for all your
efforts.

