Mr. Holmes: Thank you very much,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to brief the Council
on my recent visits to Chad and to the Sudan.

I visited Chad for a second time to look at the
humanitarian situation and response, particularly in the
light of the deployment of the European Union military
operation (EUFOR) and the United Nations Mission in
2
the Central African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT)
and the transition to MINURCAT II. In eastern Chad, I
visited refugee and internally displaced persons (IDPs)
camps, and a village where IDPs have begun to return.

In N'djamena I spoke with the Prime Minister
and other ministers. National tensions have eased since
the attack on N'djamena last February but the situation
remains fragile and volatile. In the east, banditry has
worsened and poses a significant threat to IDPs,
refugees, aid workers and the local population. The
underlying tensions from long years of internal conflict
and the spillover from Darfur have not gone away. The
humanitarian situation is relatively stable in terms of
numbers. Around 263,000 refugees from Darfur and
57,000 from Central African Republic, and 180,000
IDPs, are currently receiving humanitarian assistance.
Emergency needs are mostly being met and the quality
of aid reaching IDPs is much better than on my last
visit, in March 2007. However, the long-term presence
of such large numbers of refugees and IDPs is resulting
in growing tensions with the host population and
additional strain on the already fragile environment.

The politicization and militarization of the
refugee camps and some IDP sites are major and
increasing concerns. In particular, recruitment by
armed groups, including of children, notably by the
Justice and Equality Movement (JEM), is threatening
the civilian and humanitarian nature of the camps. This
needs to stop if the humanitarian effort is to be able to
continue successfully. The Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) has
already been unable to deliver assistance in one camp
for two months for related reasons. I asked the
Government of Chad to do all it can to prevent such
problems, and I call on the JEM. leadership in
particular to recognize their responsibilities too.

In the absence of a settlement in Darfur, there is
unfortunately little immediate prospect of return for the
Sudanese refugees who have been in Chad for the last
five years. The focus is therefore on increasing self-
sustainability. There are, however, some signs of hope
for the IDPs. There have been limited voluntary returns
to their villages of origin in recent months, particularly
in locations further away from the Darfur border.
Others are moving between the camps and their
previous smallholdings to restart agricultural activity.
In Louboutique, which I visited, the return process has
been greatly facilitated by effective locally led
08-63132
reconciliation efforts. I hope these can be replicated
elsewhere, without putting undue pressure on the IDPs.

Security remains critical, and must go hand in
hand with the provision of basic social infrastructure
and a stronger presence of State authorities. The
presence of EUFOR and the progressive deployment of
MINURCAT have helped to stabilize the situation
overall, to provide much needed general reassurance to
refugees, IDPs and the local community and to
improve security for humanitarians.

However, EUFOR has not had the capacity to
tackle the growing problems of local banditry and
criminality, which remain the greatest single concern
for the humanitarian community in eastern Chad. Since
the beginning of the year, about 160 serious incidents
have been recorded, including the murder of the head
of the Save the Children team. This banditry, which is
carried out largely for profit, following a pattern we
have seen in Darfur, is encouraged by the proliferation
of small arms throughout the area, the presence of
armed militias and more or less total impunity for those
responsible, in the absence of any meaningful local
judicial system. Some non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) have already withdrawn, wholly or partially,
and we will need to work hard to fill these gaps and
provide the best basis possible for others to stay.

A speedy and effective deployment of
MINURCAT II and a smooth transition from EUFOR
are therefore vital to help improve security for
refugees, IDPs, the humanitarian community and the
original population alike. The deployment of the newly
trained Chadian gendarme force, the Detachement
integre de securite (DIS), fully supported by
MINURCAT, is equally vital. They have the mandate
and training to provide the kind of local police
protection in and around the camps that is so badly
needed. Deployment has already begun and I was
encouraged by the attitude of members of the DIS that
I met. But there is a long way to go, and there remain
some key issues of equipment and operational
capability to be resolved.

The Council will soon be voting on the future of
the United Nations presence in Chad. I urge members
to ensure that MINURCAT II has the resources to
cover the key geographical areas currently covered by
EUFOR, in addition to one or two others, with the
necessary logistical support and an appropriate
mandate.
08-63132

In my discussions with the Chadian Government
and local authorities, I also strongly encouraged them
to increase their effective presence in the East and to
live up to their own responsibilities for ensuring
security, providing basic services and supporting
development. They, in turn, drew attention to the need
to take into account the unequal treatment of the
original population, many of whom are themselves on
the edge of extreme poverty and food insecurity. We
need to add to our existing assistance projects a
package to address this as well as the environmental
issues. I hope donors will look favourably on this, as
on the overall Consolidated Appeals Process 2009
requirements of some $389 million, in the same way
that they have responded generously to humanitarian
needs in 2008.

Overall, I left Chad with slightly more optimism
about future prospects than I had expected, including in
terms of our efforts to provide life-saving humanitarian
aid. However, the risks of rapid deterioration remain
high. The international community and the Security
Council cannot afford to neglect Chad.

I should now like to turn to the Sudan, where I
visited all three Darfur states, South Kordofan, Juba
and Khartoum. The billion-dollar humanitarian
operation in Darfur, still the largest in the world, will
soon enter its sixth year. The needs are not
diminishing, and the situation remains grave. This year
more than 315,000 people have been forced to flee
from violence and inter-tribal conflict. Even if this
displacement or re-displacement is only temporary, the
destruction, including of humanitarian infrastructure,
and consequent delays in relief assistance redouble the
suffering.

To the frustration of all, many of the problems
noted in the past are equally relevant today. The
operation nevertheless continues to achieve its primary
goal of keeping people alive, not least through the
sheer determination of thousands of aid workers to
overcome the obstacles. But at the risk of stating the
obvious, the things most urgently needed are a
ceasefire that is declared and respected by all parties
and a negotiated settlement to the conflict.

The critical humanitarian challenges today are
access and protection of civilians. There are many
reasons for our access problems, including the
continuing violence, travel restrictions, the
politicization of the humanitarian environment,
3
including in the IDP camps, and the dramatic increase
in attacks on humanitarians and their property. The
year 2008 has seen these attacks reach unprecedented
levels. As of 30 November, 261 vehicles had been
hijacked and 172 compounds broken into. The cars and
other valuables stolen seem to find their way mostly to
Chad or Libya for resale. Rebel movements, or groups
or individuals linked to them, appear to be primarily
responsible for the majority of these terrifying
incidents in rural areas. However, many also occur in
main towns under Government control. I call on both
the Government security forces and rebel leaders to put
a stop to this banditry once and for all. It seriously
damages the quality of assistance - for example,
World Food Programme rations are still only at 70 per
cent because of attacks on their convoys - and it
damages the credibility of their promises to ensure our
safety.

Nobody can be satisfied with only keeping needy
people alive. Alleviating their suffering and protecting
them from abuses are as much a part of
humanitarianism today as are food, water and other
material assistance. For example, throughout my trip in
Darfur, I was confronted with the pervasive risk of
sexual violence. I met many women who had the
courage to speak out. It was therefore particularly
disturbing that programmes aimed at preventing or
responding to this violence are under increased
pressure from Government authorities, with South
Darfur presenting the most difficult challenges and one
or two unacceptable incidents.

The authorities there have also recently forced
the closure of two NGO mental health projects. An air
of unnecessary suspicion continues to hang over the
aims of this type of project. I raised these issues with
the Government at all levels. I hope that we can reach a
better shared understanding of the essential purpose of
protection and find ways of working together to help
people living amid these brutal risks.

On the long-standing issue of administrative
obstacles impeding humanitarian operations, the
Government recently extended the moratorium on
restrictions through January 2010. I welcome this early
decision. We should be able to harmonize procedures
and practices between the federal and state levels, and
address issues together before hasty unilateral actions
are taken, such as harassing or closing projects or
expelling staff. I have also asked the Government to
provide international humanitarian staff of
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) with
multiple-entry visas to increase operational efficiency
and to avoid the anxiety of having to wait for exit
visas, for example in urgent compassionate
circumstances. This would reduce bureaucracy for both
sides and would significantly improve the atmosphere
of relations.

We must also be aware of the effects of continued
violence, stress and upheaval in Darfur. Those in
camps are increasingly frustrated. The longer they stay
there, the more militancy is increased by questions
such as land and property rights. Fears are increased by
renewed pressure by Government authorities for rapid
return, even when security conditions are clearly not
right for safety or sustainability. Some camps are
particularly sensitive, such as Kalma or those around
Zalingei in West Darfur, both of which I visited. Just
yesterday, tensions came to a boil in Hissa Hissa camp
in Zalingei, resulting in a tense standoff which required
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) to position itself between the camp
and an armed group. To help address these issues, I
have asked the Government again to allow UNHCR to
support them with camp coordination and management.
I also strongly urge rebel leaders to respect the civilian
and humanitarian nature of the camps.

Frustration and problems are not, of course,
confined to the camps, but exist in many rural areas
too. We are trying to engage with and help all
communities, including Arab nomadic communities,
and to promote early recovery and development
wherever possible. Local reconciliation efforts between
communities, as well as wider political negotiations,
are essential for future normalization, and I was
encouraged that these were already under way in some
places, for example to allow the recent harvest to go
ahead in relative peace in some areas.

Overall, my discussions with the Sudanese
authorities, while frank at times, took place in a
constructive spirit. We now need to see rapid results on
the ground. We are also intensifying our contacts with
the rebel movements to persuade them that they too
must respect humanitarian personnel and aid efforts.

From Darfur I went to South Kordofan to assess
the humanitarian response to May's serious violence in
Abyei, which forced some 50,000 civilians to flee,
many to nearby Agok. Talking to the displaced Dinka,
the message was clear: without continued progress on
08-63132
the Abyei Road Map, including further support to the
joint implementation and police units, most of the
population will not return, primarily due to fears of
renewed violence. I also discussed this with the new
Abyei Administrator and his Deputy, in particular the
importance of ensuring that the resources required to
implement the Road Map are made available. This is a
point I strongly took up in my meetings in Juba and in
Khartoum. The importance of Abyei to North-South
peace can hardly be overstated.

I also visited Juba for the first time since March
2007. Juba itself has boomed in the meantime, with the
good and bad sides that boom implies. But outside the
capital, the process of construction remains painfully
slow, and little of the oil revenue flowing to Southern
Sudan has so far been seen.

Southern Sudan, while no longer a humanitarian
emergency as such, still has some of the worst child
and maternal health indicators in the world. For
example, maternal mortality is twice as high as Darfur.
One child in every seven dies under the age of five.
Agriculture has huge potential but, three years on from
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement, more than 90 per
cent of fruits, vegetables and consumer goods are
imported from Uganda or Kenya.

The good news is that some 12,000 kilometres of
roads have been de-mined, 3,000 water points have
been rehabilitated, 2.4 million former IDPs and
refugees have returned and primary school enrolment
rates have risen dramatically. So, some of the peace
dividends hoped for on the signing of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement have begun to
appear. But there is a long way to go. While Darfur's
problems tend to take the spotlight, the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement remains of huge importance for the
whole country. The United Nations, NGOs and donors
must all continue to help ensure effective recovery and
development. But the Government of Southern Sudan
also needs to allocate additional resources for basic
services.

Let me conclude with a few general points. The
situation in Darfur remains a huge challenge - above
all for the people of Darfur, but also for humanitarians,
for UNAMID and for the political process. There is
plenty of room to criticize the Government of the
Sudan for continuing human rights violations, for not
disarming the militias, for not always facilitating
humanitarian relief, or for declaring a ceasefire then
08-63132

almost immediately violating it. However, the rebel
movements have neither declared a ceasefire nor
shown great readiness to engage in a political process,
and are also not helping relief efforts. They have a lot
to answer for, too.

Meanwhile, the situation in Darfur cannot
continue without causing incalculable damage, not
only to the physical environment - the risks to which
in areas like forest cover and water resources struck me
particularly forcibly on this visit - but also to the
ability of Darfur to recover its culture and way of life
in the future. A generation is growing up in the camps
with no knowledge of what went before. How will they
respond if and when real peace returns? How many
will go back to villages in some cases already occupied
by others? Humanitarian relief cannot answer these
questions. Only decisive political action can.

Meanwhile, it is important that UNAMID
continue to use its current and future capacity to
improve the physical protection of civilians, in
particular in the camps near the main towns, as they
have now done so successfully around Kalma camp in
South Darfur. This will not only improve the safety of
civilians and humanitarians, but will also help
contribute to reducing tensions overall.

Lastly, let me make one comment on the issue
relating to the International Criminal Court in the
Sudan. Regardless of what may happen in the coming
months, it is in everyone's interest to ensure the safety
of humanitarians and to sustain the humanitarian
operation. I took every opportunity to remind the
Government of the Sudan of its fundamental
responsibilities in this context. For our part, we will do
everything in our power to maintain our operations to
help those in need.

