Ms. Tan (Singapore): We join others in expressing
our appreciation to New Zealand for giving attention
to issues important to small island developing States
(SIDS) by hosting this open debate on peace and
security challenges.

Singapore was privileged to have worked closely
with New Zealand to shepherd the SIDS Accelerated
Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway (Samoa Pathway) at the third International Conference on Small
Island Developing States, in Apia in September 2014.
The vulnerabilities faced by SIDS can often accentuate
many of the challenges that are common to all nations.
A major preoccupation of SIDS is dealing with the
adverse impacts of climate change, which besides being
an existential threat in itself, has a multiplier effect on
non-traditional security threats.

High degrees of climate change pose enormous
risks to national and international security. Climate
change impacts could also indirectly lead to
transboundary issues like pollution and an increased
risk of terrorism if States fail, and higher temperatures
can accelerate the spread of some diseases to epidemic
proportions. In terms of disaster-risk reduction and
relief, the capacity of the international community for
humanitarian assistance is already at full stretch and
could be overwhelmed. The role played by climate
change in exacerbating such non-traditional security
threats should therefore not be ignored.

The risks related to climate change are clear and
present to many. A recent Pew Research Center survey,
measuring perceptions of international challenges,
showed global climate change as the top threat
perceived by countries in Latin America, sub-Saharan
Africa and Asia. A sizeable portion of the 45,000
persons surveyed in 40 nations cited climate change as
their biggest worry - of greater concern than the threat
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham - making
it the most widespread concern of any issue included
in the survey. The sense of urgency reflected in those
recent reports is something that SIDS have long been
preoccupied with, because SIDS have to cope with these
matters in every aspect of planning and development at
the national level.

As we anticipate a new global agreement on climate
change at the twenty-first session of the Conference of
the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change in December, the urgent need to help
SIDS adapt to the impacts of climate change should be
seen through the lens of those non-traditional security
implications. Climate change can be a threat multiplier,
and the quest to reduce the vulnerability and increase
the resilience of SIDS takes on additional dimensions
of urgency.

The Samoa Pathway recognizes that sea-level rise
and other adverse impacts of climate change continue to
pose a significant risk to the efforts of SIDS to achieve
sustainable development. For instance, climate change
implications tied in with other threats could lead to
the displacement of populations and conflict over
resources due to food and water scarcity. The Samoa
Pathway reaffirmed that SIDS remain a special case
for sustainable development, in view of such unique
and particular vulnerabilities. The document identifies
direct responses to a host of challenges to which
SIDS would be particularly vulnerable, with concrete
modalities of action to tackle disaster-risk reduction,
food and energy security, as well as water and sanitation,
among others. Addressing such challenges effectively
will help each of the SIDS manage its overall resilience
to climate change and reduce non-traditional threats to
peace and security.

International support for adaptation efforts lags
behind support for mitigation actions, yet many SIDS
undertake adaptation actions with domestic resources,
at significant opportunity costs to other development
priorities. The truth of the matter is that tackling these
challenges is an existential issue for SIDS. We have no
choice but to undertake adaptation efforts to increase
resilience, reduce vulnerability, and avoid loss and
damage. We need to do so whether there is a global
climate agreement or not.

In that respect, some of the actions identified in
the Samoa Pathway can make a qualitative difference
at the national level. Examples include improving
the baseline monitoring of island systems and the
downscaling of climate model projections, which would
help to enable better projections of future impacts on
small islands. To increase human and environmental
resilience to the longer-term impacts of climate change,
continued support is needed to raise awareness of and
communication about climate change risks, including
through public dialogue with local communities.

Also, SIDS seek to achieve, first, sustainable energy
goals through better energy efficiencies and sustainable
energy systems, including an integrated approach to
establishing and strengthening innovative energy road
maps; secondly, disaster risk-reduction goals through
early warning systems, better risk assessment and
data collection, as well as contingency planning for
better disaster preparedness and response; and thirdly,
greater food security and nutrition by promoting open
and efficient international and domestic markets and
enhancing international cooperation to maintain access
to global food markets, particularly during periods of
high volatility in commodity prices. Such actions can
contribute directly to the reduction of vulnerability,
the enhancement of resilience and the reduction of
non-traditional security threats.

Singapore is committed to helping our fellow SIDS
in building capacity to take such action. At the Third
International Conference on Small Island Developing
States, held in Apia, Singapore launched a three-year
technical cooperation package dedicated to SIDS that
includes customized programmes in areas such as
climate change, sustainable development and disaster
management. In collaboration with the United Nations
Office for Disaster Risk Reduction, we will also conduct
a specialized training course for SIDS, in October,
on the implementation of the Sendai Framework for
Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030 (General Assembly resolution 69/283), including climate change adaptation
and mitigation measures.

The adaptation objectives that SIDS have been
championing are not empty demands being made during
negotiations. They are real needs. The design and
implementation of climate change adaptation measures
must be appropriate to the respective vulnerabilities
and national circumstances if they are to be truly able
to safeguard our security. This debate at the level of the
Security Council is therefore very welcome in drawing
attention to the need for greater support for the ongoing
efforts of SIDS.

The global nature of climate change calls for the
widest possible cooperation on the part of all countries
and their participation in an effective and appropriate
international response. We need genuine and durable
partnerships that harness the full potential of engagement
among Governments at all levels. Businesses, civil
society and a wide range of other national and regional
stakeholders can also play important roles in helping
SIDS better mainstream adaptation needs as we
advance sustainable development.

In closing, we once again thank New Zealand for its
leadership in providing the opportunity to bring these
pertinent issues to the fore at this open debate.

