Mr. Hernandez-Milian (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): It an honour for Costa Rica to speak today in
its capacity as the Chair of the Human Security
Network and on behalf of the following members:
Austria, Chile, Costa Rica, Greece, Ireland, Jordan,
Mali, Norway, Switzerland, Thailand, Slovenia and
South Africa as an observer.

The protection of civilians in armed conflict is
one of the priorities of the Human Security Network
and we would like to thank the Turkish presidency of
the Security Council for the organization of this
important debate. I also thank the Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs for his presentation
today and welcome the submission of the report
(S/2009/277) of the Secretary-General on the
protection of civilians and its annex on constraints on
humanitarian access.

It has been almost 10 years since the first
peacekeeping operation was given an explicit mandate
on the protection of civilians in Sierra Leone. At this
tenth anniversary, we have accumulated important
achievements and established a comprehensive
framework in the Security Council. It is comprised of
four thematic resolutions on the protection of civilians,
as well as other milestone resolutions, including 1325
(2000), 1612 (2005) and 1820 (2008), which refer to
the protection of specific groups such as women and
children. At the country-specific level there has been
also significant progress. Today almost all peacekeeping
missions have protection-related activities. There are
currently eight missions mandated with the specific
task of providing physical protection.

In addition to that, we have entered into a new
era of multidimensional peacekeeping operations with
large civilian components including human rights
verification, humanitarian relief, capacity-building,
restoration of infrastructure and services, security
sector reform and others. As the report clearly states,
"Protection of civilians is not a military task alone"
(S/2009/277, para. 53). We share that view and believe
that a comprehensive approach and inclusive protection
strategies are the most effective ways to address and to
respond to human security threats to civilian
populations in armed conflict.

However, despite the increased attention by the
Council, the prevalence of civilian casualties and the
number of people affected by armed conflict are still
overwhelming. The changing nature of conflict and the
complexity of protecting the safety, dignity and
integrity of individuals during armed conflict continue
to pose new challenges to our collective response.

Costa Rica is deeply concerned about the
recurrent attacks against camps for refugees and
internally displaced persons, as well as against
humanitarian workers; the use of sexual violence and
forced displacement as tactics of war; the prevalence of
child recruitment; the proliferation of illicit trafficking
and misuse of small arms and light weapons; as well as
the danger posed by anti-personnel mines and the
explosive remnants of war. We also deplore the
continued targeting of civilians in many parts of the
world, the indiscriminate use of force and the use of
civilian populations as human shields.

All parties to a conflict must respect their
obligations under international humanitarian law, in
particular the principle of proportionality and the
principle of distinction between civilian targets and
military objectives. Furthermore, we call upon all
parties to armed conflict to exercise maximum restraint
in the use of force, including the choice of weapons, in
order to minimize the impact of hostilities on civilians.

The Security Council is called upon to play an
important role in ensuring respect for international
humanitarian law and compliance by all parties to an
armed conflict. It must respond firmly, systematically,
consistently and promptly to prevent violations of
international law and to protect civilian populations in
all situations without distinction. That also includes
creating the conditions conducive to rapid and
unimpeded delivery of humanitarian assistance while
ensuring the safety of humanitarian personnel.

We also recognize the importance of including
the protection of civilians as a component of
peacekeeping mandates, as well as clear guidelines and
rules of engagement for their effective implementation,
without prejudice to the primary responsibility of the
host Government to protect civilians. More substantial
interaction between the Security Council, the
Secretariat, the host country and the troop-contributing
countries can also contribute to bridging the gap
between the decision-making process and actual
implementation on the ground.

In addition, it is also fundamental to address other
major constraints faced by peacekeeping operations
such as resources, equipment and pre-deployment
training. We look forward to reviewing and discussing
the findings of the upcoming and soon-to-be-published
independent study of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations on the implementation of
protection of civilians mandates in peacekeeping
operations.

The respect for and implementation of
international humanitarian law are inextricably linked
with the fight against impunity. Ending impunity for
violations of applicable international humanitarian law
and human rights law should be viewed as part of a
comprehensive approach to the quest for sustainable
peace, justice, truth and national reconciliation. There
must be a concerted effort to cooperate with national
judicial systems in order to build their capacity and to
ensure that perpetrators are brought to justice and
prosecuted in conformity with international standards.
Restoring the rule of law, security sector reform
and transitional justice mechanisms are also key areas
in which national systems should be strengthened and
supported through enhanced international cooperation.
The International Criminal Court (ICC) and various
"mixed" courts and tribunals play an important
complementary role in prosecuting persons suspected
of international crimes. It is of the utmost importance
that national and international criminal justice
institutions receive all necessary support on the ground.

The Human Security Network takes note with
interest of the January 2009 establishment of the
Security Council Expert Group on the Protection of
Civilians and the recommendations made in the
Secretary-General's report to hold regular meetings of
the Group in advance of the establishment or renewal
of peacekeeping mandates.

As I said at the outset, this year marks the tenth
anniversary of the inclusion of the theme of the
protection of civilians on the Security Council agenda.
The Human Security Network supports the call made
by the Secretary-General in his report to seize the
opportunity of the open debate in November to
reinvigorate the Council's commitment to the protection
of civilians.

I would like to conclude by making also a few
remarks in my national capacity on two issues that we
consider fundamental for more effective protection of
civilians in situations of armed conflict.

First, with regard to the challenge of ensuring
compliance with international humanitarian law by
non-State armed groups, we believe it is necessary that
affected States allow a more systematic protection
dialogue between humanitarian organizations and such
groups. We are aware that such dialogue depends on
the military reality on the ground, that it cannot
prejudge the legal status of the non-State parties
involved in these situations and that it must be in
accordance with the core humanitarian principles of
impartiality, humanity, neutrality and independence.
However, we believe that the conclusion of special
agreements or arrangements such as humanitarian
zones, humanitarian corridors or days of tranquillity is
crucial to reduce the number of civilian casualties and
people affected by the conduct of hostilities.

In addition, promoting understanding of the
responsibilities of armed groups towards civilians and
seeking their adherence to those responsibilities are
elements that are important for the success of
protection strategies in many conflict situations. The
vast experience of humanitarian organizations, such as
the International Committee of the Red Cross, in
engaging with various armed groups, has demonstrated
the potential benefits of such a dialogue for the civilian
population. In this regard, as suggested in the report of
the Secretary-General, we support the organization of
an Arria formula meeting to discuss the experience of
the United Nations and non-governmental organizations,
as a first step towards developing a more comprehensive
approach towards non-State armed groups.

Finally, I want to stress the need to improve the
early warning and rapid response capacity of the
Security Council with respect to any situation that
could represent an imminent danger to the safety,
security and well-being of civilian populations. We
agree with the report that pre-emptive action can
significantly contribute to that end and that the Council
should make use of all the tools at its disposal,
including punitive measures, to prevent the escalation
of hostilities in situations such as the recent crises in
Gaza and Sri Lanka, The Council's credibility depends
on its willingness to give equal treatment to the
protection of civilians in all situations, even those not
formally included in the Council's agenda.

