Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to Assistant Secretary-
General Hedi Annabi for his substantive briefing on the
situation in Kosovo. Russia's views on the processes
under way in the province are well known, and very
much agree with the assessments voiced by Mr.
Annabi.

We believe that, despite certain advances that
have, to a great extent, been achieved by virtue of
international efforts, the situation in the province
continues to be a complex one. Implementation is
lacking with regard to key requirements of Security
Council resolution 1244 (1999), particularly with
respect to the situation of Kosovo's non-Albanian
inhabitants and the return of refugees and internally
displaced persons. There is neither reliable nor
equitable safety for all of the province's population.
There is an absence of fundamental freedoms and
rights and inter-ethnic tolerance. Only weak efforts are
under way to combat local and cross-border crime and
corruption.

Regrettably, over the last month Kosovo has once
again been engulfed by a crime wave that has clear
ethnic underpinnings. The most blatant of those acts
was the armed attack of 13 August against Serbian
school children in Gorazdevac. Participants in the
meeting of the Contact Group held in Moscow on 4
September issued a statement condemning that barbaric
act as well as other incidents in Kosovo that have
produced victims among the civilian population. Such
acts of violence have no justification under any
circumstances. Murder is the instrument of terrorism,
and those who perpetrate such crimes are murderers.
That must be said straight out.

We cannot stand by idly as terrorists attempt to
destabilize the situation in individual countries and
entire regions. With regard to Kosovo, there is no
doubt that this has to do with yet another manifestation
of terrorism that, given the realities in Kosovo, is
particularly dangerous, as it increases tensions in an
already complex inter-ethnic relationship. Such
incidents could provoke a chain reaction with
extremely negative consequences for a settlement in
the province.

We note the steps taken by the international
presences aimed at apprehending the criminals and
bringing them to trial. We are grateful to the head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), Mr. Holkeri, for his prompt
reactions to events. We are certain that the leaders of
the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government and
leading Kosovo politicians will provide active
assistance to the investigations and reaffirm in practice
their commitment to their declared goal of building a
multi-ethnic, democratic society in the province.

The Special Representative of the Secretary-
General faces complex challenges in restoring the
multi-ethnic nature of the province. We support the
priorities he has identified, including normalizing the
situation in the province, ensuring the rule of law,
resolving problems related to the return of refugees and
internally displaced persons, and economic recovery.

Of key importance are the implementation of the
principle of standards before status, which seeks to
ensure the essential basic democratic conditions in
Kosovo and the establishment of appropriate
mechanisms to that end. The implementation of these
obligations must be under continuous international
oversight.

The achievement of these goals will be furthered
by the prompt launching, with constructive
international assistance, of a direct dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina on technical issues of mutual
interest. We believe that the primary mediation role in
this process must be played by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, in close
cooperation with the Contact Group and the European
Union.

We urge UNMIK to assume a more active and
consistent position in countering any manifestations of
inter-ethnic intolerance and crime, to stem the growth
of radical movements in the province and to
consolidate legality there. The meeting in Moscow of
the Contact Group, with the involvement of
Mr. Holkeri, confirmed the convergence of approaches
of all the essential international participants in the
settlement towards the order and substance of measures
to be taken in this field. We note in particular the
clearly established consensus View that any discussion
on the future status of Kosovo would be premature at
this juncture and that any attempt to prejudice the
resolution of this issue would be unacceptable.

For its part, Russia intends actively to continue
participating in overall efforts to seek a just, balanced
and lasting solution to the Kosovo problem.

