Mr. Baja (Philippines): We, too, are grateful to
the Permanent Representatives of the United States and
of the United Kingdom for their comprehensive and
candid briefings this morning.

I would like to speak on only two points: the
United Nations role in the political process in Iraq, and
international cooperation in the reconstruction of Iraq.

We note with gratification that there is now a
consensus that the United Nations should have a robust
role in Iraq. In that connection, it is critically important
that the political process to restore sovereignty and
establish a democratically chosen government in Iraq
be fully accepted and supported by the people of Iraq.

As many have stressed within and outside the
United Nations, Iraqi ownership of the process must be
a foundational principle in this exercise. The
legitimacy of the process in the eyes of the Iraqi people
will be a key element in ensuring that democracy and
stability take root deeply in the country. In our view,
now that the United Nations has started to re-engage
itself in Iraq, it has become a pivotal player in the
country and the body that is in the best position to
provide such legitimacy.

The chance and the opportunity to create a
legitimate political process and establish stable
institutions for that purpose is devolving to the United
Nations, which must be able to serve as midwife to the
process through 30 June and beyond.

To pave the way for ensuring a central role for the
United Nations in Iraq, it is essential to consider, as
soon as possible, the following courses of action.

First, a special representative should be appointed
as soon as possible to lead the efforts of the United
Nations in the design, planning and implementation of
a credible process for the establishment of an interim
government and for the holding of fair and credible
elections to choose a permanent government in Iraq.
The special representative may also be able to
determine if it is possible to replicate in Iraq some of
the successes achieved in the Afghanistan political
process.

Secondly, while giving due regard to the Security
Council's concerns, the Secretary-General could
consider returning United Nations staff and personnel
to Iraq at the earliest possible time. A United Nations
presence on the ground is important to provide
visibility for the actual engagement of the international
community in the process. As the United Nations
begins in earnest to perform the required tasks in Iraq's
nation-building process, let me affirm our full support
of the principle that the United Nations must work in
the context of an independent identity and purpose to
preserve not only the reality but also the perception of
its neutrality.

The core issue of the political process to restore
sovereignty in Iraq is how to hand over power, and to
whom, after 30 June. Given the great divide among the
factionalized communities in Iraq, which are
manoeuvring for advantage at one another's expense,
the United Nations will be called on to nurse the new
Government's strength and ability to govern. A weak

Iraqi Government - one with limited legitimacy,
ineffective institutions and limited control over the
country - must be avoided. The new governing

structure must be able to deliver security and basic
services to the people. That will take courage,
resources and improvisation.

Two important issues must be addressed, and the
first is security. Even after the Iraqis take over, the
Coalition military will remain in de facto control of
security until an Iraqi military or civilian force is
firmly established. We are grateful for Ambassador
Negroponte's update on this force, and perhaps, in this
connection, we could ask for more information on the
command structure of such a military or civilian force.

The terms of reference of such an arrangement
after 30 June will have to be determined, and securing
the peace and stability of a united Iraq will also require
the support and cooperation of neighbouring States.

The second important issue is the delivery of
basic services. We are grateful to Ambassador Jones
Parry for his briefing and for the comprehensive paper
he has just distributed.

The reconstruction of Iraq will require the
participation and cooperation of the international
community, particularly the influential countries that
initially opposed the war and are still holding back
much-needed assistance to place Iraq on the track to
peace and stability.

The leading role of the United Nations in this
effort will be a critical foundation for a diplomatic
consensus among all major players to extend help in
the reconstruction of Iraq. To attain unity among the
international community, the differences of the past
should be left behind, and no one should be required to
concede in terms of national views and positions on the
military action in Iraq. Respect for the views of others
requires courage in the face of deep-rooted differences,
but we have no choice but to move forward to ensure a
stable Iraq, a peaceful region and a safer world.

There are many issues that demand our attention.
Many of them will have to be discussed and debated
later, either in this forum or in other forums that have
been established on Iraq.

It is important to maintain a united and unified
Iraq. Equally important is to give the Iraqi people a
sense of where they are going and when. In this
endeavour, we must also protect the gains achieved for
Iraq so far, during the past months. And, with a clearly
defined mandate, the United Nations can play a
constructive and important role towards those ends.

