Mr. Al-Murad (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic):
Mr. President, at the outset and on behalf of the
Member States of the Arab Group, it is my pleasure to
congratulate you on your presidency of the Security
Council this month, and to wish you every success in
conducting the Council's work. We also wish to thank
your predecessor, the representative of the Russian
Federation, for his distinguished conduct of the work
of the Council last month.

I would also like to express appreciation for the
comprehensive report presented by Mr. Alvaro de Soto,
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process
and the Secretary-General's Personal Representative to
the Palestine Liberation Organization and the
Palestinian Authority.

I would like to express sorrow on behalf of the
Arab Group for the tragic incident that took place
today in Lebanon and which claimed the lives of
civilians and caused casualties among passengers of
two buses in the area of Bikfaya. It was a criminal act
of terror that must be condemned.

Today, the Council is discussing the situation in
the Middle East, including the question of Palestine.
This question has been the most important and
outstanding matter on the Council's agenda for over
five decades. As the Council is well aware, the
question of Palestine is the quintessence and core of
the Arab-Israeli conflict. Events during the past few
years have demonstrated the validity of the conviction
established by the international community that the
resolution of this question represents the essence itself
of a comprehensive and just solution of the Arab-
Israeli conflict. In this context, we commend the
agreement that was reached in Mecca between the
Palestinian factions. We appreciate the efforts of the
fraternal Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and of the
Custodian of the Two Holy Sanctuaries, King Abdullah
Bin Abdulaziz, and all other Arab efforts that
culminated in reaching this important agreement. We
hope that a Palestinian national unity Government will
realize the aspirations and hopes of the Palestinian
people, who have been suffering for decades from
harsh economic and living conditions as a result of the
policies and practices of the Israeli occupation.
Since the Council's last discussion on the
situation in the Middle East last month, the occupied
territories have witnessed serious acts of violence and
dangerous escalation on the part of the Israeli
occupation authorities, most notably, the acts of
demolition and excavation in the perimeters of the
noble sanctuary, the Al-Aqsa mosque. These acts
represent a flagrant violation of the sanctity of the
mosque and a threat to its foundations, features and
religious symbols.

While we express our strongest condemnation
and denunciation of these hostile Israeli actions against
the third holiest shrine of Islam and the first direction
in which Muslims look, we call upon the Security
Council as the body responsible for the maintenance of
international peace and security to assume its
responsibilities and intervene immediately to make
Israel respect decisions of international legitimacy and
desist from such practices that target the religious and
cultural identity of Al-Quds Al-Sharif and represent a
provocation and disdain for Muslim sentiment.

These practices also represent a flagrant violation
of the 16 relevant Security Council resolutions,
foremost among which is Security Council resolution
465 (1980). The Council has emphasized in numerous
resolutions that all measures as well as judicial and
administrative arrangements taken by Israel, the
occupying Power, aiming at altering the legal status of
the occupied city of Al-Quds and its demographic
structure, are all null and void. Furthermore, these acts
are in clear violation of the Fourth Geneva Convention
of 1949, which applies to all the territories that Israel
has occupied since 1967, including Al-Quds Al-Sharif.
They also violate The Hague Convention of 1954,
which provides for protecting places of worship -
which represent the spiritual heritage of peoples -
from threats or hostile acts.

Israel's continued demolition and excavation
within the perimeter of the Al-Aqsa mosque, its
military incursions and continued aggression on the
territory of the Palestinian Authority within the Gaza
Strip and the West Bank and its continued imposition
of an economic siege, as well as its illegal construction
of the separation wall, construction of new settlements
and expansion of existing ones, are all unlawful and
illegal practices. They clearly and openly violate
international law, the relevant United Nations
resolutions and the Road Map endorsed by the Security
Council in its resolution 1515 (2003). Moreover, those

practices not only have dire effects and consequences
on the security and stability of the region and the
world, but also undermine the international efforts led
by the Quartet to revive the peace process.

A just, comprehensive and lasting solution to the
Arab-Israeli conflict - at the core of which is the
Palestinian question - will never be found if Israel
continues its unilateral actions to impose a fait
accompli and influence the outcome of final-status
negotiations. A lasting settlement must end the Israeli
occupation of Palestinian, Syrian and Lebanese lands
on the basis of the resolutions of international
legitimacy, including Security Council resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973), the Madrid terms of reference
and the principle of land for peace, as well as the
requirements of the Road Map and the Arab Peace
Initiative. Such a result would enable the Palestinian
people to recover all their legitimate political rights
and to establish their own independent State on their
national soil, with Al-Quds as its capital, and would
lead to a full Israeli withdrawal from the occupied
Syrian Golan to the borders of 4 June 1967.

Finally, if Israel should continue its illegal and
unlawful demolition and excavation within the
perimeter of the Al-Aqsa mosque, the Arab Group
reserves the right to raise this issue once again to
compel Israel to comply with the relevant United
Nations resolutions, particularly Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 465 (1980).

