Mr. ealovski (the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia): Let me first express the satisfaction of my
delegation, Mr. President, at seeing you, the
representative of Costa Rica, presiding over the Security
Council for the month of December. You can count on
my delegation's cooperation and support.

The Council is going to adopt an important decision
for the maintenance of peace and security in the region of
my country, the Republic of Macedonia. It will decide on
the further extension of the mandate of the United
Nations Preventive Deployment Force (UNPREDEP), at
present the only preventive peace mission of the United
Nations. We are pleased that the Council succeeded in
concluding successfully its consultations, which will now
enable the mission to continue with its important
preventive peace activities in our region.

Regrettably, the sad story of the Balkan crisis is not
over; it is continuing. It is appropriate that the Council
decided to consider the extension of the UNPREDEP
mandate in the light of the present situation in the
Balkans and of possible developments in the region.

In the letter of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Republic of Macedonia addressed to the Secretary-
General, the main characteristics of the situation in our
region are clearly spelt out. They are also underlined in
the Secretary-General's report. It is not necessary,
therefore, for me to repeat what was said in my Foreign
Minister's letter and in the Secretary-General's report.
But it is important to stress that the concerns about the
developments in our region are real. I would like to
express my Government's satisfaction that these concerns
are being considered and taken into account in the
decision to extend the mandate of the mission.

In our view, the situation in the Balkans will not
improve as much as we would like it to improve in the
coming nine months; For this reason, and with the aim of
preventing new conflicts, solving the present ones,
implementing the Dayton Agreement, developing better
good-neighbourly relations among Balkan States and
Security Council 333ch meeting
Fifty-second year 4 December 1997

integrating them into the European structures, first and
foremost the European Union, determined efforts by the
international community and the United Nations are needed
and must continue. Those are the main reasons for my
Government's view that a 12-month extension was
appropriate.

The Secretary-General's report is very informative on
one aspect of the work of UNPREDEP and with regard to
the activities of other United Nations organizations,
agencies and programmes in my country. We are informed
that the United Nations Development Programme will soon
open its office in Skopje, to take care of these activities in
the future -- one burden less for UNPREDEP.

Before concluding, I would like to express my
Government's gratitude to the Governments that have made
their military and police personnel available to
UNPREDEP, and its satisfaction over the excellent
cooperation with the Secretary-General, with the
Department of Peacekeeping Operationsz with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Henryk J.
Sokalski, who is the head of the UNPREDEP mission,
with the Force Commander, Brigadier General Bent
Sohnemann and, of course, with all the personnel of the
mission. At the same time, I would like to stress our
conviction that cooperation will continue to be excellent.
The standing of UNPREDEP in my country is very high.
I am sure that it will remain so in the coming months.

The extension of the UNPREDEP mandate represents
an important contribution of the Security Council to the
effort to maintain peace and security in the Balkans.

