Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco,
Assistant Secretary-General for Peacebuilding Support,
Mr. Smai'l Chergui, African Union Commissioner for
Peace and Security, and Ambassador Jiirg Lauber,
Chair of the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, for their briefings updating us on the
situation in Burundi.

We appreciate the efforts and work of Mr. Benjamin
Mkapa, facilitator of the inter-Burundian dialogue,
whose final report was presented at the East African
Community regional summit, which coincided with the
end of his term of office. We hope that that work will
be continued by His Excellency Mr. Yoweri Museveni,
President of Uganda, current Chair of the East African
Community, so as to maintain support for the inclusive
inter-Burundian dialogue in the run-up to the next
elections, which are scheduled for 2020.

As we have often said, we believe and are convinced
that respect for the constitutional order of each
country defines and upholds what constitutes modern
States today and therefore guarantees their stability
and plurality. We appreciate the efforts made by the
stakeholders involved in the inter-Burundian dialogue,
which led to the signing of the Kayanza road map for
the 2020 general elections and the appointment of the
new members of the National Independent Electoral
Commission. We encourage the Government and all
those involved to continue promoting inter-Burundian
dialogue with a view to the Burundians themselves
taking ownership of the process and the holding of
transparent, peaceful and inclusive elections.

In that context, we must acknowledge that today in
Burundi there is a return to normalcy after the attempts
at destabilization that followed the 2015 elections.
Today Burundi has democratically elected institutions
across the nation. They will be renewed in the same
way in the 2020 elections, the preparations for which
are taking place in a peaceful and calm atmosphere.
We should at this point express our satisfaction at the
strong political will the Government of Burundi has
shown by fully financing the electoral process that will
culminate in the 2020 elections, thereby demonstrating
its desire to take ownership of the electoral process.

Our delegation therefore congratulates the
Burundian Government on its very high level of
political will to bring about and entrench the calm and
political stability that prevail in that brotherly country
of Central Africa today. Our delegation is not the only
one to express such congratulations to the Burundian
Government. The 32nd Summit of Heads of State and
Government of the African Union, held in Addis Ababa
at the beginning of the year, praised the efforts of the
Government of Burundi to prepare for free, democratic
and peaceful elections in 2020 by setting up appropriate
mechanisms in accordance with the Arusha Peace and
Reconciliation Agreement of 2000.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea expresses its
appreciation for the spirit ofreconciliation and tolerance
that currently prevails in Burundi following the return
from exile of five political leaders, including former
President Sylvestre Ntibantunganya and former Second
Vice-President Alice Nzomukunda, among others, at
the invitation of the authorities and with guarantees
for their security and protection of their land, and the
recognition of the Congres national pour la liberte, a
new opposition party led by Agathon Rwasa.

Those facts, along with the release last year of more
than 3,000 prisoners, including insurgents who took part
in the violent demonstrations of 2015, the contribution
by Burundi of more than 6,000 troops to peacekeeping
missions and the return of 210,000 refugees from
2016 to date, together represent real and tangible
demonstrations of the very positive development of the
situation in this Central African nation.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea is greatly
encouraged by that very positive development in the
situation in Burundi. The peace and calm that prevail in
the country today should lead the Security Council to
seriously consider removing Burundi from its agenda
and allocating the United Nations resources currently
allotted to that situation to other countries facing major
crises that need greater United Nations support.

Equatorial Guinea aligns itself with the efforts
of the international community in the search for a
peaceful end to conflicts and its commitment to the
construction and consolidation of stable, peaceful and
prosperous societies that prioritize the national interest
and the internal coexistence of just, transparent and
inclusive sociopolitical and cultural institutions. To that
end, any attempt to build peace, restore international
legitimacy and champion the negotiated and peaceful
end of conflicts will always enjoy the total support of
the Republic of Equatorial Guinea.

The election of Burundi as a member of the African
Union Peace and Security Council at the thirty-
second Ordinary Session of the Assembly of Heads
of State and Government of the African Union, held
on 10 February in Addis Ababa, was a true reflection
of the current situation in the country. We therefore
reiterate once again the need for the Security Council
to remove Burundi from its agenda, since the current
situation in the country no longer represents any threat
to international peace and security.

The launch and implementation of the national
development plan for Burundi are critical to the
development of Burundi in the framework of the goals
of the United Nations 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the African Union's Agenda 2063.
We believe that if we are to achieve the Africa we want
by 2063, we must join forces to facilitate mechanisms
to relieve States of the obstacles to their development.

To conclude, the international community must
continue resolutely to support the Government and
the other parties directly involved in the promotion
of confidence-building measures so as to ensure
an environment conducive to peaceful elections;
commitment to the Constitution and the road map to
the peaceful transfer of power in an atmosphere of
peace and national concord; and, above all, support
for the Government in the reintegration of refugees,
who are returning to the country voluntarily and en
masse. It is therefore important that the Government of
Burundi step up its collaboration with the international
community and the African Union in particular.

