Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): First of all, I would like to congratulate the
Senegalese presidency on its commitment to giving
prominence to water diplomacy as an instrument of
cooperation among States.

My statement is meant as a complement to
the statement just delivered by the observer of the
European Union.
First of all, I would like to underline what an
excellent idea it is to have a Security Council debate
on the topic of water, peace and security. As we
consider this issue, we see that the links among the
various elements are numerous. It is also important
not to underestimate the role that water plays both as a
potential source of conflict and as a potential element
of cooperation. I would like, in that connection, to raise
three points: first, the tools available to the Security
Council on dealing with the subject; secondly, the
specific case of the Sahel; and, thirdly, the situation of
small island developing States.

First, looking at the tools that the Council has at its
disposal, I would like to draw everyone's attention to
the Peacebuilding Commission. Its advisory function
should be used more actively. The link between
security and development, which is at the core of the
Commission's mandate, makes it an essential partner
for ensuring that in post-conflict situations natural
resources, including water, are put at the service of
sustainable development. Belgium therefore urges
the Council to agree that the advisory function of the
Peacebuilding Commission should be fully used by the
Council to deal with the issues on our agenda today.
At the same time, the Peacebuilding Fund also offers
opportunities. Belgium, which participates in financing
the Fund, looks favourably on any Fund project that is
devoted to the prevention or the resolution of issues
relating to the sharing of or access to water.

Secondly, peacekeeping missions also have an

important role to play. The mandates ofcertain missions,

such as the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali, include elements that call
on the missions to monitor the environmental impact of
their activities. Those elements usually take the form
of guidelines for water management. I think we can
only welcome such developments, because experience
has shown that the way in which water is managed
by major United Nations Blue Helmet bases can have
an impact on the drinking water resources and the
sanitary services of the towns and villages surrounding
the bases.

Finally, the experience of the United Nations
Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy in Central
Asia, which regularly reports on its activities to the
Security Council, is worth mentioning. Its facilitation
role to assist the Central Asian States in modernizing
their existing legal framework in the area ofthe regional
management of transboundary waterways is certainly
rich in lessons to be shared with other United Nations
entities, such as the United Nations Office for West
Africa and the Sahel.

With regard to the Sahel, on 26 May an open debate
(see S/PV.7699) was held that underscored the direct
impact of climate change and population growth on
desertification and the availability ofwater in the region.
The intensive use of water resources has contributed to
the generation of security tensions, migratory flows,
sanitary problems and declining agricultural yields.
However, as the Senegalese presidency points out in
the concept note (S/2016/969, annex) for this debate, as
well as during the Arria Formula meeting on 22 April,
there are encouraging examples of cooperation between
the States in the region aimed at taking up the challenge
of access to water resources. Those initiatives, in
particular in the Gambia and Senegal River basins,
should be welcomed and supported.

For its part, Belgium - as part of the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel, which aims
at promoting national and regional mechanisms for
managing natural resources, in particular water - has
developed proj ects on water management and sustainable
agriculture in order to combat desertification in several
countries of the region.

The third topic that I would like to focus on concerns
small island developing States. That category of States,
because of their particular physical, demographic and
economic characteristics, faces complicated issues in
the management of their freshwater supplies. Global
warming has further aggravated the situation that
those islands find themselves in. It has led to rising
ocean levels, which causes saline infiltration that
contaminates groundwater tables. The danger that
threatens the very survival of those States should be
recognized by the international community. Climate
change must be countered in an effective way. Inaction
would be disastrous for our planet.

In conclusion, I want to say that water, like other
natural resources, is a crucial element for human
development, but also, as a corollary, for international
peace and security. Owing to the increasing link
between water resources management and peace and
security issues, the Security Council will in the future
have to deal increasingly with issues related to that
topic. Certainly, Belgium urges the Council, in keeping
with its efforts aimed at sustaining peace, to become
actively involved in the topic.

