Mr. Asim (Maldives): I wish to thank Kazakhstan
in its capacity as President of the Security Council for
convening today's open debate on the situation in the
Middle East. This is my first time, since assuming
office in 2016, to address the Council, and it is only right
that it would be on an issue to which the Government
and the people of Maldives have historically attached
particular importance - the Middle East and the
question of Palestine.

We started the year 2017 with hope for the people
of Palestine. The adoption of resolution 2334 (2016),
which was the first Security Council resolution on
the Palestinian issue in almost a decade, was the most
recent of many resolutions to reaffirm the illegality of
Israeli occupation and settlements in Palestine. The
resolution calls on States to distinguish in their relevant
dealings between the territory of the State of Israel and
the Palestinian territories occupied since 1967. It was
a step forward in the Security Council, demonstrating
international support for addressing the predicament of
the Palestinian people.

Yet the year ended with decisions that shook the
foundations of that critical work. The Security Council
long ago declared null and void, through resolutions
476 (1980) and 478 (1980), the Israeli occupation of
the State of Palestine, the annexation of the Holy
City of Jerusalem, the moving of the Israeli capital to
Jerusalem and the decision by any country to recognize
Jerusalem as its capital or to move its embassy to the
holy land. Yet we seem not to be able to reach consensus
in the Council on a matter previously agreed to, which
enjoys nearly universal support. That is an unfortunate
situation for the Council's effectiveness and legitimacy.

The Maldives has always believed that an
independent State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as
its capital, established on the basis of the 1967 borders,

living side by side in peace and harmony with Israel, is
the best and only solution to the seven-decade conflict.
It is unacceptable that the occupation of Palestinian
lands continues in the twenty-first century. We call on
Israel to fully implement the decisions of the Council
and to respect the legal obligations under the Charter of
the United Nations. We urge the Security Council to do
more to address the continuing situation and to bring
lasting peace to the people of Palestine.

We are encouraged that the Secretary-General has
identified the seven-year-long situation in Syria as one
of his priority areas for 2018. Since the start of the
conflict, hundreds and thousands of people have been
killed or driven out of their homes. Homes, livelihoods,
hospitals, schools and basic infrastructure have been
reduced to rubble. Fear and uncertainty have manifested
themselves in the hearts ofthe Syrian people. While we
recognize the progress being made in finding an end
to the conflict, with the congress of all Syrian parties
expected to be convened at the end of this month, much
more remains to be done. Those small seeds of hope
that we planted last year must grow tall and healthy.

Hope must also be cultivated in the hearts of our
brothers and sisters in Yemen, who are suffering the
worst famine in years, and in Libya, where Violence
still prevails. Peace is a prerequisite and a consequence
of development, and we must do our part in finding
constructive and lasting solutions in those countries.

The threat of terrorism and violent extremism
continues to grow. Terrorists do not pay heed to borders.
They do not distinguish between the young and the old
or between women and men and do not respect any
religion or culture. We can beat them only by being
better and smarter and by countering violence with
hope, misinformation with truth and ignorance with
enlightenment. That is why we need to pay much more
attention to the enabling factors, while cooperating
across borders and sharing information and strategies
on how to address the root causes in a meaningful and
sustainable way.

We need to work together with the countries
concerned and the people affected to find meaningful
solutions to the many situations of violence and
instability in the Middle East. At the same time, we need
to focus on sustaining peace and maintaining stability
and security so that conflict does not erupt again.

We believe that a key approach would be to focus on
State-building in our peacekeeping and peacebuilding
efforts. State failure has the potential to derail any peace
process. If we take stock of the variety of conflicts
before us, it is clear that there is a clear need for the
strengthening of State institutions to address conflict
and to sustain peace - whether by strengthening the
capacity of State institutions themselves to ensure
meaningful checks and balances, by eradicating
poverty and promoting sustainable development or
by addressing other determinants of conflict, such as
the dearth of resources or exposure to natural or man-
made risks. In order to do so, the Security Council, in
considering approaches to conflict resolution, ought to
look at the wide plethora of tools available across the
United Nations system, and not just military options.
That would enable not only a more holistic approach to
conflict resolution, but also a more lasting one. It would
also, in many cases, ensure a more organized approach
rather than a top-down one.
The Security Council always has our support in
crafting lasting solutions to the many conflicts that
face our world, especially in Palestine and the Middle
East - a region with which we share many cultural,
religious and historic ties. The Maldives will remain a
partner to be counted on as we find shared solutions for
our shared destiny.

