Mr. van Walsum (Netherlands): My delegation,
too, is grateful to Ambassador Holbrooke for his
presentation of the mission's report, and I personally
share his enthusiasm about the effective functioning of
the mission. It has pointed out by other speakers that
his style of leadership was largely responsible for that.

I heard Ambassador Holbrooke describe the
mission as "three members from Africa, three from the
European Union and one from the United States".
There are, of course, other ways of looking at this; last
Friday, I described the mission as "three from Africa,
three from the P-5 and one from the Netherlands".

It is easy to find arguments for not going into the
Congo. At a time when United Nations peacekeepers
are taken hostage by rebels at one end of Africa, and a
Security Council mission fails to prevent the outbreak
of a full-scale war at the other end, the idea of
deploying another peace operation in the heart of that
troubled continent can easily be depicted as a hare-
brained plan. The arguments against such an operation
are valid and should be taken seriously. It is, in fact,
somewhat disconcerting that so few of them have been
heard in this morning's debate.

But, in the end, my delegation believes that all
these arguments are overruled by the more compelling
argument that the United Nations cannot afford simply
to leave the Democratic Republic of the Congo to its
fate. That country is one of the largest and potentially
one of the wealthiest countries in Africa and lies in the
very centre of the continent. The presence within its
borders of the armies, invited or uninvited, of five
other African countries evidently affects its national
sovereignty and territorial integrity. Obviously, in such
a huge country the deployment of 500 observers
protected by 5,000 troops would indeed be a hare-
brained operation if we were dealing with a fierce and
bitter war between the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and its Southern African Development
Community (SADC) allies on the one hand, and
Rwanda and Uganda on the other, and if the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo II (MONUC II) was devised as
an inter-position force. But that is not the case. The
most important conclusion drawn by our mission is that
all the forces want to disengage, and each of the five
Presidents consulted by us was unequivocal in his
appeal for a rapid deployment of MONUC II.

The argument that the Democratic Republic of
the Congo is too big and MONUC II too small has
clearly become less persuasive since the coming into
force on 14 April of the ceasefire cum disengagement
plan, which generally seems to be holding. A strip of
land even as narrow as 30 kilometres, running right
through the country, would be manageable from a
military observer mission's point of view. Such a
demarcation zone, however, should also serve as a
warning to the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
to the international community that disengagement
cannot be the end of our involvement. With MONUC II
we will not be able to put an end to all the bloodshed,
but our focus should be on the preservation of the
Congo's territorial integrity.

One of the first decisions of the Organization of
African Unity (OAU) was not to tamper with the
existing borders. This decision bespoke great wisdom
at the time, for what would have been more natural for
the newly independent African States than to want to
revise their borders, which had been arbitrarily drawn
by their former colonial masters. This is not just a
matter for Africa; the entire international community
has a duty to honour this African wisdom.

This is why disengagement is not enough but
must be followed by withdrawal. It was made very
clear to our mission that a solution to the problem of
the armed groups is a prerequisite condition for this
withdrawal. Without such a solution, we cannot simply
move the demarcation line to the eastern border and
call it MONUC III, and with it, such an operation will
not be necessary. This is why the Lusaka signatories
must find a common solution to the problem of the
armed groups.

If we focus too much on military solutions,
however, we tend to overlook another condition for
preserving the Congo's territorial integrity, and that is
the successful implementation of the inter-Congolese
dialogue. We fervently hope that no one in Kinshasa
may be tempted to believe that the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement is an a la carte menu that can also be
sampled without the dialogue. If we want to preserve
the territorial integrity of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, we need all the help from Kinshasa that we
can get.

In this connection, my delegation would like to
suggest that the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo have a fresh look at the
nationality question. We understand that in 1981 the
Zairean parliament repealed the 1972 nationality law,
thus stripping the Banya Rwanda and the Banya
Mulenge of their Zairean citizenship. To be sure, the
Banya Mulenge were of Rwandan descent, but their
forebears had migrated to South Kivu between the
sixteenth and eighteenth centuries. This is, of course, a
matter of domestic jurisdiction, and we are not
suggesting that the Security Council should get
involved in it. But we do want to point out that
stripping ethnic groups of their nationality on account
of their kinship with an ethnic group in a neighbouring
country cannot be reconciled with the African doctrine
of inviolate borders. Inviolate borders imply inviolate
citizenship for all ethnic groups living within these
borders.

This is just one instance of the many measures
that can be taken to improve Lusaka's chances. The
mission's report states that the Secretary-General's
decision on deployment will be complex. We believe it
can be made less complex by all of us.

