Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
thank Assistant Secretary-General Fernandez-Taranco
for his sober and realistic briefing this morning.

Peace in the Middle East is a key objective of the
United Kingdom, the European Union and the
international community as a whole. We want to see an
end to suffering on both sides, but it is also crucial
because it resonates around the world and often stands
as a symbol of the international community's failure to
act, feeding resentment, fostering hatred and
encouraging extremists.

Over a year after the Gaza conflict, meaningful
peace negotiations must restart as soon as possible if
hope is to take the place of continued frustration. We
continue to fully support the efforts of the United
States Administration, and especially Senator George
Mitchell, to bring the parties to the negotiating table.
We hope that his current efforts will lead to early
progress. Recent tensions in and around Jerusalem only
remind us of the consequences of failure, and we call
on all parties to refrain from unilateral actions which
prejudice long-term agreed solutions.

The alternative to progress is not the status quo; it
is further deterioration and violence. The parties should
recognize that a comprehensive peace can be achieved
only through meaningful negotiations, and take all the
steps necessary to enter into those negotiations. The
United States is not and should not be alone in this
task. The other members of the Quartet are also playing
an important role. The European Union stands ready to
contribute both politically and practically to a final
settlement. Active Arab engagement, building on the
important Arab Peace Initiative, can play a crucial role
in creating an atmosphere in the region that is
conducive to peace.

Both Israel and the Palestinians must redouble
their efforts and avoid a hardening of positions and
provocative actions. The parameters of peace are well-
known: two States with an independent, democratic,
contiguous and viable Palestinian State based on 1967
borders, living side by side in peace and security with
the State of Israel, Jerusalem as the capital for both
States, and a just settlement for refugees. Such an

agreement is the only sustainable way to meet the
national aspirations of the two peoples. If a lasting
peace is to be achieved, a way must be found for
Jerusalem to be shared as the capital of both States.

With this in mind, and while we recognize the
recent moratorium on some building in West Bank
settlements, we remain extremely concerned by
announcements last month by the Israeli authorities of
plans for further settlement expansion in East
Jerusalem. These settlements are illegal. They prejudge
negotiations and are counterproductive as far as
Israel's security is concerned and are therefore an
obstacle to peace. We call on Israel to stop creating
new facts on the ground, which can only make a
negotiated peace deal harder to achieve.

As for the Palestinians, a well-functioning State
is an essential element of any future settlement.
Therefore we support the ambitious two-year plan to
develop the institutions of a Palestinian State and to
prepare for statehood. The United Kingdom will
continue to provide strong political and financial
support for those efforts, which are delivering real
change on the streets of West Bank towns. We
encourage others to do the same. The prospects for
statehood are undermined by divided Palestinian
leadership, so we urge Hamas to unite behind the
legitimate Palestinian Authority.

In Gaza, the outlook is dire. We remain deeply
concerned by the humanitarian situation there.
Although, as Mr. Fernandez-Taranco has reported,
there has been a slight easing of restrictions on certain
goods - notably glass - continued restrictions are
having a damaging impact on the lives of people in
Gaza. The United Kingdom is providing practical
support to alleviate their humanitarian suffering, but
there can be no real improvement as long as there
remain restrictions on the flow into Gaza of materials
essential for reconstruction.
We have heard here today that there has yet to be
a satisfactory Israeli response to the United Nations
attempts to restart long-standing reconstruction
proposals. We urge Israel to remove restrictions on the
import of humanitarian aid and reconstruction
materials, as required by Security Council resolution
1860 (2009), which this Council adopted over a year
ago. Failure to do so merely encourages increased
traffic through the tunnels, provides funding to Hamas,
makes the task of detecting and curbing the flow of
weapons more difficult and generates greater anger,
resentment and, ultimately, radicalization of Gazans.
The combination of a more radical population and an
increased likelihood of an inflow of illicit weapons will
inevitably lead to violence. We believe it is in Israel's
own security interests to ease these restrictions.

But Hamas also bears a heavy responsibility for
the situation of innocent Gazans. Hamas must release
Gilad Shalit immediately and renounce once and for all
its use of violence. That includes an immediate end to
indiscriminate and - as the Assistant Secretary-
General has said - increasing rocket attacks that
threaten the people of southern Israel, as well as the
means by which those rockets are supplied.

As we have stated before, achieving peace in the
Middle East is a difficult and daunting task, but there
exists right now a precious opportunity to secure that
peace. The United States Administration is actively
pursuing a settlement. There is broad international
convergence on the parameters of a settlement, and the
two leaders claim to want a negotiated settlement. We
understand the pressures of domestic politics on both
sides, which can lead to entrenched positions and make
resuming and finalizing negotiations difficult. But the
current favourable international context will not last
forever, and the alternative to a two-State solution is
continuing conflict and suffering. Now is the time for
leaders on both sides to rise above domestic politics
and make the difficult choices, sacrifices and
compromises that are required to secure an historic
peace agreement.

