Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): Iwould like to start
by thanking Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs, and Mr. Geir
Pedersen, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Syria, for their insightful briefings this morning.

South Africa continues to express its deep concern
about the many civilians, in particular women and
children, who have lost their lives, sustained severe
injuries and been displaced due to the recent upsurge
of violence in north-west Syria. We have grave
concerns over the widespread destruction of civilian
infrastructure and basic services, with schools, health
facilities, markets, water stations and residential areas
destroyed in the fighting.

We also express concern that a number of aid
agencies have suspended their operations due to increase
in violence. The large numbers of people fleeing the
area add to the already overburdened humanitarian
response. We continue to urge all parties to respect
their obligations under international humanitarian law
and international human rights law with regard to the
protection of civilians and civilian infrastructure. It is
also important that the signatories of the September
2018 ceasefire memorandum adhere to its provisions.

South Africa reiterate that, while we acknowledge
the threat and violence committed by terrorist
organizations, it is also necessary that all actions taken
to counter terrorism activities not be undertaken at the
expense of innocent civilian lives and that any other
such actions be taken only within the parameters of
international law. We express support for the opening
of a peace corridor in northern Syria in an effort to
establish a safe zone in the region and to facilitate the
repatriation of Syrian refugees through such corridors.

We continue to call for the immediate cessation of
hostilities between the parties engaged in the conflict.
We wish to re-emphasize that the situation in Syria can
be resolved only through negotiation and dialogue in
a Syrian-owned and Syrian-led process supported by
the United Nations. We therefore call on all parties to
exert every effort towards the full implementation of
resolution 2254 (2015) to further avoid the displacement
of Syrians and loss of innocent lives. We recognize the
role of the Astana process in trying to find a solution
to the situation in Syria. Furthermore, we call for the
early convening of the constitutional committee and
thank the Special Envoy for his hard work in that
regard. To ensure its legitimacy, the committee should
be inclusive and representative of all Syrian actors.
Without a political process, the humanitarian situation
will further deteriorate, leading to more destruction
and deaths.

In conclusion, we further call for respect for the
territorial integrity and sovereignty of Syria by all
States Members of the United Nations.

