Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I would like to convey my appreciation
for the briefings by Special Envoy Martin Griffiths,
Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Virginia
Gamba, as well as Ms. Muna Luqman's statement.
China commends the efforts of the United Nations
and the relevant humanitarian agencies to advance the
political process and ease the humanitarian situation
in Yemen.

At present, the ceasefire is generally holding
in Al-Hudaydah and surrounding areas, but the
security situation is fragile and there has been limited
progress in the implementation of the agreements.
The conflict in Yemen has been going on for many
years, and the security landscape gives us no cause
for optimism. The humanitarian situation is dire, and
the country is confronted with multiple economic and
social challenges. However, the desire remains for all
the Yemeni parties to promote the implementation of
the agreements in search of a political solution. The
United Nations mediation efforts have not let up for
one moment, thereby achieving a measure of success
over the past several months. It is incumbent upon the
international community to remain seized of the issue
of Yemen with greater input. Continued patience is
needed, and we must not lose confidence. In China's
View, work should be focused on the following areas on
the path ahead.

First, we must continue to push for the
implementation of the Stockholm Agreement, which
did not come about easily. It is an important starting
point for Yemen's journey from conflict to peace. The
Yemeni parties must implement it in earnest. With
regard to the issue of redeployment in particular, they
should step up cooperation with the United Nations,
resolve differences through dialogue and operationalize
concrete arrangements. Consultations should continue
on prisoner exchanges and the issue of Taiz, and efforts
should be made to reach a workable arrangement as soon
as possible, while continuously enhancing mutual trust.
The process of deploying the United Nations Mission to
Support the Al-Hudaydah agreement in Yemen should
continue, with guarantees for the safety and security of
United Nations personnel to support and supervise the
implementation of the agreements.

Secondly, the Yemeni parties must be encouraged to
maintain effective political dialogue and negotiations.
The various parties in Yemen are currently sharply
divided. The foundation for establishing mutual trust
remains far from solid. The road ahead leading towards
a political settlement remains long. In the long-term,
resuming political peace talks remains imperative to
finding a holistic solution to the issue of Yemen. The
United Nations should continue to work as the main
mediator. The Security Council should remain united,
fully consider and respect the views of the countries
concerned and of those in the region, continue to
provide political support for dialogue and negotiations
among the Yemeni parties and urge the countries of
the region to maintain their constructive assistance to
that end.

Thirdly, robust efforts must be made to alleviate
the humanitarian situation in Yemen. The international
community should increase humanitarian assistance
to Yemen, honour its pledges and provide targeted
financial and in-kind support, including food and
medicine, to help the country respond to famine, the
cholera outbreak, displacement and other challenges.
The work of the United Nations humanitarian agencies
on the ground should be supported with humanitarian
access, while ensuring the safety of humanitarian
workers. The humanitarian needs of women, children
and other vulnerable groups should figure prominently
on the agenda, and support should be provided to
Yemen to improve its economy so that it can meet the
basic needs of its people.

The Committee established pursuant to resolution
2140 (2014) recently visited countries in the region to
engage meaningfully with the countries concerned.
That was a positive exercise that helped deepen our
understanding of the positions of the various parties
and aligned the 2140 Committee's agenda with the
overarching goal of a political settlement of the Yemeni
issue. China was represented on the Committee's
mission to support strengthened dialogue between
the Committee and the parties concerned. In order
to settle the Yemeni issue, there is no alternative to
a political solution. The parties concerned should
uphold Yemen's sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity, and support a broadly inclusive
political solution, to be achieved through dialogue and
negotiations, based on the relevant Security Council
resolutions, the Arab Gulf Cooperation Council
Initiative, its Implementation Mechanism and the
outcome of the comprehensive National Dialogue
Conference. The role of the international community is
to create a favourable environment in which the Yemeni
parties will be able to implement agreements and reach
a political solution.

