Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): Mr. President, I
would like to start by thanking you personally and the
Slovak presidency for inviting me, in my capacity as
Chairman of the Peacebuilding Commission, to address
the Council on this complex but very vital subject
concerning security sector reform. Considering that
security sector reform constitutes one of the key
ingredients of the post-conflict peacebuilding agenda,
this debate is obviously timely and of particular
importance to the Peacebuilding Commission, as it is
taking place at a moment when the newly established
body has embarked on concrete action-oriented efforts
in the field.

It is my hope that the proposals to be made today,
and those made by different forums outside and within
the United Nations on the subject, will enable the
Security Council to reach its objective regarding the
development of a comprehensive, coherent and
coordinated United Nations approach to security sector
reform.

As I have just stated, the security sector is
complex in terms of its composition as well as its
nature. It is complex in its composition, in that it
comprises a broad group of security actors, including
the armed forces, police, intelligence and security
services, security management and oversight bodies,
justice and law enforcement institutions and non-
statutory security forces, such as liberation armies,
guerrillas and militias. That group is extremely broad.
The security sector includes all those organizations that
have the authority to use, or to order the use of, force
or the threat of force to protect the State and its
citizens, as well as those civil structures that are
responsible for their management and oversight.

Given the complexity of the security sector, a
comprehensive and coordinate approach is required in
dealing with its problems, especially its reform. The
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno stated, while addressing the
Fourth Committee in October of last year, that
sustainable security sector reform required many
international actors, that United Nations peacekeepers
were only one of the elements in the picture and that
Member States, multilateral actors and international
financial institutions were equally crucial.

Although it is generally admitted that reform of
the security sector is a field in which the United
Nations still needs to develop capacities and
coordination, it is also important to note that this
Organization has accumulated valuable experience
through its Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and that the Security Council has dedicated particular
attention to this question. The debate in the General
Assembly on the report of the United Nations Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations and the
experience of the Economic and Social Council Ad
Hoc Working Groups on countries emerging from
conflicts have also produced valuable ideas on this
issue. United Nations agencies, programmes and
departments have also been involved in concrete
actions on the ground or have developed important
knowledge based on different aspects of the security
sector.
I am equally pleased at the attention devoted to
this question by Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon at the
very start of his mandate by calling on the Congolese

authorities to focus on security sector reform in his
recent visit to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
His presence here this morning is testimony to his
concern. It was also recognition of this fact that led
former Secretary-General Kofl Arman to decide in
2006 on the establishment of a Security Sector Reform
Working Group, incorporating the United Nations
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the United
Nations Development Programme, the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.
The task assigned to the Working Group was to
produce a policy outlining options for United Nations
engagement in security sector reform within the
context of peacebuilding efforts. The Working Group's
composition is a clear recognition of the fact that no
body of the United Nations can deal on its own with
this question.

I particularly salute the role played by the
Security Council, as well as the visibility given to this
important issue, particularly as concerns post-conflict
situations. It is, therefore, my conviction that this
Council will take advantage of the work done by other
United Nations bodies on this question. Success in
security sector reform is the key to success in any post-
conflict situation.

The work of the working group on security sector
reform could, therefore, constitute one of the examples
upon which we could build in our reflection today. On
the other hand, the United Nations approach in the
field of security sector reform should fully take into
account the reform of the Organization currently under
way, including the establishment of the Peacebuilding
Commission, which constitutes an important
framework for the same purpose. Recognizing that
effective peacebuilding requires meticulous reform of
the security sector, the Peacebuilding Commission, in
coordination with the Governments concerned, has
spared no effort to address this question pertaining to
the countries on its agenda - namely, Burundi and
Sierra Leone - taking into account the specificities of
each case. In Sierra Leone, Peacebuilding Commission
members agreed on the need to continue the ongoing
national efforts in the fields of justice and security
sector reform, to strengthen the justice system and the
fair administration of justice and to promote further
sustained reform of the security sector, including the
police and army.

With regard to strengthening of the rule of law
and the security sector in Burundi, Peacebuilding
Commission members have agreed on the centrality of
national efforts to strengthen the rule of law in
consolidating peace, as well as the importance of
completing disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, with particular emphasis on effective
reintegration programmes and reform of the security
sector.

We are, therefore, faced with a challenging task.
However, implementing security sector reform in post-
conflict situations is only possible provided there is
adequate support from the international community
accompanied by responsible national ownership. This
is a worthwhile investment by the international
community. Recent experience in Haiti, Timor Leste,
Guinea-Bissau and other countries has clearly
demonstrated that, unless there is a sustainable and
long-term engagement by the international community,
there can be total disruption of fragile peace
arrangements, representing a serious setback to
international peace, which keeps the countries
concerned on the agenda of this Council.

All of these lessons should contribute to our
discussion today. The experience accumulated by
regional organizations on their own and through
cooperation between these organizations and the
United Nations on security sector reform in post-
conflict situations clearly points to the need for
strengthening relations between regional organizations
and the United Nations system. I trust that the
Peacebuilding Commission will be a forum serving as
a framework for this discussion, thus enriching the
debate and the search for solutions to post-conflict
situations.

I wish to conclude with a word of thanks to the
Slovak presidency for having included this theme on
the Council's agenda this month. I trust that today's
deliberations will not only help to highlight the
importance of the topic of security sector reform for
the international community, but also, and in particular,
contribute to the search for solutions and to sustained
engagement by the international community.

