Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I
should like to express our deep thanks and gratitude to
you - my friend, Foreign Minister Bernard Kouchner -
and your friendly country for the efforts that you have
undertaken. I would like to say that we are truly and
completely satisfied and reassured that the Council has
finally succeeded in adopting this resolution.

President Mubarak initiated steps by assuming
Egypt's historical responsibilities towards the
Palestinian question and by offering a comprehensive
road map three days ago to settle the situation in Gaza.
Today's resolution welcomes that initiative, which was
submitted at Sharm El-Sheikh in the presence of the
French President, Mr. Sarkozy. President Mubarak
personally welcomes the resolution that we have
adopted today. We believe that it offers significant and
crucial support for the Egyptian effort. The people of
Egypt and other Arab peoples, who are closely
following today's important development hope that the
Council will ensure the immediate implementation of
the resolution in order to avoid further bloodshed and
the killing of innocent civilians.

In thanking the Council and its members, we
would particularly like to thank His Excellency the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the United Kingdom
and Government and delegation, who worked tirelessly
and sincerely with us from the very beginning and
provided a proposal that constituted the basis on which
we reached the resolution that we have adopted
tonight.

Egypt, which is mentioned twice in the
resolution, assures the Council that it will spare no
effort, working with all the sincerity that our brothers,
the Palestinians, and the international community have
witnessed in our dealings with all parties to restore
calm and to provide the necessary environment for the
peace process to continue, so as to establish a
Palestinian State with Jerusalem as its capital, as it
makes every possible effort to restore the unity of the
Palestinian people and to achieve Palestinian national
reconciliation. I wish to underscore that all
Palestinians, for all their political differences, are part
of the same intrinsic whole. They have one cause, one
just cause, and Egypt will make every effort to bridge
the gaps between them so as to achieve the supreme
Palestinian interest.

Finally, let us establish an immediate ceasefire
and Israeli withdrawal from Gaza. Let us alleviate the
suffering of the people of Gaza, put an end to the
blockade and implement the resolution as soon as
possible, in such a way as to restore the iahdiya to the
Gaza Strip and open the way for the reconciliation that
we began to work for a month ago.
09-20414
