Mr. La Yifan (China) (spoke in Chinese): We
wish to thank Ambassador Mayr-Harting, Ambassador
Lacroix and Ambassador Urbina for their briefings on,
respectively, the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) (the 1267 Committee), the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC)
and Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) (the 1540 Committee). We express our
appreciation to them and their teams for their effective
work.
Under the chairmanship of Ambassador Mayr-
Harting, the 1267 Committee has updated its guidelines
in accordance with the relevant provision of resolution
1822 (2008). At present, the review of all the
information on the sanctions list is being carried out in
an orderly fashion. That review is helpful in making
the sanctions regime more effective and fair, so as to
help alleviate the concern that some countries have
with regard to the Committee's procedural aspects.

In order to uphold the authority and status of the
Committee, it is necessary to have the support of each
and every Member State. We encourage all the Member
States to provide the Committee with information that
is as detailed as possible so as to help with the review.
In addition, in order to make the sanctions regime more
targeted, we support the Committee's continued
improvement of its listing and delisting procedures so
as to make the sanctions list a truly live document.

The CTC, with the assistance of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED),
has endeavoured to improve its working methods,
based on efficiency and consistency in its work, and
has achieved visible results in areas such as
Preliminary Implementation Assessment (PIA)
consideration, visits to countries and technical
assistance. China expresses its appreciation in this
regard.

At present, one important task facing the CTC is
that of carrying out a new round of PIA consideration.
That work is of great significance in terms of
promoting implementation of resolution 1373 (2001).
We hope that the CTC, in the process of PIA
consideration, will strengthen its dialogue with
Member States and help them overcome difficulties in
implementing that resolution. We also encourage
Member States to provide, in a timely manner, all the
necessary information to the CTC and CTED so as to
make the Committee's work more reflective of the real
needs of Member States.

In the most recent period, the 1540 Committee
has carried out a series of activities in areas such as
formulating its programme of work, considering
implementation reports from Member States and
outreach and international assistance. It has played an
important role in bringing about comprehensive and
effective implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
China expresses its appreciation in this regard. In the
next period, in accordance with resolutions 1540
(2004) and 1810 (2008), the Committee should
comprehensively and in a fair and balanced manner
continue to promote the achievement of the various
goals listed in its programme of work.

China attaches great importance to the role of the
1540 Committee and has always actively and
constructively participated in its activities. We are
ready to continue to support the Committee's work and
to play our role in bringing about a comprehensive,
balanced implementation of resolution 1540 (2004),
solidifying the non-proliferation consensus and
advancing the cause of international non-proliferation
cooperation.

In the past few months, despite unrelenting
worldwide efforts in the counter-terrorism field, global
terrorist activities have continued unabated. Terrorism
has continued to be a serious threat to international
peace and security. In our View, the Security Council
counter-terrorism mechanism, with the three subsidiary
committees as the backbone, is an important
component of the United Nations counter-terrorism
regime. The results produced by the Council have
made great contributions to the international counter-
terrorist effort. At present, under the grave situation of
counter-terrorism worldwide, China considers that the
Council's counter-terrorism mechanism should
continue to play its due role and to demonstrate to the
international community its resolute determination to
combat terrorism and to increase the effectiveness of
international counter-terrorism cooperation.

China has noted that the three committees have
made further progress in strengthening their
cooperation. We hope they and their experts will
continue to consolidate their resources and efficiency.
We hope that in their work they will pay more attention
to the counter-terrorism requests of developing
countries and heed their views in this process.

The United Nations counter-terrorism strategy is
among the most important counter-terrorism
resolutions of the United Nations. China supports the
participation of the three committees, within the scope
of their respective mandates, in relevant activities of
the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force
(CTITF) and their facilitation of comprehensive and
balanced implementation of the global counter-
terrorism strategy. They should make sure that the
activities carried out by the Council are complementary
and are coordinated with those of the General
Assembly so as to uphold the central role of the United
Nations in the global counter-terrorism cooperation.

