Mr. Skoog (Sweden): Let me begin by thanking the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Jean
Arnault, for his briefing this morning, and assure him
that we continue to support his efforts and the work of
the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia.

(spoke in Spanish)

I would also like to welcome the presence of the
Vice-President of Colombia, Mr. Oscar Naranjo, with
us here today. I thank him for his personal dedication
and the key role he has played and continues to play for
peace in Colombia.

(spoke in English)

Over a year has now passed since the Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable
and Lasting Peace was ratified by the Government and
the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia
(FARC) and the conflict came to an end. However,
ensuring that peace is sustained requires a continuous
effort. We commend the political courage and strong
commitment to peace of both parties, and their efforts
to overcome challenges in the implementation of the
Peace Agreement. Last year saw the successful laying
down of arms and the conversion of the FARC-Ejercito
del Pueblo into a political party. These were truly
historic achievements. The security and reintegration
of former combatants will mark the next milestone in
the journey to consolidate a sustainable peace.

The increasing number of incidents of intimidation,
reprisals and killings of human rights defenders,
community leaders, FARC members and their families
continues to be worrisome and underscores the need
for the State to fill the power vacuum and safeguard the
rule of law. We welcome the updated stabilization plan
as one measure to address that, and look forward to its
speedy implementation.

A redoubled and sustained effort is now needed
on the part of all parts of the State, in support of the
wider Peace Agreement, including comprehensive
rural reform, so that it can rapidly deliver tangible
peace dividends for all Colombians. The development
of a national reintegration plan would be key in that
regard by providing a renewed impetus and ensuring
coherence among all actors and initiatives. At this
critical time in the implementation of the agreement, the
United Nations and Colombia's international partners
must lend our full support to the parties, and engage
proactively to assist them in reaching their goals.

We would also like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the work
of the Mission on the inclusion and participation of
women. We welcome the gender-sensitive analysis in
the Secretary-General's report (S/2017/lll7). Women's
meaningful involvement in the ongoing reconciliation
and peacebuilding efforts is essential to attaining
long-term peace and stability. In that regard, we see
Colombia as serving as a model.

Finally, we note the positive impact on the
humanitarian situation of the temporary ceasefire
between the Government and the Ejercito de Liberacien
Nacional (ELN). We regret that the ELN has resumed
attacks and urge it to renew its ceasefire commitment
as soon as possible, and we reiterate that the United
Nations and the Security Council must stand ready
to assist the parties in monitoring a new agreement.
Sweden, as a member of the Grupo de paises de
apoyo, acompafiamiento y cooperacio'n a la Mesa de
conversaciones, will assist the process as much as it can.

The Colombian Peace Agreement represents the
culmination of an historic process, which brought more
than 50 years of conflict and violence to an end. It shows
that through political courage and leadership, through
dialogue and diplomacy and with supportive regional
involvement, even the most entrenched conflicts can
be brought to an end, setting an irreversible course
for peace. The agreement also acts as a basis for the
wider economic and social reforms that will benefit
the entire country and all Colombians. It is a visionary
ambition and it seems in line with the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and how it connects to the
sustaining peace agenda. By remaining committed to
the peace agreement, the parties are keeping faith with
the hopes and aspirations of the Colombian people for
the future of their country. It also bridges divisions
inside the country. We must therefore continue to do all
we can to support them.

Finally, I would like to say to my dear friend,
Matthew Rycroft, how much we will miss him. We
appreciate his contribution to this dossier, but also his
efforts on so many other issues that the Council has
been dealing with. We wish him all the best in his
future endeavours.

