Mr. Momem (Bangladesh): My delegation
commends the Japanese presidency for having
organized this timely debate on post-conflict
peacebuilding. I thank the Secretary-General for his
comments earlier in the day. I also thank the Ministers
of Japan, Afghanistan, Sierra Leone, Timor-Leste and
Bosnia and Herzegovina, who participated in the
debate today.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement (NAM).

The General Assembly is the main deliberative
body of the United Nations, composed of
representatives of all Member States, and is entrusted
with the responsibility of addressing important
questions relating to peace and security, among other
significant matters. The Non-Aligned Movement
hereby reiterates the crucial relevance of the General
Assembly, while having regard for the powers and
responsibilities of other organs in the fulfilment of
their respective obligations.

This debate takes place against the backdrop of a
major review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture, which is being conducted under the
auspices of the General Assembly, as stipulated in
resolution 60/180. The Movement seeks to reassure
itself that the discussion in this Council is aimed at
augmenting the efforts for a successful completion of
that process.

It is the view of NAM. that the potential inherent
in the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) as an advisory
body is far from being fully utilized. We should engage
ourselves in defining how the PBC can capitalize on its
current composition, in accordance with operative
paragraph 4 of resolution 60/180, so as to draw on the
competitive advantages and expertise of the diverse
representation of the general membership in the
Organizational Committee, in particular the
representation of the United Nations Charter bodies.

The Non-Aligned Movement places significant
value on the PBC, particularly its role in support of the
national ownership - I repeat, national ownership -
of post-conflict peacebuilding priority planning and
initiatives. There is concurrence and broad consensus
within the Commission that economic reconstruction
and rehabilitation and job creation should be at the
forefront of all efforts aimed at sustaining peace,
initiating development and promoting post-conflict
recovery.

Like any new and fledgling apparatus, the PBC
has experienced difficulties in accomplishing its given
mandate. Despite many challenges, the PBC has made
good progress in addressing the challenges of the four
countries on its agenda. I would like to highlight the
following important issues that my group believes need
to be addressed to strengthen the ability of the PBC to
contribute actively to the efforts for post-conflict
peacebuilding.

First, the General Assembly, the Security Council
and the Economic and Social Council should fully
utilize the ongoing 2010 review to realize the potential
inherent in the PBC as an advisory body to achieve its
ultimate goal of preventing countries from relapsing
into conflict.

Secondly, NAM. highlights the need to clearly
define how the PBC can ensure a successful
peacebuilding strategy through a better coordination
among all actors - including the international
financial institutions, the United Nations agencies,
funds and programmes, the private sector and civil
society organizations that are operating on the
ground - in order to maximize synergies in the
peacebuilding process. In this regard, NAM. stresses
that, in crafting peacekeeping mandates, the Council
should clearly define the role of peacekeeping
operations in the peacebuilding process.

Thirdly, NAM. strongly emphasizes the
importance of partnerships and early investments to
economic recovery and development in the
peacebuilding process and in the sustenance of peace.
The international community must ensure from the
very beginning a coherent and predictable deployment
of resources in countries emerging from conflict. NAM
stresses that that there can be no lasting peace without
development, and no sustainable development without
stability.

Fourthly, NAM. reiterates that it is of the utmost
importance that the gender perspective be reflected as
an essential element in the peacebuilding process.

Fifthly, the PBC should continue to work in
cooperation with national or transitional authorities in
full conformity with the principle of national
ownership.
Finally, the PBC needs to develop a more
dynamic relationship with the Secretary-General with a
view to providing effective guidance to the
peacebuilding efforts of the United Nations. In this
respect, it is imperative to strengthen the capacity of
the Peacebuilding Support Office with a view to
promoting more integrated and strategic United
Nations responses in post-conflict countries, keeping in
mind the need for better support to peacebuilding
activities on the ground.

Looking ahead, the Non-Aligned Movement is
convinced that the upcoming debate in the review
process will undoubtedly contribute to strengthening
the PBC in addressing critical peacebuilding needs.
The Non-Aligned Movement believes that the debate in
this Council will, of course, add value in gaining
further momentum for the subsequent discussions on
the 2010 review of the PBC now taking place in the
General Assembly.

In closing, we should not lose sight of the urgent
need to provide necessary support to the PBC with a
view to fulfilling its mandate. A failure to do so will
cast shadows in the minds of those who need our
attention the most - the people who are suffering from
the curse of conflict. We cannot and should not bypass,
in the name of the scale and complexity of
peacebuilding needs, the critical role that the PBC can
play in bringing lasting peace and sustainable
development to post-conflict countries.

