Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I would first like to express our appreciation
to you, Sir, as President of the Security Council, to
my colleagues on the Council and to everyone in this
Chamber today for the tribute to the memory of Vitaly
Ivanovich Churkin, the late Permanent Representative
of Russia, exactly a year since he was unexpectedly and
untimely taken from us. I thank you.

I would also like to express our sorrow and
sympathy at the passing yesterday of our dear
friend and colleague Mr. Necton Mhura, Permanent
Representative of Malawi.

We are pleased to welcome Mr. Mahmoud Abbas,
President of the State of Palestine, to the Council
Chamber. We believe that the participation of the
leader of Palestine in today's meeting is important to
an understanding of the current situation in the Middle
East. We thank Mr. Mladenov for his informative
report on the situation regarding the settlement of the
Palestinian-Israeli situation.

The long-suffering region of the Middle East
is being ripped apart by violent conflicts, in Syria,
Yemen and Libya, all of them in themselves deeply
critical. But it would be deluded to think that the
Palestinian problem has now taken a back seat and an
even greater mistake to put it there on purpose. Even
today it is still the epicentre ofthe chronic instability in
the Middle East. The situation in the area has recently
deteriorated. In the absence of full-fledged political
negotiations between the Palestinians and Israelis, the
notorious recent decisions regarding Jerusalem have
not only inflamed emotions and pushed the situation
into another destabilizing cycle, they have intensified
people's desperation. There have been demonstrations
in the West Bank and Gaza and angry statements from
the Palestinian leadership and the capitals of the Arab-
Muslim world, all of which only confirm the sensitive
significance of the problem of Jerusalem, the cradle of
three monotheistic religions.

We believe that increasing the pace of Israeli
settlement activity will undermine the prospects for
achieving a two-State solution and that the policy should
be ended. Ensuring the ability of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East to do its work effectively is absolutely
critical. We must never let the Palestinians find
themselves in circumstances where they have nothing
to lose, practically speaking, a situation that would fuel
radicalism and has the potential to blow up the situation
in the Palestinian territories and the entire region.
Russia contributes regularly to the Agency's budget as
well as giving the Palestinians bilateral assistance.

It bears repeating that the current status quo in this
protracted conflict is incapable of producing a reliable,
lasting and viable outcome. Only a settlement based
on a two-State formula, presupposing the peaceful and
secure coexistence of two States, Palestine and Israel,
will enable the crisis to be overcome and create the
conditions for sustainable development and a road to
peace. As the situation evolves, Russia will continue
its efforts to maintain the architecture of the Middle
East settlement and to lead the political process
out of its current depressed state. The priority task
right now is achieving an immediate resumption of
direct Palestinian-Israeli negotiations on a generally
recognized international legal basis, including the
relevant Security Council resolutions and the Arab
Peace Initiative.

We firmly believe that the Middle East Quartet still
has the full potential to be a unique mediation format,
approved by the Council's resolutions. There should
be no question that the group of four mediators, in
collaboration with the League of Arab States, is capable
of playing a role in unfreezing the political dialogue.
The work of the Quartet, particularly its report of
June 2016, has not lost its relevance. Implementing
the report's recommendations will help to strengthen
confidence-building measures between the parties. It
discusses what to do about the settlement activity, the
persistent provocative rhetoric and violence from both
sides and other factors, as well as the imperative of
ensuring that the Palestinians achieve genuine national
unity based on the political platform of the Palestine
Liberation Organization. We support activating this
mechanism and its regular and thorough collaboration
with the League of Arab States and all the regional
and global stakeholders that are capable of helping to
overcome the dangerous impasse in the Palestinian-
Israeli settlement. We particularly welcome Egypt and
Jordan's efforts in that regard. Our Egyptian partners'
mission to unite the Palestinians' ranks continues to
be vital.

Getting new developments with regard to the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict requires considering how the
international community will support the process so as
to create the conditions for direct negotiations between
Palestine and Israel. A direct dialogue on settling all
final-status issues is a given in the Middle East peace
process equation. We must focus on developing a
formula acceptable to both sides. We are ready to discuss
its parameters with all global and regional stakeholders.
As we all know, the last two weeks in Russia have seen
numerous contacts conducted at the highest level,
including visits by King Abdullah II of Jordan, Prime
Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and President Abbas.
We reaffirm our willingness to provide a platform in
Russia for a meeting of Palestinian and Israeli leaders,
without preconditions. We expect the proposal will
receive a positive response from both sides.

We would like to emphasize that achieving a
Palestinian-Israeli settlement, as with the resolution
of other regional problems, will require joint efforts
and collective and mutually respectful cooperation.
All efforts to lay blame, groundless accusations and
insulting rhetoric must be left behind, forever part of
the past. We must rather activate channels for dialogue
where we can discuss ways for resolving these difficult
problems. The measures for confidence-building and
security for the entire Middle East that we have long
proposed still remain on the agenda.

