Mr. Li Zhaoxing (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The assassination of Rafik Hariri last February was
indeed distressing. Today's ministerial meeting of the
Security Council has positive significance not only for
the search for the truth and for bringing the
perpetrators to justice, but also for preventing the
recurrence of similar incidents.

Over the past several months, the International
Independent Investigation Commission, led by Mr.
Mehlis, has done much work. China takes the questions
raised in the Commission's report (S/2005/662)
seriously. The Security Council is duty-bound to urge
the relevant parties to cooperate seriously and fully
with the Commission in accordance with Security
Council resolution 1595 (2005). We also hope that the
Commission will continue its investigation in an open
and impartial manner, obtain iron-clad evidence and
bring the truth to light as soon as possible, so as to
bring justice to the Victims and safeguard the authority
of the Security Council.

It is precisely on the basis of that consideration
that China believed it necessary for the Security
Council to adopt a resolution urging the relevant
parties to strengthen their cooperation with the
Commission, with a View to sending an unequivocal
signal to the international community.

China always maintains that no arbitrary use or
threat of sanctions should be allowed in international
relations. The use of sanctions can only be authorized
by the Security Council with prudence and in the light
of actual situations. The Mehlis report is still a
preliminary report, and the Commission itself also
believes that the investigation is yet to be completed
and that there is no final conclusion.

In such circumstances, it is inappropriate for the
Council to prejudge the outcome of the investigation or
threaten to impose sanctions. That will not contribute
to resolving this issue and will add new destabilizing
factors to the already complex situation in the Middle
East. This is a legitimate and reasonable concern of
China, Islamic countries and many other nations.

The current situation in the Middle East is
complicated by various intertwining factors. Last June,
I Visited a number of Middle Eastern countries,
including Lebanon and Syria. During that visit, I
profoundly sensed the wishes of the Governments of
those countries for peace, stability, good-
neighbourliness and friendship, as well as the
expectations of the peoples of those countries for a
tranquil, harmonious and happy life. Therefore, in
handling the relevant issues, the Security Council
should take into full consideration the unique and
complicated situation in the Middle East, and respect
the sovereignty of those countries and the will of their
peoples, so as to avoid causing new tensions and
turmoil in the region.

