First and foremost, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on the assumption by France of the presidency of the Security Council for June. I support your intensive work in managing the proceedings of the Security Council and wish you continued success. In two days' time, the world will mark the seventy-fifth anniversary of the signing of the Charter of the United Nations. On that occasion, States undertook to maintain international peace and security across the world, uphold justice, stand up to oppression and confront aggressors. At a time when Member States are preparing to mark the signing of the Charter of the United Nations, the Israeli occupation authorities are persisting with their provocative settlement policy in the occupied Palestinian territory. In so doing, they are showing total disdain for all international covenants, the four Geneva Conventions and the authoritative international resolutions, which outlaw settlement-building and prohibit the prejudice caused to civil and public rights and property when settlements are expanded or when those already in place are legalized. The attempts by Israel to annex more occupied Palestinian territory in the West Bank and the Jordan Valley constitute a grave violation of international law and the relevant resolutions of the Security Council. Such steps could eliminate any prospect of a lasting and comprehensive peace. Saudi Arabia categorically rejects all the futile and illegal policies, practices and plans enacted by Israel, such as the Israeli authorities' recent attempts to annex land in the West Bank, particularly in the Jordan Valley, and hence to create a new reality on the occupied land. Those actions will lead to a significant conflagration that will be difficult to contain. Saudi Arabia also rejects the attempts by Israel to institutionalize racial discrimination against the Palestinian people, obliterate its national identity, displace an entire people, revoke its right to its own land and holy places, and deprive it of the fundamental rights that it needs in order to live. Owing to those measures, Israel is the foremost violator of human rights in the world. Saudi Arabia will continue to defend the cause of Palestine and its people in its quest to exercise its legitimate and inalienable rights, which are guaranteed under international law. For my country, the main points of the Palestinian question remain the same: ending the occupation, establishing an independent Palestinian State, with Jerusalem as its capital, and guaranteeing the right of return of Palestine refugees. We emphasize the importance of a comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East, based on a strategic choice to end one of the longest and most intractable historic conflicts in modern times; the Arab Peace Initiative of 2002, which provides for the establishment of a Palestinian State within the borders of 4 June 1967, with Jerusalem as its capital; the return of the refugees; and an end to the occupation of all Arab lands, including the Syrian Arab Golan and Lebanese territory. The time has come for the international community and the Security Council to assume their responsibilities, come to the aid of the Palestinian people and champion its cause by seeing that justice is done and fulfilling its aspiration - indeed, its right under international resolutions - to build an independent State. It is time to confront decisively Israel's ongoing practices and violations of international law and the relevant Security Council resolutions, which show disdain for the will of the international community, undermine any prospect of peace, and extinguish any glimmer of hope for a lasting and comprehensive peace in a region that has long been plagued by instability. My country welcomes the removal of the coalition to support legitimacy in Yemen from the list, which is annexed to the report of the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict for 2020 (S/2020/525), of parties that have not put in place measures aimed at improving the protection of children. That step shows that the coalition has been able to formulate and follow a protocol for the protection children in armed conflict. It is also a testament to the coalition's commitment to protecting children, and to the value of the significant and ongoing measures taken by the coalition, in accordance with the international terms of reference, to protect children in the current conflict in Yemen. The coalition recognizes the importance of finding peaceful solutions to conflicts and supports every effort to do so. Accordingly, it has accepted the Secretary-General's recent call for a ceasefire in Yemen. My country has also backed the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire in the light of the coronavirus pandemic, not to mention the efforts of his Special Envoy for Yemen to press for a ceasefire. In view of the role of Saudi Arabia and the coalition States in resolving the Yemeni conflict, and your own considerable efforts to implement the Riyadh agreement, Sir, we commend the Yemeni Government and the Southern Transitional Council for responding to the coalition's appeal for a comprehensive ceasefire, de- escalation and the convening of a meeting in Saudi Arabia to move forward with implementation of the Riyadh agreement and restore normality. Such action would bring the Yemeni people together, heal its rifts and support its endeavour to recover its control of the State and restore security, stability, and territorial unity and integrity. My country has worked intensively to ensure that control of the Yemeni State returns to the Yemeni people. It has supported the efforts of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen to move the peace process towards a solution consistent with the three terms of reference, namely, the initiative of the Gulf Cooperation Council, the outcomes of the all-inclusive National Dialogue Conference and the relevant resolutions of the Security Council, particularly resolution 2216 (2015). However, the Iran-backed terrorist Houthi militias have thus far merely given further confirmation of their amoral stance. They have continuously carried out bare-faced terrorist attacks on civilians and civilian sites in Saudi Arabia. Most recently, they launched eight pilotless explosive aircraft and three ballistic missiles at civilians and civilian sites in Saudi Arabia, in a flagrant violation of international humanitarian law and customary norms. They have rejected all of the coalition's ceasefire and de- escalation initiatives. We call on the Security Council to assume its responsibility and take a decisive stand to put a stop to the Iran-backed terrorist Houthi militias' attacks on civilians and civilian sites in Saudi Arabia, and to compel them to engage genuinely with de-escalation efforts and refrain from hampering United Nations endeavours to reach a political solution to the conflict in Yemen, in accordance with the three terms of reference, and spare the Yemeni people any further suffering.
