Mr. Aslov (Tajikistan): At the outset, I would like
to congratulate Kazakhstan on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the first time,
and to thank the delegation for convening today's
ministerial-level debate on the very important topic
of building regional partnership in Afghanistan and
Central Asia as a model to link security and development.
I would also like to thank Secretary-General Antenio
Guterres for his very constructive briefing.

Central Asia and Afghanistan - once a foothold
of global political and economic development, a hub of
science, philosophy and intellectual life and a region
that bridged civilizations from Asia to Europe via
the Silk Road - have undergone significant changes
throughout their long history.

Today, the worsening situation in the Islamic
Republic of Afghanistan and the threats coming from
its territory are of particular concern. The military-
political situation in the bordering northern provinces of
the country has a steady tendency towards complication.
The expansion of international terrorism, the increase
in extremism, transnational organized crime and drug
trafficking and the exacerbation of environmental
issues such as climate change and desertification are
among the most pressing challenges faced by the region
today. That current situation requires that the countries
of the region take more robust action and make firm
commitments by facilitating regional cooperation and
partnerships based on a fair, effective and mutually
beneficial economic system.

Tajikistan, which shares a long border with
Afghanistan, bears the brunt of the security challenges
and cannot remain indifferent to the current situation
on that border. The activation of radical terrorist groups
such as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, the
Taliban, the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan, the
Ansarullah Movement and others in the northern
districts of the country against the backdrop of the
significant influx of narcotics, weapons and human
resources is a matter of great concern to us.

Another threat that has a significant impact on the
adoption of measures to ensure stability and security
in Tajikistan, Central Asia and beyond, and which
requires the joint effort of the international community,
is illicit drug trafficking. Combating drug trafficking
and drug abuse is part of the fight against organized
crime, international terrorism and extremism, and the
fight is carried out through implementation of foreign
policy and through economic, legal, organizational,
technical, operational, preventive and other measures.
Coordinated activities of the Central Asian States in
this sphere of common interests are carried out by their
special drug-control coordinating agencies.

The Republic of Tajikistan, like any other State
in the region around Afghanistan, bears the brunt
of the fight against drug trafficking. Thanks to the
measures taken by the Government of Tajikistan, as
well as the support of donor countries and international
organizations, including the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, our country has made visible progress
in that direction. I must note that the Government of
the Republic of Tajikistan adopted a national strategy
on combating illicit drug trafficking for 2013-2020 and
a sectoral programme for the implementation of that
strategy with a view to combating illicit trafficking
in narcotics.

It is obvious that the fight against drug trafficking
requires the joint efforts of countries at the regional and
international levels, because no country alone can deal
with this threat and its related crimes. Unfortunately,
nowadays, despite the growing threat of drug
trafficking, as evidenced by the record expansion ofthe
opium poppy cultivation area in Afghanistan in 2017,
not enough attention is paid to combating it. I consider
it necessary to emphasize that all countries of the
region should give priority to developing cooperation
in combating illicit drug trafficking and developing
concerted actions aimed at counteracting this evil.

The complex military and political situation in
Afghanistan requires us not only to mobilize domestic
resources, but also to improve the military and security
infrastructure at the border and to provide the border
guards with modern technologies and equipment so
as to ensure efficient border management and prevent
undesirable incidents at the border. At present, the law
enforcement agencies of Tajikistan and Afghanistan are
closely collaborating on those issues.

Tajikistan, as an advocate of the restoration of peace
and security in Afghanistan through economic and
social development, believes that regional cooperation
is an important element for strengthening stability in
that war-torn country and in the entire region. The
joint promotion of projects in the fields of transport,
communications, energy, investment, education, human
resources, border management and other areas could
become a basis for the rehabilitation and sustainable
development of Afghanistan.

Being at the crossroads of Eurasia, Afghanistan
could gain access to some of the fastest-growing
markets in the world and serve as a transit hub for
the expansion of trade between Europe, Asia and the
Middle East. In that regard, I would like to highlight the
importance of the timely implementation of regional
transport, communications and energy projects,
including the Central Asia South Asia Electricity
Transmission and Trade project - CASA-1000. To
facilitate trade with Afghanistan, Tajikistan, with the
assistance of the international community, has built
five bridges on the Panj River and established two free
economic zones on the border with Afghanistan, which
significantly increased the volume of trade between the
two countries.

One of the factors contributing to the maintenance of
peace and stability in Afghanistan is the development of
the education system. Currently, more than 500 students
study in Tajikistan universities. The Government
of Tajikistan has decided to provide scholarships to
approximately 1,000citizens of Afghanistan until 2025.

Tajikistan will continue its efforts to further
strengthen cooperation with the Government of
Afghanistan and international partners in the social,
economic and security spheres with a view to supporting
peace, stability and socioeconomic development in that
neighbouring country. At the same time, we believe that
an increase in targeted assistance by the international
community, with the United Nations playing a central
and coordinating role, remains vitally important.
We are confident that the Central Asian countries
need to further intensify economic cooperation with
Afghanistan. Afghanistan's active involvement in
regional projects is crucial.

Tajikistan's policy in the region is based on
developing and strengthening good-neighbourly relations
and expanding traditional practices of fraternal
coexistence with all neighbouring countries. We have
made them a priority in our international relations.

We believe that supporting Afghanistan's economic
revival and social development is the best tool for
maintaining its peace and stability and for ensuring
security in the region. Therefore, we would like to
call on the international community to increase its
assistance in supporting socioeconomic development
and improving the security situation in Afghanistan.

Furthermore, we note in particular the role of the
regional organizations in ensuring peace and security
in Afghanistan. Therefore, we call for strengthening
cooperation between the relevant United Nations
institutions and regional organizations, including
the Collective Security Treaty Organization and the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization.

Tajikistan stands ready for an open and constructive
dialogue with all interested parties aimed at finding
solutions to current security and stability challenges
faced by Afghanistan and the region and at facilitating
regional economic development.

Once again, Mr. President, please accept my sincere
congratulations on your assumption of the Council
presidency. I wish you and your team every success in
fulfilling your noble commitments.

