Mr. Mendez Graterol (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela would like to thank the Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, for introducing the twenty-third report on
the investigation into the situation in the Sudan, in
accordance with resolution 1593 (2015). At the same
time, my country would like, as a State party to the
Rome Statute, to acknowledge the work done by her
Office and the International Criminal Court (ICC) in
the fight against impunity and the promotion ofjustice.

Our country firmly supports the efforts of the
Prosecutor to ensure justice and accountability in the
fight against impunity, as well as the strengthening
of the international criminal justice system, so as to
make it more transparent and effective. We reiterate the
importance of international cooperation in achieving
the objectives ofthe Court, as well as the firm objective
of defending the strengthening of the institutions and
the effectiveness of the ICC as the only body in the
criminal sphere.

In that respect, we encourage all Member States
that are not yet parties to the Rome Statute to accede to
that instrument in order to achieve its universalization
and to contribute to building the rule of law nationally
and internationally.

More than 10 years have passed since the adoption
of resolution 1593 (2005), through which the Security
Council referred the situation in Darfur to the Office of
the Prosecutor. Since then, very little progress has been
made with respect to its implementation. Although
we believe that some gradual progress has been made
through the implementation of the provisions of the
Doha Document for Peace in Darfur as well as the
mediation efforts of former president Thabo Mbeki, the
situation in Darfur remains a source of concern.

In this respect, we share the concerns of the
Prosecutor concerning the continuation of the violence
that is affecting the civilian population. For our
country, accountability is an indispensable condition
for achieving a lasting peace in the Sudan. Hence, we
stress that those who have committed violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law in
the armed conflict in Darfur must be tried. This would
help not only to break the prevailing cycle of impunity
but also to prevent the recurrence of these actions, as
well as to promote confidence in the institutions of the
Sudanese State.

In this respect, we believe that it would be
beneficial to promote an effective dialogue between the
International Criminal Court and the African Union
in order to study practical arrangements that would
facilitate the work of the Prosecutor and of the Court,
including the possibility of taking certain steps in the
region and of achieving agreements based on mutual
respect and full respect for international law. We
believe that this would complement regional initiatives
to fight impunity.

We support the efforts of the Prosecutor to ensure
that justice and accountability become a reality and also
encourage the Court to assess the situation objectively
and impartially. Its role in the impartial investigation
of the actions of all parties to the conflict is extremely
important so as to strengthen the credibility ofthis legal
body. The Court must work in a balanced manner in
order to promote justice and to achieve a firm, lasting
and comprehensive peace.

In that context, we are concerned by the attempts
made by some to politicize the work of the ICC, which
affect the principles on which the Court is based, such
as autonomy, independence, impartiality, transparency
and objectivity. Undermining these principles would
weaken the institutions of the Court, as we would be
applying justice in a selective fashion, using a policy
of double standards to the detriment of the spirit and
purpose of the Rome Statute.

The arrest warrant issued by the International
Criminal Court against President Omar Al-Bashir
undermines the right to jurisdictional immunity for
the sitting Heads of State of those States that are not
party to the Rome Statute. The process to suspend
the jurisdictional immunity of a sitting President
in exercising his office so that he can be naturally
tried by justice in his country represents a procedure
set out in the Constitution of the Republic of the
Sudan. In that regard, Venezuela shares the position
of the African Union, the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation, the League of Arab States and the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries on the matter.
However, we call upon the Government of the Sudan,
the competent regional authorities and neighbouring
States to cooperate effectively with the International
Criminal Court with respect to the arrest of those
suspects who do not enjoy jurisdictional immunity and
who are currently being investigated by the Office of
the Prosecutor for alleged crimes against humanity, war
crimes and genocide and whose arrest warrants have
been issued by the International Criminal Court in the
case of the situation in Darfur.

In conclusion, we encourage the strengthening of
cooperation between the International Criminal Court
and the Government of the Sudan, as well as by the
countries of the region, in order to help to find a solution
to the conflict in Darfur whereby the objectives of peace
and justice are achieved for the benefit of the people of
that country, in accordance with international law.

