Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening this briefing on the human
rights situation in Ukraine. Ithank Mr. Ivan Simonovie,
Assistant Secretary-General for Human Rights, for his
briefing and for his efforts in reporting and ensuring
human rights in Ukraine.
The report of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights issued yesterday
indicates worrying patterns of human rights violations,
mainly born of the current crisis. The report also
indicates a culture of effective impunity, including
torture, extortion, arbitrary detention and corruption.
It is unfortunate that the situation has bloomed into a
deadly crisis in which over 120 people have lost their
lives due to gunfire and severe beatings, while 100
remain missing.

The situation in Ukraine again proves that there are
fault lines in our preventive measures. Nonetheless, it
is our view that the international community still has a
chance to prevent a further deterioration of the situation
in Ukraine. We again welcome the establishment of a
United Nations human rights monitoring mission in
Ukraine, which we support. We believe that we can
build on the work of the mission to support Ukraine in
its efforts to build the State that Ukrainians deserve.

It is incumbent on the Ukrainian Government
and indeed a priority to build confidence between
the authorities and the people and among the various
communities, with a View to reassuring all people
throughout Ukraine that their concerns will be
addressed, especially the Russian-speaking community.
It is time to ensure the inclusion and equal participation
of all Ukrainians in public affairs, rather than adopting
legislation regarding a lustration policy that would lead
to further isolation and radicalism.

In eastern Ukraine, the situation on the ground has
deteriorated in the past few days, instigating a dire need
for a viable political solution. We express concern about
the seizure and illegal occupation of public buildings
and infrastructure by armed protestors, and stress the
need for security forces to avoid any excessive use of
force while restoring the necessary public order.

In the meantime, we are extremely concerned
by the increased rhetoric and negative propaganda
that have exacerbated a situation, and in some cases
driven decisions taken to prevent the possibility of
stakeholders reconciling. Once again, we reiterate our
call on all parties to de-escalate the crisis and engage
in genuine dialogue, with respect for the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine. In that
regard, we look forward to the talks among Ukraine, the
Russian Federation, the European Union and the United
States of America to be held tomorrow in Geneva. We
hope that the meeting will contribute to a sustainable

political solution in Ukraine and the region.

Let me conclude by saying that the people of
Ukraine will judge us by our action, or lack of action.
Failing them is not an option. It is time to support a
truly Ukrainian-led solution, with the support of the
region and the larger international community.

