Mr. Konishi (Japan): At the outset, Mr. President, let
me also welcome your presence on this important occasion.

Last August, in order to prevent a resurgence of the
conflict in the Central African Republic, the Security
Council made the political decision to authorize the
Member States participating in the Inter-African Mission to
Monitor the Implementation of the Bangui Agreements
(MISAB), and those States providing logistical support, to
ensure the security and freedom of movement of their
personnel. My delegation would like to express its sincere
appreciation to all involved, including those who took part
in the activities of MISAB, the International Monitoring
Committee and France, which provided much needed
support for those activities. I would also like to pay special
tribute to President Bongo of Gabon in his capacity as
Chairman of the International Mediation Committee, who
has played an indispensable role.

Japan has been engaged in the effort to devise an
effective strategy for the prevention and early resolution of
conflicts in Africa and to explore just what role the
Security Council can play in such a strategy. As a member
of the Council since last year, Japan has taken a keen and
active interest in the Council's deliberations on this issue.
In the light of these efforts, my delegation is of the view
that the deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping
operation in the Central African Republic should be
considered a part of this strategy. It recognizes that while
there is relative stability on the ground, thanks to the
excellent work of MISAB, a continued international
presence will be essential once MISAB's mandate expires.
For these reasons, my delegation will vote in favour of the
draft resolution before us, including its intention that the
Council take a decision by 16 March on the establishment
of a peacekeeping operation in the Central African
Republic. I also consider that extending the authorization of
MISAB until 16 March will give President Patasse the time
to make good his promise to implement the Bangui
Agreements.

I would like to reiterate that it is extremely important
that President Patasse, as the Head of the Administration,
fulfil his commitment and responsibility to the people of the
Central African Republic, in particular the soldiers and
officials of the Government. This is indeed the prerequisite
for true and lasting peace and stability in the country. There
are many difficulties to be overcome, including the
restructuring of security forces and the adoption of the new
electoral code. My delegation looks forward to the
Secretary-General's report, to be submitted later this month,
describing the progress made in these areas, as well as the
details regarding the peacekeeping operation to be
established. In the meantime, Japan, for its part, will
continue to assist the Central African Republic in its
effort to restore stability and achieve greater prosperity.

