Mr. Duclos (France) (spoke in French): Allow
me to say that we believe that the Council's presidency
has undertaken an excellent initiative in proposing this
subject for our debate today. It is very useful to engage
in collective soul-searching with regard to a problem
that we are all aware is, on several levels, of crucial
importance to the work carried out by the international
community when it intervenes in crises. I would also
like to welcome the excellent briefings given by
Under-Secretary-General Guehenno and Ambassador
Martin Dahinden, who has very clearly illuminated the
various aspects of this subject.

Given the statements made by the two previous
speakers, which I fully support - and especially many
of the things said by the representative of Guinea - I
shall confine myself to three comments.

First, it is clear from the briefings we have heard
that the United Nations has taken stock of the problems
and that mine action is today undoubtedly being
mainstreamed into the culture of the United Nations.
We can be particularly pleased at the fact that
peacekeeping operations very much now reflect the
crucial need for mine action. We have noted that the
main peacekeeping operations, in particular the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, now include an important
element dealing with mine action.

As the two previous speakers have done, I would
add that the General Assembly is playing an important
role in the work done by the United Nations in the area
of mine action. Since 1998, mine action has been
regularly addressed, followed up and expanded by the
General Assembly. France welcomes the fact that the
resolutions adopted in that regard, which have
traditionally been introduced by the European Union,
cover all the work done by the United Nations in the
area of anti-personnel mines. Those resolutions also
provide a politically useful and legitimate context for
peacekeeping operations. They have also highlighted
the work of the Mine Action Service of the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations. In that regard, I welcome
the important role the Service is playing, in particular
in the area of cooperation.

Secondly, it is also clear that, as always, there are
areas where further progress could be made. I thank
Mr. Dahinden and Mr. Guehenno for pointing out some
possible ways by which that could be done. I am
thinking, for example, about what Mr. Guehenno said
regarding potential progress in the area of norms, the
role of mine action as a confidence-building measure,
the need to better train the troops that are contributed
in mine-action awareness and, lastly, the issue of
financing mine action. I would perhaps add one thing
to that. We believe it to be altogether crucial that the
Ottawa Convention be recognized not only with regard
to its role in banning anti-personnel mines, but also as
a tool to mobilize mine action at all levels, including in
the area of demining. It is a fact that the Convention,
which was in large part the result of work done by civil
society, has played a major role in mobilizing efforts in
the area of demining. For us, that is another reason to
hope that all the major countries with an important role
to play in peacekeeping throughout the world will
accede to the Convention as soon as possible.

Thirdly, despite the major role being played by
the United Nations - which, once again, we should
welcome - it does not mean that Member States
should not make their contributions and every possible
effort in their national capacities. For its part, France is
making a contribution through the European Union and
the United Nations Development Programme, as well
as through its bilateral cooperation. Our mine action
efforts have in recent years taken place on almost every
continent, including in Cambodia, Nicaragua, Kosovo
and Croatia - not to mention Angola, which this year
we will be providing with over $3 million as part of
our bilateral assistance. In the context of our bilateral
military cooperation, I should point out that we are
endeavouring to develop demining training in many
countries, in particular African countries. For instance,
last spring France opened a regional training centre in
Benin.

With regard to assistance to victims, we actively
support the work done by non-governmental
organizations, and in particular by Handicap
International.

In conclusion, I would like to say that these
activities must be carried out in close cooperation with
the United Nations. In that regard, the work could
include both official and unofficial efforts. I would like
to say that we very much appreciate what is being done
in the Mine-Action Support Group, which is now
presided over by Germany. I salute the work it has
done in that regard. I would also like to say that we
believe it is very important that we in the United
Nations are aware of the fact that the political
geography of mine action has to be evaluated and
frequently reviewed to fine-tune mine action in the
field. It is very important to continue to work against
the mass use of mines, such as was the case in
Cambodia, Angola and other countries massively
affected by anti-personnel mines.

It is also important to undertake perhaps more
limited and sophisticated work that has greater political
impact in the context of crisis management, as
Mr. Guehenno said. For example, in terms of
confidence-building measures, it is important that mine
action is given the importance it deserves in West
Africa, where the problem is less widespread, because
of its potential impact on crisis management. In that
vein, we have been pleased at the importance attached
to mine action in the peacekeeping operation in
Liberia. We think that, generally speaking, this issue
should be taken into account in the context of the entire
subregion.
