Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (interpretation from Chinese): Since last March, President Kabbah and the
Government of Sierra Leone have adopted a series of
effective measures to stabilize the general situation in that
country. The Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) has
played a positive role in this, and the Chinese delegation
expresses its appreciation to it. However, the situation in
Sierra Leone has not been fully stabilized. Some armed
rebels from the former military junta are continuing to
resist and to carry out atrocities against the civilian
population. There are also signs that certain elements in
Liberia are involved in the rebel activities against the
Government of Sierra Leone. The Government of China
expresses deep concern about this matter and hopes that
it will receive the attention of the international
community.

In response to the request of the Government of
Sierra Leone and other African countries concerned, the
United Nations will dispatch an observer mission to Sierra
Leone to assist the host Government and ECOMOG to
restore stability in Sierra Leone and facilitate national
reconciliation. This is the second time in recent years that
the Security Council has deployed a peacekeeping mission
in Africa, which demonstrates the will of the international
community actively to support and assist the African
countries in bringing about peace and stability. We
believe that the establishment of the United Nations
Observer Mission in Sierra Leone (UNOMSIL) will be
conducive to the stability of Sierra Leone and the
surrounding region and that it will also facilitate the
swifter achievement of national reconciliation and the
beginning of economic reconstruction.

 

The Government of China therefore supports the
establishment of UNOMSIL and will give positive
consideration to the dispatch of military observers to the
mission. We hope that the Secretariat will work with the
host Government and ECOMOG to finalize the
arrangements at an early date so as to ensure the safety of
military observers and other personnel of the Observer
Mission. We also hope that UNOMSIL will take full
account of the opinion of the Government of Sierra Leone,
fully respect its sovereignty and cooperate well with
ECOMOG.

China will vote in favour of the draft resolution.

