It is an honour to speak before the Security Council for the first time since assuming my role as the Permanent Representative of the State of Israel to the United Nations. I come to this position after nearly two decades in the Israeli Knesset and Government. I have served on Israel's security cabinet and in several ministerial positions dealing with such issues as counter-terrorism and the ongoing attempts to delegitimize my country. I believe that the United Nations as a whole and the Security Council in particular can be a force for good in the world, especially today, when the world is facing harrowing health and economic challenges. In my view, the Council should serve as a model for how nations can set aside their differences and unite to tackle international problems and promote peace and security. In the two months since I arrived in New York, I have witnessed a jarring dissonance between what the Council chooses to focus on and what is actually happening in the Middle East. During this short period of time, I witnessed the Council ignoring opportunities to promote peace while simultaneously choosing not to act in the face of grave threats. I was told by many that the Council holds an institutional bias against Israel. Despite these criticisms, I want to keep an open mind. I want to prove wrong all those who tell me that the Security Council is a lost cause. Nevertheless, I have a few considerations I would like to pose to the Council in order to better understand its priorities in the Middle East. In a debate entitled "The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question," one would expect the Council to focus on the most important issues facing the Middle East. However, once a month, for 20 years - which amounts to hundreds of debates - Council members have routinely overlooked critical issues and focused only on the "Palestinian question". Today's debate is a perfect example. Should we not be discussing the momentum of peace between four countries in a turbulent region? As the United Nations organ entrusted with developing friendly relations among nations, surely the Council should discuss the Abraham Accords and the most recent peace agreement between Israel and the Sudan. Yet the only debate the Security Council held on the historic peace agreements between Israel and the United Arab Emirates and Bahrain was an informal one. To understand how significant these agreements are, consider that it was in Khartoum in 1967 that the Arab League adopted the Khartoum Resolution and the infamous "Three Nos": No peace with Israel, no recognition of Israel and no negotiations with Israel. On Friday, the Sudan replaced three "no's" with three "veses": Yes to peace with Israel, yes to a new Middle East and yes to a brighter future for our children. Some 53 years ago, the Sudan symbolized the Arab world's refusal to accept the Jewish State's legitimacy. Today it symbolizes the Arab world's growing acceptance of the Jewish State. I look forward to hearing Council members' insights on this unprecedented paradigm shift and how we can build on these agreements. Perhaps we could discuss today how the Abraham accords and the new Israeli-Sudanese alliance present new opportunities for dialogue and prosperity and how these agreements will enhance cooperation in the fields of security, sustainability, technology, innovation, health and more. These accords are an important milestone that will serve to advance further agreements with other Arab and Muslim countries. They disprove preconceived notions of peacemaking in the Middle East and represent a new pragmatic approach that is not held hostage by unrealistic demands from one side. Maybe that is exactly why the Palestinian leadership opposes them. Instead of viewing the accords as a new opportunity to kick-start negotiations, the Palestinians have attacked the Emiratis, the Bahrainis and the Sudanese, calling their decision to have relations with Israel a "betrayal" and a "stab in the back". It should be clear to Foreign Minister Al-Malki that everyone can now see that the Palestinians will lash out against any country that seeks peace in the region, even its fellow members of the Arab League. The fact that the Palestinians attack those who make peace with Israel, demonstrates that, for years, the Council has been applying pressure on the wrong side. It is not surprising that the Palestinians refuse to see the agreements as an opportunity for peace. President Abbas has refused every peace offer made by the State of Israel. Actually, to be more precise, he has refused every offer that he has bothered to respond to. Former Prime Minister Ehud Olmert is still waiting for a response to the generous offer he made in 2008. Instead, the Palestinian representative calls here for a peace conference. Do not be fooled by this; it is only another distraction. Abbas knows a conference will not bring peace. The only way to achieve real peace is through direct, bilateral negotiations. Prime Minister Netanyahu has invited President Abbas to Jerusalem many times. He has even offered to go to Ramallah, but Abbas continues to waste time calling for another useless conference. The Security Council should instead call on the Palestinians to begin negotiations based on the American Vision for Peace, which is a good starting point for realistic, sustainable peace. In a debate entitled "The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question", should not a new era of peace that has a huge impact on the region be discussed? In addition to discussing opportunities for peace, the Council must also discuss the destabilizing forces in the region, namely, Iran. It is surprising, but I actually want to thank that country. Indeed, I want to thank the regime for the role it has played in bringing the moderate forces in the region closer together. Ironically, Iran's extreme and murderous ways have contributed to the signing of these historic agreements. Nevertheless, Iran and its terrorist proxies remain the biggest threats to peace and security in the region. Its stated aim of using violence to create Shia hegemony in the region should top the agenda in all debates on the Middle East. Iran's ongoing aggression threatens to take many more innocent lives - of Muslims, Jews and Christians - than it already has. Opposing Iran's nuclear ambitions while allowing it to buy and sell other lethal weapons puts the entire region in grave danger. The fact that almost every member of the Security Council was willing to let the arms embargo expire calls into question this body's commitment to international peace and security. The sanctions on Iran, which were reinitiated by the United States- triggered snapback, remain in full effect. We fully support the American initiatives in this regard. Iran is also one of the biggest human rights violators in the world. One example is its excessive and illegal use of executions. During President Rouhani's tenure, Iran has executed over 4,300 people, including minors, women, members of the lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender community, journalists and anti-Government protesters. Should this not be discussed in a debate on the situation in the Middle East? The Security Council must unite in establishing a maximum pressure campaign against Iran. It must prevent the regime in Tehran from continuing to develop its nuclear capabilities, obtain advanced weapons and violate human rights. For Israel and other Arab countries, this is an existential threat. One day many more countries will realize Iran threatens them too. Let us hope it is not too late. When discussing security in the Middle East, there is another Iran-related threat that is barely discussed by the Council. It has been nearly a month since Prime Minister Netanyahu revealed new intelligence about a Hizbullah arms depot embedded in Beirut's Janah neighbourhood. The terrible explosion last August at the city's port killed some 200 people and injured thousands. This has not stopped Hizbullah from putting Lebanese lives at the risk of another, similar disaster. This is not the first time that Hizbullah has used Lebanese civilians as human shields. Hizbullah acts in complete disregard of human life and of resolutions 1559 (2004), 1680 (2006) and 1701 (2006). If the Council truly cared about the future of the Middle East, how is it possible that all Council members have not designated Hezbollah in its entirety as a terrorist organization? Should this question not be discussed in a debate on the situation in the Middle East? Of course, the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is also an important issue and should be a part of the debate. Yet while discussing it every month for the last 20 years, key elements have been neglected. If you are looking for the real obstacle to peace, Mr. President, look at the Palestinian's long record of incitement and hate. Palestinian Authority textbooks incite violence and promote terrorism and antisemitism. Through its pay-to-slay programme, the Palestinian Authority rewards terror attacks against Israeli civilians. Maybe part of the answer to the Palestinian question can be found in that fact alone. The Palestinian Authority spends hundreds of millions of dollars a year on its pay-to-slay programme. Just think how that money could have been spent this year fighting the coronavirus disease. The United Nations regularly produces distorted one-sided reports about alleged Israeli violations of Palestinian rights. Perhaps a discussion should be held about the Palestinian Authority's violation of its own people's rights, including the basic right to choose their leaders. It is well known that Israel has held more elections in a year than the Palestinian Authority has held in the last 15. For decades, many in the international community have fixated on a single solution to the conflict. They vote for the same anti-Israel resolutions, recycle old talking points and ignore issues that are crucial for ending the conflict. They also ignore the fact that this approach has only emboldened Palestinian rejectionism. Perhaps Council members are too accustomed to the ritual of these debates to see that they have been completely ineffective in answering the Palestinian question. We all know what Einstein said about trying the same thing over and over and expecting different results. While the Council's talking points have not changed for decades, the Middle East has. Three historic agreements considered impossible to achieve were reached in just two months. The Security Council should embrace the accords and use them as a catalyst to promote peace and security in the region. It can facilitate the next round of agreements. I am committed to proving wrong all those who say that the Security Council is a lost cause. However, ignoring the most pressing issues in the Middle East and expressing bias when discussing the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, makes that hard to do. The Council must recommit itself to pursuing peace and security, and not let politics dictate its actions in the Middle East. I remain optimistic that the Security Council can fulfil its mandate and I look forward to working with its members in that noble pursuit.
