Mr. Mansour: Madam President, I warmly
congratulate you and your friendly country, Nigeria, on
your presidency of the Security Council this month. We
express our appreciation to Mexico for its very skilled
guidance of the Council's agenda last month.
I also wish to thank Under-Secretary-General
Lynn Pascoe for his briefing. In that connection, I wish
to express our appreciation to the United Nations,
including the Secretary-General, Mr. Serry, the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) and all the
agencies that have been working so hard on the ground
during this period, including with regard to securing
the delivery of humanitarian aid from the Gaza
freedom flotilla and other ships to the Palestinian
people in Gaza. We also express our appreciation to the
United Nations for its unwavering calls for the full
lifting of the Israeli blockade of Gaza.

Three months ago we came before the Council, in
its last open debate on this subject (6298th meeting),
compelled to draw attention to the extremely difficult
situation in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem, as a result of Israel's ongoing
aggression, colonization and provocation against the
Palestinian people and their land. While we had hoped
to inform the Council of progress in the United States-
mediated proximity talks and of improvement on the
ground, today we regretfully report that the situation
remains volatile, due to Israeli actions. It is a situation
requiring immediate redress if we are not to lose the
opportunity before us for attaining peace. The
alternative is to allow tensions to continue to rise,
igniting another cycle of violence that will do further
harm to the possibility for a peaceful resolution of the
conflict and cause more suffering, insecurity and
instability.

For some, it seems strange that such a volatile
situation persists in light of the international and
regional efforts being exerted for a revival of the peace
process. Those efforts have raised hopes in the region
and throughout the globe and are being followed
closely, with all hoping that the problems that have
historically plagued and undermined the peace process
can finally be overcome.

The proximity talks were supported by the
Palestinian leadership, the Arab countries and the
international community as a means to bridge the gaps
that remain between the two sides. That those gaps
remain is due to Israel's refusal to comply with its
legal obligations and its Road Map commitment to
cease all settlement activities, including so-called
natural growth, which, we are all aware, constitute a
major obstacle to the peace process. We reiterate that
such cessation is essential for the resumption of a

credible process aimed at achieving a two-State
solution on the basis of the pre-1967 borders.

We believe that the proximity talks would serve to
reaffirm the fundamental principles and agreed terms of
reference of the peace process and to clarify respective
obligations and the status of their fulfilment, including
with regard to previous agreements and understandings
reached and commitments undertaken in the context of
the Annapolis process under international auspices.
While a strong international consensus exists in support
of the agreed terms of reference - including among the
Arab countries, which remain committed to the Arab
Peace Initiative - it is clear that Israel continues to
refuse to adhere to those terms of reference and
commitments and, in fact, continues to carry out
policies undermining them.

We believe that the active engagement and
mediation of the United States, as reflected in the
dedicated efforts of Senator Mitchell as well as by
President Obama and Secretary of State Clinton, would
compel Israel, for the sake of peace and security, to
finally comply with these obligations and
commitments, including a settlement freeze. That, in
turn, would help build the trust and confidence
necessary for a resumption of direct negotiations on the
core final status issues - Jerusalem, refugees,
settlements, borders, water and security.

The Palestinian side has thus engaged in the talks
in good faith. Over and over again, the Palestinian
leadership has affirmed its commitment to peace and its
willingness to engage in the talks to pave the way for a
return to direct negotiations aimed at the achievement
of a just and lasting settlement. This commitment has
been reflected in both words and deeds and is attested
to in numerous multilateral and bilateral reports and
meetings, including with regard to the positive and
proactive Palestinian State-building programme and
efforts to promote law, order and security.

The same cannot be said for Israel. On the
contrary, Israel has repeatedly challenged those talks
with illegal and reckless actions. It has been the same
dysfunctional and destructive pattern since the start of
the peace process almost 20 years ago, of Israeli
intransigence and arrogant ruses aimed at
circumventing its obligations, and shocking acts of
aggression and illegal policies that are causing serious
harm to the Palestinian civilian population and to the
contiguity, unity and integrity of the Occupied
Palestinian Territory, sabotaging the peace process.

There is an extremely wide gap between Israel's
words and deeds that must be obvious to all. While
Israel professes to want peace, all of its actions are
absolutely to the contrary. Unlawful and provocative
Israeli policies and actions, both by the Israeli
occupying forces and by the Israeli settlers, continue to
inflame tensions and sensitivities on the ground and
throughout the region. This, in turn, is casting a dark
shadow on the efforts to resume the peace process,
raising grave doubts about Israel's credibility as a
peace partner and its willingness to abide by legal
obligations and commitments. What we are witnessing
is an Israeli Government that speaks facetiously of
peace on the international stage while it simultaneously
carries out its illegal schemes aimed at imposing a fait
accompli prior to conclusion of a peace settlement,
making a mockery of the efforts being exerted in this
regard by all parties concerned.

In the two-month period since the proximity talks
began, Israel has persisted with its illegal measures on
a broad scale, in some instances even intensifying
them, including by continuing settlement and wall
construction in the Occupied Palestinian Territory,
particularly in and around East Jerusalem, despite the
unwavering international calls for complete cessation
and Israel's own so-called moratorium. It also
continues to impose the punitive blockade on the Gaza
Strip, despite widespread international condemnation
and calls for its full lifting, which heightened in the
aftermath of Israel's attack on the humanitarian flotilla.
Israel continues to impede the efforts aimed at lifting
the blockade and allowing for sustained and regular
movement of persons and goods and for the long-
overdue reconstruction process to begin.

Over 900 military incursions in the West Bank and
several raids against the Gaza Strip were carried out by
the occupying forces during this period. At least six
Palestinian civilians were killed and more than 120
injured in Israeli attacks, including the killing of a 16
year-old boy and a 59 year-old woman by Israeli
settlers. Settler terror, in particular, continued unabated.
Threats of deportation have continued against
Palestinian civilians, including four elected Palestinian
legislators from Jerusalem, who are among the hundreds
of Palestinian J erusalemites whose residency rights have
been revoked or that Israel is threatening to revoke.

Demolition of Palestinian homes in East
Jerusalem has also continued, with several more homes
destroyed and families made homeless and displaced as

part of the illegal campaign to empty the city of its
indigenous residents. Final approval for the demolition
of 22 Palestinian homes in the Al Bustan area of
Silwan for the building of a so-called park was also
announced during this period. Tens of other demolition
orders have also been issued, including for a school,
and there are reports of intentions to issue demolition
orders for up to 40 buildings, comprising at least 100
homes, in the Issawiya neighbourhood of East
Jerusalem.

More than 380 Palestinians were arrested several
hundred others detained, especially at checkpoints and
including children, adding to the thousands of
Palestinian civilians still in Israeli jails and detention
centres.

Incitement by Israeli officials and settlers has
continued, including threats to launch military assaults
in the Occupied Palestinian Territory as well as against
other countries in the region, and ongoing threats
against ships attempting to break the Gaza blockade,
despite the disastrous aftermath of Israel's attack on
the Turkish aid ship and its killing of nine civilians. In
this regard, we continue to join the calls for a full,
independent, credible, international investigation,
under the auspices of the Secretary-General, into that
Israeli attack.

Despite its claimed commitment to peace,
Israel has not ceased these actions - not even for a
moment - in violation of its legal obligations and in
defiance of international calls for their cessation. This
situation has seriously hampered progress in the
proximity talks and undermined the credibility of any
kind of peace process.

What was set out to be accomplished during the
current talks, has thus far not been accomplished.
Moreover, everything that has occurred in the
meanwhile on the Israeli side has been the stark
antithesis of that required for a peaceful settlement in
accordance with the two-State solution on the basis of
the pre-1967 borders and the parameters that are well
known to all of us and firmly internationally supported
and endorsed.

The solution for the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
the core of the Arab-Israeli conflict, is before us and
has been for decades. And, yet, the international
community once again seems at a loss as to how to act
collectively to justly and finally resolve this long-
festering conflict. The bold measures that must be

taken to implement the relevant resolutions of this
Council, which provide the basis for any just, lasting
and comprehensive peace, remain to be taken. Israel's
impunity continues to trump the efforts to shore up the
necessary political will to take those bold measures
needed to promote the resumption of a credible and fair
peace process and advance the cause of international
peace and security, which this conflict unquestionably
directly harms.

What needs to happen for the Security Council to
finally rise to its responsibility to bring an end to this
brutal military occupation that has denied the
Palestinian people their inalienable rights, denied them
a life of freedom and dignity in their homeland, and
totally destabilized an entire region, making peace and
security elusive for millions and millions of people for
more than half a century? We have reiterated on
numerous occasions that time is of the essence and that
its passage is not in favour of the realization of the
two-State solution, which continues to be threatened by
illegal Israeli attempts to alter the demographic
composition, status and character of the Occupied
Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and
forcibly de facto annex even more Palestinian land,
prior to any final settlement being reached.

Faced with this ongoing challenge, it is high time
that the international community, with the Security
Council and Quartet at the forefront, ceases to appease
Israel and genuinely consider the collective actions that
must be taken to bring it into compliance with its legal
obligations and to salvage the two-State solution and
advance the realization thereof within an accelerated
time frame.

I reaffirm today that, despite the harsh reality that
prevails on all fronts, the Palestinian leadership
remains fully committed to peace and to engaging in a
credible peace process based on the agreed terms of
reference, with the aim of definitively bringing an end
to the Israeli occupation in order to allow the
Palestinian people to exercise their right to self-
determination in their independent State, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, living side by side with Israel
in peace and security on the basis of the pre-1967
borders, and achieving a just resolution of the plight of
the Palestine refugees in accordance with international
law and United Nations resolutions.

