Mr. Ayebare (Uganda): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Sir, and the delegation of the
United Kingdom on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I thank you for
organizing this important and timely open debate on
the situation in Somalia. I also thank the Secretary-
General and his Special Representative for Somalia for
their statements.

This debate is being held hardly two weeks after
the Security Council adopted resolution 2036 (2012).
Uganda commends the Council for that resolution,
which was a demonstration of the Council's
commitment to the cause of peace and security on the
African continent, and Somalia in particular.

Uganda also commends the United Kingdom for
organizing the London international conference on
Somalia on 23 February. We welcome the outcome of
that meeting, which affirmed international support for
the stabilization of Somalia. We also wish to
underscore the need to build on that outcome through
the collaborative effort of all stakeholders in Somalia,
the region and the rest of the international community.

Uganda is convinced that durable peace and
stability in Somalia are attainable. When we can look
back from where we have come, I am sure we can say
today, without any contradiction, that we have made
visible progress in moving forward to stabilize
Somalia. We commend the efforts of the Transitional
Federal Government (TFG) and the Somali people
aimed at restoring peace, security and stability in the
country, in spite of the challenges. We commend them
because, ultimately, that is their primary responsibility.
We also commend the international community for
supporting the people of Somalia.

In addressing the situation in Somalia, I would
like to make the following points.

First, we encourage the TFG to intensify its
efforts to complete the outstanding transitional tasks.
We welcome the commitments made at the London
conference to work for a more representative
Government in Somalia, in line with the Transitional
Federal Charter, the Djibouti Agreement, the Kampala
Accord, the end of transition road map and the Garowe
Principles. We believe that a representative
Government will lead to greater accountability and
unity, which are essential to peace and stability in
Somalia.

Secondly, resolution 2036 (2012) was a
significant outcome because the Security Council
responded positively to the request of the African
Union to continue its support of the Union's ongoing
stabilization efforts in Somalia. That was an example
of the envisaged United Nations-African Union
strategic partnership that can enhance our collective
efforts in the maintenance of peace and stability on the
continent.

Uganda appreciates the support that has been
extended to the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) by international partners, such as the
bilateral support programmes of the United States of
America and the African Peace Facility of the
European Union. It is essential that that support
continue because there is need to consolidate the
security gains made in Somalia and deny a new lease
on life for extremist groups such as Al-Shabaab. We
need to build on our achievements and continue to
support efforts aimed at developing the Somali security
forces and institutions, the role of which remains vital
to ensuring Somalia's long-term security and stability.

Thirdly, the humanitarian situation in Somalia
remains a matter of concern. Uganda commends the
humanitarian agencies and workers who continue to
operate in Somalia under very difficult conditions. We
call upon the international community to redouble its
support for the humanitarian effort.
Fourthly, piracy off the coast of Somalia is an
international problem that requires our collective

efforts and contribution. We welcome the counter-
measures that have been undertaken but also note the
increased incidence of attempted attacks. As we have
said before, pirates are not aquatic. They live on the
mainland. We would like to reiterate, therefore, that the
most effective and durable approach to combating
piracy off the coast of Somalia is to address its root
causes and establish State authority and control on the
mainland. That is where our collective efforts should
be directed.

Fifthly, the progress we see in Somalia is a signal
to the Somali people and to the international
community that a new phase and opportunity exist in
Somalia. The people of Somalia want to be safe, to be
well and to have access to basic services; and they are
looking for economic opportunities. However, the
Government is not in a position at this time to
undertake certain critical activities. The country
requires the support of the international community for
its reconstruction and economic development,
including for the provision of key basic services and
infrastructure. That will promote resettlement,
reintegration and reconciliation and lay the foundation
for sustainable peace.

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate Uganda's
commitment to supporting stabilization efforts in
Somalia. We will continue working with our partners in
the region and outside the region to that end. An
opportunity exists that must not be lost.

