Mr. Kolby (Norway): I would like to thank Sir
Kieran for his excellent briefing and to convey my
Government's appreciation for the work of Special
Representative Brahimi and his staff in the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).

As Chairman of the Afghanistan Support Group,
Norway remains in continuous contact with
Mr. Brahimi and the Afghan interim authorities in
Kabul in order to make the Support Group's support for
the peace process as efficient and constructive as
possible.

Among our main goals is that of promoting a
comprehensive and coherent approach, bridging the
gap between humanitarian assistance and the long-term
national rehabilitation and reconstruction process.
Norway fully supports the efforts of Mr. Brahimi and
UNAMA to ensure coordination of donors and the
United Nations system.

In the immediate term, our common concern must
be to do what we can to ensure that the emergency loya
jirga process proceeds as peacefully and smoothly as
possible. This week, Norway transferred a contribution
of $500,000 for the loya jirga process into the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) Trust Fund.

We fully support Sir Kieran's message on the
urgent need for funding. My Government has so far
disbursed $15 million, out of the $40 million that we
pledged at the Tokyo conference in January. The
Norwegian Foreign Minister, Mr. Petersen, has written
to Afghanistan Support Group colleagues and stressed
that it is absolutely necessary that the donors speed up
disbursements of pledges made at Tokyo so as to
bolster stability by improving the living conditions of
the Afghan people.

As part of our efforts to strengthen security in
Afghanistan, Norway believes that the adoption today
of a resolution extending the mandate of the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) by
another six months is a very important measure. We
commend the United Kingdom's lead role in ISAF and
welcome Turkey's decision to take over the lead after
the United Kingdom. I am pleased to confirm that
Norway will continue to contribute military forces to
ISAF, as well as to the United States-led coalition's
operations in Afghanistan, also in the coming six
months.

Norway will also play an active role in the
German-led efforts to establish a civilian police force
in Afghanistan. We will contribute both with police
instructors and financial resources, at a value of up to
one million Euros.

As Sir Kieran indicated, international aid to
mitigate the humanitarian crisis must remain a priority.
Through the Afghanistan Support Group, we will work

for relief operations to be continued and expanded to
meet the increasing need for assistance. Also, we must
turn increased attention to the need for mine clearance,
and to providing shelter and work for the returning
refugees and internally displaced people.
The challenges are many, but with the sustained
commitment of the international community and the
constructive cooperation of the States of the region, we
are convinced that we can succeed in creating a more
stable and peaceful Afghanistan in the long term.
Today's resolution is an important step in this process.

