Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I wish to offer my best
wishes to you, Madam Presidenet, as you take on the
crucial role of Security Council President. I would also
like to convey my very special thanks to Ambassador
Rycroft and his team for the excellent way they
conducted business doing the eventful month of March.

I would also like to express my condolences to the
families of the victims of the terrorist attack that took
place yesterday in Saint Petersburg.

I join others in congratulating Mr. Jeremiah
Kingsley Mamabolo on his appointment as Joint Special
Representative for Darfur. Ukraine fully supports his
efforts aimed at advancing the achievement of peace
in the Sudan. In the light of the information presented
during Mr. Mamabolo's briefing, my delegation wishes
to highlight the following points.

First, Ukraine welcomes the fact that the security
situation in most parts of Darfur remained stable over
recent months. Although no major fighting between
Government forces and rebel groups has been observed
as of late, attacks against internally displaced persons
committed by armed militias continue to occur and
must be halted immediately. We hope that the unilateral
ceasefire declared by the Government of the Sudan and
the non-signatory movements to the Doha Document
for Peace in Darfur will continue to hold. We also call
on the Abdul Wahid faction of the Sudan Liberation
Movement Army to refrain from military activity and
to join the peace talks. In that vein, we expect that
all parties will continue to undertake genuine efforts
aimed at preserving the positive momentum with
a View to resolving critical issues related to the safe
return of internally displaced persons and the renewal
of peace talks.

That brings me to my second point, on the
political process. There has been Visible progress on
the political track. The endorsement of amendments
to the Constitution and the establishment of the
Government of National Reconciliation and the post of
Prime Minister, as well as the separation of the posts
of Attorney-General and the Minister of Justice, are
steps in the right direction. My delegation also notes
the positive engagement by the Government and the
Sudan Liberation Movement-North, which resulted in
the mutual release of respective prisoners of war. We
urge the Sudanese Government and the opposition
parties to continue to implement the recommendations
of the National Dialogue. Ukraine also looks forward to
the resumption of talks facilitated by the African Union
High-level Implementation Panel.

My third, and last, point is on the African
Union-United Nations (UNAMID). Given that the
situation in Darfur has evolved since 2015, we believe
that the current mandate and tasks of UNAMID deserve
close consideration. We look forward to the conclusions
of the strategic review that was conducted by the joint
African Union-United Nations team last month. The key
priority in that regard should be to ensure the gradual
transfer of tasks from UNAMID to the United Nations
country team in the framework of peacebuilding efforts
in Darfur. Meanwhile, we are concerned by continued
restrictions and impediments to UNAMID's work,
which include delays in the clearance of containers
with equipment and supplies for the mission, as well
as denial of access into some parts of Darfur. We
call on the Government of the Sudan to remove these
restrictions in line with its obligations under the status-
of-forces agreement.

Finally, as Chair of the Sanctions Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005),
concerning the Sudan, I remain committed to continuing
to engage closely with the Government of the Sudan on
issues within my mandate. I recognize the positive and
constructive role in that regard played by the delegation
of the Sudan in New York.

