Mr. Nambiar (India): We appreciate this
opportunity, in today's open meeting of the Security
Council, to express our views on the vital issue of the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
(WMD). The threat of terror and WMD proliferation
coming together is a real one and should clearly be an
issue of the highest priority for the international
community.

As a victim of terrorism for almost two decades,
India understands the danger that the transfer of such
weapons of mass destruction could entail. It is that
realization that prompted India to pilot draft resolutions
on measures to prevent terrorists from acquiring
weapons of mass destruction, adopted by consensus by
the General Assembly at its last two sessions (General Assembly resolutions 57/83 and 58/48).
We perceive today's discussion as a logical
continuation of the process initiated in the General
Assembly. Hence the validity of the focus on non-State
actors in the draft resolution under discussion.
However, this in no way diminishes State
accountability with respect to combating terrorism and
eliminating its support infrastructure and linkages with
WMD. As in the case of terrorism, States cannot be
absolved of accountability on grounds that proliferation
was the result of private enterprise.

The sponsors of the draft resolution under
discussion in the Council have stated that the intention
behind their initiative is to fill a gap in the non-
proliferation regime - which, if negotiated through
the multilateral framework, could take years. In our
view, the issue should ideally have been addressed
through existing international instruments and by
building on them.

Our recognition of the time imperative in seeking
recourse through the Security Council does not,
however, obscure our more basic concerns over the
increasing tendency of the Council in recent years to
assume new and wider powers of legislation on behalf
of the international community, with its resolutions
binding on all States. In the present instance, the
Council seeks to both define the non-proliferation
regime and monitor its implementation. But who will
monitor the monitors? We are concerned that the
exercise of legislative functions by the Council,
combined with recourse to Chapter VII mandates,
could disrupt the balance of power between the General
Assembly and the Security Council, as enshrined in the
Charter.

The issue goes beyond a mere legal consideration
of the Council's allocated powers under the Charter.
The credibility and even respect that the Security
Council can garner depend on its actions being the
product of internal cohesion and universal
acceptability. Although resolutions such as resolution
1373 (2001) were adopted unanimously, the limitations
in their implementation underscore the need for caution
on the Security Council being used as a route to short-
circuit the process of creating an international
consensus. Exhaustive and excessive reporting
obligations resulting from resolutions 1267 (1999) and
1373 (2001) have led to repetitive reporting exercises
and burdensome bureaucratic structures without
commensurate results on the ground.

As it returns to the theme of non-proliferation
after a gap of more than 12 years since 1992, the
Council's credentials are not helped by its track record.
Exclusive focus on non-proliferation does disservice to
the essential principle of the mutually reinforcing
linkage between disarmament and non-proliferation,
recognized since the first special session of the General
Assembly devoted to disarmament. International
treaties or agreements in this field should be
multilaterally negotiated, not imposed. They should be
based on a balance of obligations to ensure universal
adherence, which is the true test of legitimacy and
credibility.

To our mind, export controls are not an issue on
which the Security Council should prescribe norms.
There is tension between ad hoc arrangements on
harmonizing export controls among a select few
countries on the one hand, and measures being put
forward by the Council, intended for universal
application, on the other hand. The flip side of export
controls is indiscriminate technology denial to States
with legitimate socio-economic needs. Recent cases
have thrown the spotlight once again on the
inadequacies of the current regime. They have also
shown that, far from effectively addressing genuine
proliferation concerns, export controls on sensitive
technology and materials have often served to deny
those technologies to responsible nations which play
the game by the rules.

India has taken note of the observation of the
sponsors that the draft resolution does not prescribe
adherence to treaties to which we are not a State party.
For our part, we shall not accept any interpretation of
the draft resolution that imposes obligations arising
from treaties that India has not signed or ratified,
consistent with the fundamental principles of
international law and the law of treaties. India will not
accept externally prescribed norms or standards,
whatever their source, on matters pertaining to
domestic jurisdiction of its Parliament, including
national legislation, regulations or arrangements which
are not consistent with its constitutional provisions and
procedures which are contrary to its national interests
or which infringe on its sovereignty.

A word of caution on the definition of terms will
be in order. By applying traditionally understood
categories of arms control in novel areas in which
definitions are not well established, we may be creating
grounds for differing interpretations. That problem can
be compounded by differing national capacities among
States to carry out their obligations. A one-size-fits-all
approach will not work. The draft resolution makes
reference to non-State actors as those identified in the
United Nations list, which may not be exhaustive.

While being under Chapter VII, the draft
resolution ought to steer clear of any coercive or
punitive approach or follow-up mechanism, which
would defeat its very purpose. We have noted the
sponsors' assurance that the use of force is not
envisaged or authorized by the draft resolution.
Transparency and inclusiveness in that regard are
crucial. Given the far-reaching scope of the draft
resolution, it stands to reason that membership of the
relevant committee should not be restricted to that of
the Council but should also include other Member
States which have significant capabilities and expertise
in related fields.

Having said that, it must be stated that Member
States have undoubtedly seen the utility of urgent
measures to foster cooperative action at the multilateral
level, as is envisaged in the draft resolution.

As a matter of national policy, conscious of its
responsibilities arising from the possession of
advanced technologies, India is committed to an
effective and comprehensive system of export controls
to deny unlawful access, whether to States or to non-
State actors. Our national effort is based on a policy
anchored on a conscious decision to prohibit or control
exports of WMD-usable materials, equipment or
technologies or their delivery systems.

The crisis underlying the non-proliferation order
is a matter of deep concern to India, since the
infirmities of the present order have adversely
impacted on our security. It would be a precarious
paradox if individual State actions, despite this draft
resolution, condoned instances of proliferation or
rewarded proliferating States by other means. We
believe that meeting new proliferation challenges
requires fresh approaches, pooling the efforts and
resources of the international community.

Today we renew the call made at the 1992
Security Council summit on non-proliferation for
devising a new international consensus on non-
proliferation. We hope that our endeavours will spur
common efforts for mutual benefit and in the interests
of a safe and secure world.

