On behalf of the Government of Malta, I thank the Nigerien presidency for organizing today's debate on this topical issue, which also has extensive and far- reaching effects on the international community as a whole. Malta fully aligns itself with the statement submitted earlier on behalf of the European Union (annex 21), and I would like to add a few remarks in my national capacity. Climate change is one of the major threats to our future, and a collective effort is needed if we are to secure the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and guarantee a sustainable future for our children. Malta believes that every country can make a difference. The Security Council has mechanisms to promote and work towards an international community that is united against that existential threat. Malta is ready to continue to support ongoing work towards securing a sustainable future for all and will work hard to that end if entrusted to serve as a member of the Security Council in 2023-2024. As we take stock of the devastating and debilitating effects of environmental degradation brought about by climate change and conflict, Malta believes that short- term interventions should be complementary to longer-term strategies. A preventive approach is essential if we are to promote peace and avoid conflict. No country is immune to extreme weather events, or to conflict situations. From the Sahel to South-East Asia, from the Pacific to the Caribbean, Europe and the Mediterranean, people are dying or forced to abandon their homes. In spite of this, the international community continues to be reactionary, resulting in delayed actions and the triggering of impromptu mechanisms. Malta believes that it is not enough to put into motion a set of tools that are often reactive and rely on such complementary processes as disaster-risk management and humanitarian assistance. On the contrary, we need to go beyond this. Humankind has suffered irreparable harm when we have failed to appreciate the impact of climate change and environmental degradation upon human security and socioeconomic well-being. If we stop for a minute and take the time to really take stock of the environment and the atmosphere around us, we realize that very often there is a set of complex and interrelated drivers at play that together contribute to destabilization or conflict. These drivers are the result of the effects of slow-onset climate change and environmental degradation, which affect freshwater resources, soil erosion, biodiversity, ocean resources, health and food security. While the implications may not be immediately visible, we find upon closer examination that that the worst-affected situations are those where people cannot deal with additional strain. Malta is concerned with the consequences of climate change that are increasing the severity of already existing humanitarian situations as well as threatening peace and security. The work of peace operations is becoming increasingly complex because climate change is altering the dynamics of ongoing conflicts, and therefore increasing the possibility that conflicts might become violent. Malta calls for an increase in cross-agency knowledge-sharing and for all parties involved to proactively identify climate action as an opportunity to build sustainable peace. This would allow for greater coordination and better information on the ground, which would allow for a more cohesive peacebuilding response. A thorough assessment of climate-related security risks should be carried out prior to any peacebuilding commitment. We have already taken significant steps to encourage further convergence between climate action and the Sustainable Development Goals. However, this is but one piece of an increasingly complex puzzle. In order to address our security concerns effectively, Malta believes that we need to focus on a preventative strategy, one that is both comprehensive and integrative: comprehensive in the sense that any actions taken in response to climate or environmental emergencies should be complementary to our long-term mitigation and adaptation efforts, and integrative because we also need to work towards the integration of environmental and socioeconomic concerns into policymaking on national and international levels. In conclusion, Malta believes that any forward-looking approach needs to be holistic, incorporating humanitarian, political and security responses together with longer-term development and sustainable peace.
