Mr. Oyarzabal (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): First,
I wish to reaffirm Argentina's position condemning
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, as well as
our commitment to the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy. At the same time, I reiterate that
the general framework for a response to terrorism must
always be full respect for international law, international
humanitarian law, international human rights law, and
the purposes and principles of the Charter ofthe United
Nations.

Argentina recognizes that it is important for the
issue of kidnapping for ransom as a possible form of
financing for terrorist groups to begin to be considered
in the framework of the United Nations so as to establish
an explicit link between hostage-taking and terrorism,
as it arises from the preamble of the International
Convention against the Taking of Hostages, adopted by
the General Assembly on 17 December 1979 (resolution 34/146, annex). At the same time, we understand that
while this is a complex phenomenon, it is not universal
but is limited to certain geographic regions. Given
such complexity, which extends to definitions and legal
details that are lacking in the resolution and that must
be agreed on a multilateral basis, we believe that the
phenomenon needs to be addressed at the multilateral
level.

Argentina believes that the response to a hostage
situation or kidnapping should take its specific
circumstances into account, and that we must prioritize
the lives of hostages over other considerations. In this
sense, we must consider the implementation ofmeasures
to identify, freeze, seize or confiscate the funds or
other property constituting the proceeds of the crime
of hostage-taking, as provided for by the International
Convention against the Taking of Hostages, given
that the Convention does not necessarily penalize the
payment of ransom.

All this makes it clear that resolution 2133 (2014)
should be implemented via an approach conducive
to advancing our consideration of the issue. Beyond
promoting its discussion in the Counter-Terrorism
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001), the Council has decided to call upon all Member
States to cooperate closely, clearly recognizing the
need for expert-level discussions in the broader context
of the United Nations and other relevant international
and regional organizations.

Argentina believes that, beyond not establishing
new legal obligations for Members, the resolution
has the symbolic value of reflecting the Council's
unanimous agreement that dialogue should be initiated
on ways of combating this particular form of financing
of terrorism. Such United Nations dialogue, which
Argentina supports, must take place in the context of
the General Assembly, which is not only the competent
forum, but which will also ensure the participation of
all Member States in a matter of such importance in
order to move towards the necessary consensus.

