Ms. Andiijar (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): The Dominican Republic associates itself with
the statement delivered earlier by the representative of
Argentina on behalf of the countries endorsing the Safe
Schools Declaration.

We would like to congratulate Sweden on its
assumption of the presidency of the Council and for
organizing today's open debate on children in armed
conflict, with the theme of "Protecting children today
prevents conflicts tomorrow".

Our thanks also go to Ms. Virginia Gamba, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Children in
Armed Conflict, and to Ms. Henrietta Fore, Executive
Director of UNICEF, for sharing with us their important
perspectives. Likewise, we thank Ms. Yenny Londofio,
representative of civil society, whose experience
reminds us of our responsibility and the urgency with
which we must act.

We are concerned about the high levels of
violations against children affected by conflict, about
armed groups recruiting children to serve as suicide
terrorists and about alarming rates of kidnapping
of and sexual violence against children. Children
continue to be stigmatized for having been recruited
and used by armed groups, and they are criminalized
for acts they were forced to commit. That results in a
traumatized generation whose childhood has been cut
short and whose future is in jeopardy. It is essential to
ensure justice, protection and full enjoyment of human
rights, putting greater focus on the most vulnerable
children i those in armed conflict - as a means to
prevent conflict and build peace.

Schools, students and teachers are deliberately
targeted in attacks, demonstrating that this is not only
a crisis of security but also of human rights and social
development. Children's education is always one of
the first casualties during conflict and too often the
last to be recovered. Due to the seriousness of the
situation, the Dominican Republic has endorsed the
Safe Schools Declaration and the Vancouver Principles
on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment
and Use of Child Soldiers, and we encourage other
States to endorse those non-legally binding documents.
Furthermore, in 2014 the Dominican Republic ratified
the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child on the involvement of children in armed
conflict, and we call for its universal ratification.

It is imperative to strengthen respect for
international humanitarian law, which provides the
basis for legally binding obligations for all the parties
in conflicts, in addition to continuing to adopt measures
and taking on greater commitments, principally with
the action plans, to protect children from conflict
and contribute to more effective conflict prevention.
We therefore take this opportunity to call for an end
to impunity for those who perpetrate violations of the
rights of children in conflict.

The protection, reintegration and support of children
who have been recruited by armed groups - including
through greater investment in programs for education,
training, counselling and family reunification - is
key in breaking the cycle of violence and directing us
towards the goal that unites us today in this debate.

We believe that it is vital to guarantee the active and
meaningful participation of children and young people
in the processes of building and maintaining peace and
security. Furthermore, we recognize the fundamental
role played by United Nations agencies and by regional
and subregional organizations in addressing the
consequences suffered by children in armed conflicts.
We believe that this problem must continue to be part of

the policies and programmes of peacekeeping missions
in the field.

We still have a way to go in eliminating the abuse
and horrors that children in conflict face. We therefore
reiterate our commitment to continue collaborating with
the United Nations, Member States and civil society
while we occupy our seat in the Security Council as
a non-permanent member beginning in 2019, giving
this agenda and our children the level of priority that
they deserve.

