Mr. Cengizer (Turkey): First of all, I should like
to congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for this month. I should also like
to thank you for organizing this open meeting. One
year has elapsed since the establishment of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) in the wake of
the tragic events of 11 September, and convening this
meeting is a timely initiative that gives Member States
an opportunity to make a few comments on the
Committee's work thus far. In addition, my delegation
thanks Sir Jeremy Greenstock, Chairman of the CTC,
for his briefing to Member States.

While aligning ourselves with the statement made
Friday on behalf of the European Union, we should like
to highlight certain points.

Terrorism is a threat to the very existence of
individuals, of nations and of human civilization as a
whole. It is a means of oppression that humiliates the
individual and obstructs the development of humanity.
No consideration whatsoever can be invoked to justify
terrorist acts. Terrorism is simply a violation of human
rights.

Turkey has been calling for intensified
international cooperation against terrorism. It is our
firm belief that the only way to overcome international
terrorism is through coordinated action among the
members of the international community. In this
regard, we have been actively engaged in the work of
the organs of the United Nations to combat this scourge
at various levels. Here, I would like to underline
certain points concerning international cooperation
against terrorism.

Security Council resolution 1373 (2001) is an
effective instrument, and we lend our full support to its
implementation. We congratulate the CTC for the work
it has been carrying out since its inception. Turkey has
submitted two comprehensive reports to the CTC, as
envisaged by the resolution, and looks forward to
working closely with the Committee. The reports
presented by Turkey to the Counter-Terrorism
Committee put forward the basic parameters of Turkish
legislation for the prevention of terrorism, as well as
the actions taken by Turkey in international forums. As
mentioned in our reports, we have been working
closely with other States, both in our region and within
the international organizations of which Turkey is a
part.

Another important aspect of cooperation relates
to the 12 international conventions against terrorism
adopted so far. We are party to all 12 conventions, and
we call upon all States that have not yet done so to
become parties to them. Moreover, we expect States
fully to implement the bilateral, regional and
multilateral anti-terrorist conventions to which they are
parties.

Along the same lines, we look forward to further
progress in the Sixth Committee of the General
Assembly on discussions on a comprehensive
convention against international terrorism and on the
International Convention on the Suppression of
Nuclear Terrorism. In setting up these legal
instruments, it is important to ensure that there is no
safe haven for terrorists in any country, regardless of
their motivation or of the type of crimes they have
committed.

I would like to emphasize once again the urgent
need to put aside selective attitudes based on political
motivations and tolerance for, or the condoning of,
certain terrorist movements. We expect all States to
pursue a consistent and determined approach in
fighting terrorism without any leniency whatsoever.

