Mr. Leplinskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Today's meeting is further confirmation of
the serious concern of the international community and
the Security Council at the situation in Africa, as well
as the desire to work out an effective strategy for
peacekeeping and the sustainable development of
Africa.

We are alarmed that domestic and international
crises are having a destabilizing effect on the situation
of entire regions. The States of Central Africa are no
exception.

There are no quick recipes to resolving the
enormous job of settling regional conflicts. Multi-
track, painstaking efforts are required by Africa's
friends and, primarily, by the Africans themselves, in
order to break the familiar vicious cycle: from lack of
development, to social problems, political and military
instability, conflict and, ultimately, the collapse of
development pro grammes.

However, we are pleased to note that we have
come to today's meeting with some positive
achievements. Thanks to the efforts of the world
community, the United Nations and the Security
Council, as well as regional and subregional
organizations, significant success has been achieved in
resolving the situation in Angola and, to a certain
extent, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Active mediation is under way to stabilize relations
between the Central African Republic and Chad and
there has been normalization in the relationship among
the States of the Great Lakes region at the
intergovernmental level.

The Russian Federation notes a significant
increase in the activities of the Africans themselves in
preventing and resolving conflict situations, which
attests to their willingness and resolve to assume
greater responsibility for solving existing problems.
Only a few days ago, the Security Council welcomed
the decision to deploy an International Observation
Force in the Central African Republic, composed of
soldiers primarily from the Central African States.

An important role in post-conflict peacekeeping
and peace-building is played by the regional and
subregional organizations. Because of their
geographical proximity and their greater familiarity
with unique local situations, these organizations could
become centres for the coordination of sustainable
development and early warning of possible dangers. An
example of this is the decision taken by the Central
African States to establish a Council for Peace and
Security in Central Africa and to sign important
documents, as well as a Non-Aggression Pact and a
Mutual Assistance Pact.

We think it is important to make active use of the
provisions of the United Nations Charter that
encourage regional and subregional organizations to
take the initiative in preventive diplomacy and the
peaceful settlement of disputes. This, in particular,
implies expanding the practice of regional
peacekeeping operations with the support of the
Security Council. Of course, the appropriate principles
of the United Nations Charter must be observed when
launching peacekeeping operations. The carrying out of
operations that use force by regional and subregional
structures is permissible only if there is clear
authorization by the Security Council.

The Russian Federation intends to continue
giving whatever assistance it can to resolve the
problems of Africa, with whose countries we are
traditionally bound by friendly relations, and
sometimes by partnerships. Africa was, and remains, a
priority for us.

