Mr. Pleuger (Germany): I should like to join
other delegations in thanking the Secretary-General for
his latest report on the situation in Timor-Leste
(S/2003/449) and to thank Ambassador Sharma and his
staff for the excellent work that they have done thus
far. I should also like to pay tribute to the people of
Timor-Leste and their representatives for their
continuous successful endeavours as they build up their
young democracy.

Germany appreciates the increased stabilization
of the security environment in Timor-Leste. In that
regard, we welcome the downsizing of the personnel of
the United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET), in accordance with Security Council
resolution 1473 (2003), and the strengthening of the
National Police, as well as the idea of a common
border patrol between Indonesia and Timor-Leste.

Planning a gradual transfer of policing authority
to the Timor-Leste police force, as envisaged in
resolution 1473 (2003), remains one of our main
targets in paving the way for a democratic Timor-Leste,
independent of international assistance. Germany
therefore welcomes the handing over of routine police
tasks to the Timorese police as well as the
enhancement of its capabilities to deal with crowd
control and with the challenges potentially posed by
armed groups. We encourage the parties to continue the
process of smooth but steady transfer of
responsibilities. The internationally formed police
unit - as envisaged by resolution 1473 (2003) - will
be used to address urgent needs alongside the
competences already gained by the police of Timor-
Leste so that the police force has adequate time to
develop.

We also support the actors involved in
strengthening the country's political and administrative
institutions in order to proceed with the establishment
of a viable independent State. In that regard, we should
like to point to the importance of an adequate judicial
system, and we urge focus on that issue in order to
guarantee free and fair trials and to promote the rule of
law as an essential element of the new democracy.

Having listened attentively to the Special
Representative, I believe that the major task clearly
remains the country's economic and social
development. Every possible effort is needed to
achieve an upturn in the economy in order to promote
the population's economic and social well-being - an
important prerequisite for the future political stability
of the country. Here, the continued assistance of the
international community remains essential.

To accomplish these remaining tasks, we
therefore fully agree with the Secretary-General's
proposal to extend UNMISET's mandate for another
year. We shall continue to promote further bilateral
support alongside and after the Mission's contribution.
The story of Timor-Leste is our common success story
and therefore deserves our common support.

