Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): France is
in favour of any initiative to save civilian lives in Syria.
It was in that spirit that, on 16 December, it proposed
a draft resolution to deploy an evacuation monitoring
mechanism in Aleppo. It is for those same reasons that
France today voted in favour of resolution 2336 (2016).

France hopes that this ceasefire agreement
will be implemented immediately and calls on the
guarantors to assume their full responsibilities in this
regard. The text of the Russian-Turkish agreement, as
partially presented to the Security Council yesterday,
nevertheless still contains areas of obscurity.
France's first concern concerns the genuine
adherence of the Syrian parties to the truce agreement,
while bombardments have been carried out by the
regime in violation of the agreement in the past 48
hours, while a regime offensive, supported by Iran,
is still under way in the Barada valley. The Security
Council has received no document signed by the regime
or opposition groups. The list of groups considering
themselves to be parties to the agreement has not been
communicated to us. Russia said that some groups had
mandated others to accede to the agreement, which is
not corroborated by the texts that have been transmitted
to us.

Under these conditions, the degree of commitment
of the parties to the truce appears relatively uncertain
and its implementation fragile. In particular, France
considers that the cessation of hostilities must apply
to all armed groups, with the exception of groups
designated as terrorists by the Security Council. Armed
groups that are not parties to the cessation of hostilities
should not automatically be regarded as terrorists.

It is also essential that the monitoring of compliance
with the ceasefire be coordinated with the United
Nations. In this respect, France would have liked to
be able to study, with its partners, the modalities of
extending the monitoring arrangements provided for in
resolution 2328 (2016) to other localities in Syria. France
remains at the disposal of the guarantors to consider a
rigorous and impartial monitoring mechanism.

All the efforts of the international community
must now be aimed at facilitating the resumption of
the negotiations to be held on 8 February under the
auspices of Staffan de Mistura, to whom we reiterate
our full support. The preparatory exercises must fall
within the framework defined by resolution 2254
(2015) and the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex). The Astana meeting could be a useful first step
in that regard. To that end, the process of appointing
opposition representatives to the Astana meeting should
be transparent. However, it raises important questions.
France recalls that the High Negotiation Committee is
the legitimate representative of the opposition in the
inter-Syrian negotiations. There can be no credible
exercise that excludes it.

France hopes that the discussions on these points
will continue in a transparent manner with a view to
an effective political transition, which is essential if
Syria is to recover and begin its reconstruction. France
remains fully committed to the search for a lasting
solution to the conflict, which has lasted too long.

