Ms. Johnson: I wish to thank you, Sir, for the
opportunity to provide this short briefing on the
incidents that took place this week in South Sudan to
supplement Under-Secretary-General Ladsous's
briefing. We will provide the Council with more detail
on what we have learned up to now.

On 6 November, a mission of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) visited New Guffa,
in Maban county, on the border with Kurmuk county in
Blue Nile State, in response to bombings reported by
the Sudan People's Liberation Army (SPLA) on
2 September and 26 October. The situation was
assessed as calm. However, two days later, the SPLA in
Upper Nile State reported that Sudanese Armed Forces
(SAF) had conducted an aerial bombing of New Guffa
and Yalta, in Maban county, at around 4 pm. UNMISS
followed up on that information, which was confirmed
by the Maban county commissioner. The SPLA and the
commissioner reported that the bombing was carried
out by an Antonov aircraft, which dropped nine bombs
that resulted in the death of one child and seven SPLA
soldiers. Furthermore, they reported that six SPLA
soldiers and seven civilians, including four women,
were injured. Two non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) present in the area have also confirmed the
8 November bombings. However, UNMISS has not
verified those reports. The county commissioner
requested assistance with the evacuation of about
29 casualties. UNMISS today evacuated 14 of the
priority-one casualties, from Bunj to Malakal.

This morning, UNMISS received a report from a
local authority that new bombs may have been dropped
in the area of Guffa today. That has not been confirmed
from other sources. We are now trying to verify the
information. Reports indicate that people are moving
away from Guffa towards Bunj, the county capital.
Reportedly, there are already large numbers of
internally displaced persons and refugees in Bunj
already, with increasing numbers anticipated.
Humanitarian assessments and inter-agency teams are
being sent to Bunj now. A mission to Guffa is also on
its way to verify and assess situation on ground.

Yesterday, we received reports that between 2.30
and 3.00 pm. Sudanese Armed Forces bombed the
Yeda refugee camp, on the border between South
Kordofan, the Sudan, and Unity State, South Sudan.
The refugee camp is located in an area near an SPLA
camp. According to the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and other
humanitarian agencies, five bombs hit the Yeda area,
with two falling directly inside the perimeter of the
yeda shelter site. One bomb fell near a temporary
school. The number of casualties has yet to be
confirmed. A bomb that fell in the market remains
unexploded.

A rapid assessment by NGOs has so far found no
casualties, but many remain unaccounted for.
Reportedly, many fled when they heard the aircraft.
The UNMISS Mi-26 helicopter, which had been
delivering humanitarian supplies, left Yeda just
moments before the bombing started. An UNMISS
Mi-8 helicopter was on the ground at Yeda for a regular
flight scheduled to that location. There is no damage to
the helicopter, which was used to evacuate some
United Nations agency and international NGO staff.

UNMISS is currently organizing the relocation of
international NGO and United Nations agency staff
from the area. It is also working to verify the locations
of the reported bombings. In total, 26 people were
relocated yesterday by two UNMISS flights, including
5 from the United Nations, 15 from NGOs and 6 other
representatives of media and Government.

Fighting in Upper Nile State was reported by the
SPLA on 9 and 10 November, allegedly between SPLA
and rebel militias at South Kuek and Gabat. Both
locations are in Manyo county, on the western side of
the Nile river. UNMISS has not been able to verify
those incidents. However, the SPLA is seeking
assistance for the evacuation of SPLA casualties from
both locations, which are being organized as I speak.
Reportedly, the SPLA claims to have pushed the rebel
militia groups back into Kordofan. UNMISS has been
requested to assist the SPLA with the evacuation of
16 wounded from Renk. In doing so, we hope to
confirm which rebel militia groups they were fighting.
11-58922

SPLA spokesperson Philip Aguer today alleged
that there had been fighting in Kuek following an
attack on their base by Sudanese Armed Forces and
so-called mercenaries, which started at 9.00 am. and
lasted seven hours. They have also reported an alleged
18 deaths and 73 wounded, on both sides. Aguer also
said that the SPLA expected more attacks in the Upper
Nile area, motivated by Khartoum's desire to "take the
oil fields". That echoed the words of President Salva
Kiir, who made similar claims yesterday.

It is a significant concern that the rhetoric is
heightened on both sides, the Republic of the Sudan
and the Republic of South Sudan. The engagement of
the Security Council in contributing to de-escalating
the situation is very welcome, as Under-Secretary-
General Ladsous so strongly emphasized.

