Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic):
Once again the Security Council faces a new challenge
in the discharge of its responsibilities with respect to
the painful circumstances in the Middle East. Those
challenges are posed by the ongoing aggression of the
Israeli occupation of the Palestinian people and their
territory and the continuation and increased ferocity of
the military operations in Iraq after the failure of
efforts to reach the peaceful settlement called for in the
Council's resolutions.

Difficult days have passed since the outbreak of
hostilities in Iraqi territory. Today we meet to consider
the collective action we should take to put an end to the
fighting and to resume political action in the
framework of international legality with a view to
achieving a peaceful settlement to this crisis. That way,
we would spare the people of Iraq and the peoples of
the Middle East and the whole world the scourge of a
war that will bring nothing but destruction, devastation,
destabilization and threats to the welfare and security
of peoples. It is a war that threatens to reach grave
dimensions and to have serious, long-lasting and far-
reaching repercussions.

Egypt has participated actively in the various
stages of international action on the question of Iraq
throughout the last decade. Egypt's approach is based
on its firm belief in the need to act within the collective
international security system provided for in the United
Nations Charter. It is also based on the absolute need to
preserve the territorial integrity, unity and sovereignty
of Iraq, as well as the territorial integrity, unity and
sovereignty of its neighbours.
Undoubtedly, if the international inspection
regime in Iraq had been given sufficient time and if all
States had maintained the position that peace was
possible and deserved going the extra mile within the
framework of international legality, it would have been
possible for humanity to prevent the painful picture we
see today - the picture of the dead and wounded
soldiers and civilians, whose numbers will only
increase in coming days. The loss of a single victim is
a loss to humanity; the loss of a single victim is a seed
of resentment and revenge that will continue to haunt
succeeding generations, who will have to pay the price
of these sad and disturbing developments.

As the genuine representative of the conscience
of the international community and the source of
international legitimacy, the Security Council is called
upon to send a clear message calling for the immediate
cessation of fighting in the territory of Iraq and for the
attempt to resume efforts to reach a settlement by
peaceful means. It is called upon to affirm the
inadmissibility of any infringement on the sovereignty
of Iraq and its neighbours and to affirm Iraq's
sovereignty over its territory and resources. All parties
must respect international humanitarian law and the
responsibilities that flow from it. We the members of
the international community have the common duty to
urge the Council to assume its responsibilities swiftly.

At the meeting of the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of the League of Arab States on 24 March, an
important resolution was adopted that pays tribute to
the advocates of peace. The resolution contained
important elements that must be taken into account by
the Security Council in its consideration of the
question of Iraq and its grave repercussions for
international peace and security. Foremost among those
elements is the cessation of the aggression, the
withdrawal of foreign forces, the reaffirmation of
respect for Iraq's sovereignty, political independence
and territorial integrity and the need for all States to
refrain from interfering in Iraq's internal affairs.

The international action for the elimination of
proscribed Iraqi weapons cannot ignore the fact that
such action will remain incomplete without the full
implementation of paragraph 14 of resolution 687
(1991), which calls for making the Middle East a zone
free of weapons of mass destruction. The disarmament
of prohibited Iraqi weapons is only one step towards
that objective, which must be fully implemented at the
regional level, as called for by resolution 687 (1991).

The international community, on the basis of the
rule of law and respect for international legitimacy,
demands that the Council and its members safeguard
the Charter, which rejected war and called for the
peaceful settlement of disputes. Resorting to war and
the use of force epitomizes, in our view, the failure of
political action aimed at achieving the peaceful
settlement of disputes.

I cannot believe that the Council, under any
circumstances, would not assume its responsibility
under the Charter of maintaining international peace
and security. Nor can I believe that the Council would
delay acting to put an end to a tragedy that endangers
the lives of thousands of people and undermines the
foundation of the edifice constructed by the world in
order to avert the recurrence of violence and cruel
wars.

Finally, if we were to reject war at all costs and
also reject peace at all costs, we now have the
opportunity to build peace upon a foundation that is
clearly based on law and legality and the hopes of
humanity, including the right of peoples to live free of
weapons of mass or limited destruction.

