Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Let me start by thanking
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Zahir
Tanin for his briefing on the recent situation in Kosovo.
I would also like to welcome His Excellency Ivica
Dacic', First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, to New York
and to thank him for sharing his views on the recent
development in the field.

The Special Representative of the Secretary-
General provided us with a picture of the situation on
the ground. We have noted with concern the continuing
rising tension in the region. It is now important to ensure
that that rising tension does not escalate and deepen
the conflict. That therefore needs the commitment
of all parties to exercise restraint and not to further
exacerbate the situation. I believe that that is the main
purpose and the sole reason for us to gather here today.
We will continue to gather if there is no long-standing
resolution that leads to peace in the region. In brief, I
would also like to bring the following three points to
the attention of the Council.

First, the implementation of resolution 1244 (1999)
is and remains the basic framework to resolve the
conflict in the region. Each party is of course expected
to honour its part of the bargain in line with the
resolution, without exception. It would be unfortunate
to throw away two decades of progress due to violations
of the resolution, which would almost certainly have
the potential to threaten peace and security in the
region. Allegations and rhetoric do not help anyone
but, in particular, make the path to reconciliation
more difficult.

Secondly, Indonesia consistently upholds the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of States Members
of the United Nations, including Serbia, in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations and international
law. We will not condone any act that violates the
sovereignty or territorial integrity of any State. Should
any differences occur, dialogue is always the best and
the only way to address the issue; hence the need to
create a conducive environment for talks to resume.
That leads me to my third point. Indonesia strongly
believes that, in resolving the issue, all parties need to
use peaceful means through dialogue and negotiation
in the spirit of constructive engagement and mutual
accommodation. There are legitimate concerns that
have been raised today by the parties, as well as by
many Security Council members. We believe that the
transformation of the Kosovo Security Force into an
armed force and the imposition of a 100-per-cent tariff
on targeted countries are not in line with constructive
engagement and can quickly diminish confidence
between the sides. Tariff conditionalities by Pristina
hamper progress on negotiations and are ill-intentioned,
as they do not help anyone but hurt the common
consumers. Indonesia believes that, with a spirit of
constructive engagement and mutual accommodation,
even if it is not easy, there is hope for peace and a
solution through dialogue. We, of course, welcome the
efforts of the European Union in that regard.

We would like to express our appreciation for
the work undertaken by the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) thus far.
We support the continuous engagement of UNMIK and
encourage the Mission to continue to create a conducive
environment for the resumption of political negotiation.
Innovative approaches to building confidence and
trust through inter-community trust-building, youth
engagement and the participation of women in the
dialogue are most welcome. People-to-people contact is
important in order to build tolerance.

My childhood was spent in Yugoslavia in the early
19605. I saw people from different communities and
ethnic backgrounds living together in harmony and
happiness. I, for one, would like to see that happen
again. Pending that becoming a reality, the Security
Council needs to remain seized of the matter and to
push for all parties to come to the negotiating table and
find a mutually acceptable and beneficial solution for
the sake of all peoples in the region.

