Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Our delegation would like to thank the
delegation of Luxembourg for its initiative to convene
today's meeting and its very professional chairmanship
of the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.

We thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations
Mr. Herve Ladsous, Executive Director of the United

Nations Children's Fund Mr. Anthony Lake, and
Mr. Alhadji Babah Sawaneh for their participation in
this meeting and their useful contributions to today's
discussion. Separately, we would like to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflicts, Ms. Zerrougui, for her
commitment to assisting children and for her active
work in various regions of the world.

As one of the most vulnerable groups of the
population, children continue to suffer the horrors of
war, despite all the measures undertaken at the national
and international levels and the existence of a broad
international legal basis. The approach to considering
the issue of children and armed conflict must be
comprehensive, as established in resolution 1612 (2005)
and subsequent documents of the Security Council.
This requires equal attention to be accorded to all six
categories of grave violations against children in armed
conflict, both within the framework of the monitoring
and reporting mechanisms in place and during the
activities of the relevant thematic Working Group of
the Security Council.

These mechanisms need above all to engage in the
most pressing and widescale situations ofarmed conflict
on the agenda of the Security Council. Unfortunately,
the Security Council periodically reviews the issue of
children in situations that are not only not on its agenda
but also cannot be described as armed conflict. While
this subject is of the utmost importance, we believe
that it is incorrect in this context for the Council to
focus on issues that are not related to the maintenance
of international peace and security. These are the
prerogatives of other entities, whose work should not
be duplicated. Only by maintaining a balanced division
of labour can we ensure the greater effectiveness of all
bodies engaged on the issue of children and achieve
synergies between them.

The Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict, headed by Luxembourg, has done a great deal
to establish, in an atmosphere oftrust, accommodations
on specific situations and to structure dialogues with
countries affected by armed conflict. In order effectively
to implement existing plans, close cooperation must be
developed with the Governments of those countries,
which ultimately should help to improve the situation
of children on the ground. National Governments play a
paramount role in protecting and rehabilitating children
in armed conflict, while the actions undertaken by

the bodies of the United Nations system must seek to
support and complement national efforts.

Preventing crimes against children is an important
component of the set of measures developed to promote
post-conflict settlement and recovery. Russia condemns
all violations against children, above all the most
serious, whosoever perpetrates them, and advocates
bringing their perpetrators to justice. Crimes against
children should not go unpunished. We are particularly
alarmed by the killing and wounding of children in
premeditated attacks and as a result of indiscriminate
or excessive use of force, including as a result of the
use of unmanned aircraft. The rapid development of
military technologies has seen such instances take
place with tragic regularity. This issue calls for ever
heightened attention.

The report of Mr. Emmerson, Special Rapporteur
on the promotion and protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism,
prepared for the twenty-fifth session of the Human
Rights Council in Geneva, cites 37 cases in which
unmanned aircraft have carried out attacks leading to
civilian casualties. According to the data of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, in 2013 19
confirmed uses of drones led to 59 civilian casualties,
45 of which were deaths. As a result of 54 combat air
operations carried out by the International Security
Assistance Force, there were 182 casualties, of which
118 were killed. Women and children comprised some
45 per cent of civilian victims of such operations.

Last year's thematic report provided by
Ms. Zerrougui to the Security Council (S/2013/245)
cites specific information on the use of drones in
Pakistan that have killed or wounded children.
Information is available on reports of child victims of
United States air strikes in Yemen. One such case was
an attack by unmanned aerial vehicle on 2 September
2012 in the region of Rada, as a result of which there
were 12 civilian deaths, including those of three
children and one pregnant woman. We should also
recall the civilian deaths occasioned by NATO military
operations in Libya. We do not accept attempts to
categorize civilian victims, above all children, as so-
called collateral damage. That contravenes, inter alia,
the provisions of international humanitarian law. We
advocate scrupulous investigation of such incidents and
the punishment of their perpetrators.

Slightly less than a year ago, in a Security Council
debate on children and armed conflict, several
delegations advanced the priority idea of exerting
pressure on so-called persistent perpetrators. While we
do not dispute the importance of approaching this issue
in the framework of the appropriate context, in each
case we need to understand who such perpetrators are
and why a number of parties to conflict have remained
so long on the lists contained in the annexes of the
Secretary-General's reports, despite efforts to remedy
the situation. We believe that the establishment of clear
procedures and criteria for the listing and delisting
of parties to armed conflict in the annexes to the
reports of the Secretary-General would enhance the
transparency of existing procedures and strengthen
trust in the objectivity of the functioning of the entire
range of instruments. Unfortunately, that issue is not
duly reflected in resolution 2143 (2014), adopted today.

We believe that the "Children, not soldiers"
campaign, launched yesterday to end the recruitment
and use of children in Government armed forces by
2016, is an important step in the right direction. We
believe that openness with respect to that issue will not
only lead to tangible results to prevent the recruitment
by Government armed forces, but also set an example to
be followed forthwith by many armed groups. We hope
that the campaign, having demonstrated its balanced
and impartial nature, will enhance the attractiveness
and effectiveness of the engagement of parties to
conflict with the United Nations in the prevention of
violence against women.

