Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Lithuania and Chairman-in-Office of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE),
Mr. Audronius Azubalis, for his statement. We believe
his intervention included some very interesting
perspectives on the OSCE's future and its cooperation
with the United Nations.

Colombia would like to highlight the common
identity and shared principles of our two organizations.
We also share a vision of the essential nature of
freedom, democracy and respect for human rights in
efforts to maintain security.

Likewise, we believe that security, which is at the
top of the list of the priorities of the Government of
Colombia, is a prerequisite for the consolidation of the
rule of law, peace and conflict prevention. We view
security as a requirement for the effective enjoyment of
citizen's liberties, sustainable development and the
achievement of social prosperity under democratic
precepts. In this context, we value the work of the
OSCE as an example of the constructive potential of
interregional, regional and subregional cooperation in
promoting stability for nations and peoples.

In the context of respect for the principles and
norms of international law, sovereignty and the
self-determination of peoples, dialogue and

cooperation at all regional levels can contribute to
progress towards a safer and more harmonious world.

We also believe that the interaction between
organizations of this type and the United Nations -
and the Security Council in particular, in areas within
its purview - promotes a better understanding of
specific situations. Such exchanges promote
comprehensive approaches to security issues by
integrating human, political, economic, environmental
and military elements specific to the regional
dynamics.

With respect to cooperation with the United
Nations, we welcome the contribution of the OSCE
Mission in Kosovo to implementing the mandate of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo. We will have the opportunity to address that
issue on the agenda tomorrow, but I believe it relevant
to express appreciation for regional efforts to move
ahead on areas of common interest, in accordance with
the provisions of resolution 1244 (1999).

Furthermore, we applaud the firm commitment
noted by the Minister of Lithuania to the role of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe in
fighting terrorism. To the extent that regional areas
resolutely support overall frameworks and strategies to
address that transnational scourge in all its
manifestations, we will be able to make more effective
use of the relevant international instruments. Similarly,
we note with interest the planned increase in OSCE
support for actions led by the United Nations to
stabilize Afghanistan with a view to countering, in
coordination with national authorities, transnational
threats that could emerge from that country's territory.
Colombia takes this opportunity to express its
solidarity with the Afghan people and to offer all
relevant experience in fighting such threats.

In conclusion, I would like to underscore the
importance of promoting smoother communication
between OSCE and other regional organizations,
including the Organization of American States, as the
Minister mentioned. Prosperity, democracy and peace
are the clear beneficiaries of dialogue and interregional
agreement on the fundamental value of security.

