The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Lebanon and the Syrian Arab
Republic in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Assaf
(Lebanon) and Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) took seats at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
photocopies of a letter dated 12 December 2005 from
the Secretary-General addressed to the President of the
Security Council transmitting the report of the United
Nations International Independent Investigation
Commission prepared pursuant to resolutions 1595
(2005) and 1636 (2005). The letter and its enclosure
will be issued as a document of the Security Council
under the symbol S/2005/775.

I should like to draw the attention of members to
documents S/2005/762 and S/2005/783, which contain
letters dated 5 December and 13 December 2005,
respectively, from the charge d'affaires ad interim of
the Permanent Mission of Lebanon to the United
Nations addressed to the Secretary-General.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2005/788, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by France, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
United States of America.

I welcome the presence at this meeting of the
Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Kofi Annan.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Algeria, Argentina, Benin, Brazil, China,
Denmark, France, Greece, Japan, Philippines,
Romania, Russian Federation, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, United States of America


The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1644 (2005).

I shall now give the floor to those representatives
who wish to make statements after the voting.


