Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): I would like first to
thank the Permanent Representative of Uganda for the
excellent cooperation we had and I only regret that we
did not have a chance to work longer together on the
Council.

(spoke in French)

As for the issue being discussed today, I wish
first to thank the Security Council presidency and the
delegation of the United Kingdom for having taken the
initiative on today's debate and for their efforts in
preparing the debate.

Like previous speakers, I wish to emphasize that
the Brahimi report remains relevant as a basis for any
discussion of the peacekeeping. Since its publication,
many challenges remain the same, but new ones have
emerged. We now face an unprecedented level of
peacekeeping activities in often hostile contexts and
with increasingly complex mandates. At the same time,
given the rapid growth in the number and size of
missions, we are approaching the limits of available
resources. Changes involving work methods and
institutional changes in the planning, implementation,
follow-up and assessment of peacekeeping operations
will help us to address those issues more effectively.

My delegation notes with great satisfaction that
the Secretariat has launched a similar process to
analyse key questions relating to future peacekeeping
operations. Austria is a long-standing troop contributor
in the framework of the United Nations and of regional
structures, such as the European Union and the NATO
Partnership for Peace. Since 1960, some 60,000
Austrian soldiers have served in peacekeeping
operations under United Nations authority. It goes
without saying that we are following this work with
great interest and that we are ready to participate
actively in it and to share our relevant experience and
expertise.

Given the growth in peacekeeping operations and
the fact that their mandates are becoming increasingly
complex, cooperation with regional organizations will
be more important than ever. Support for creating the
expertise and capacity is necessary to allow those
organizations to play a more important role. While the
Security Council must not abandon its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, the United Nations must strive to
play a growing role as a bridging force until the
regional organizations are able to take up the slack.
That would also contribute to strengthening regional
ownership of crisis management.

Austria supports the idea of strengthening the
expertise available to the Security Council and all of its
members in the preparation of the Council's decisions
on new peacekeeping missions. That is clearly true for
military expertise and for the specific expertise that
may prove necessary for action on such issues as the
protection of civilians in conflict. We are also in favour
of a temporary strengthening, if necessary, of the
strategic capacity of the Secretariat to manage and
oversee particularly complex operations.

Moreover, Austria supports an interactive process
in which the Secretariat, the Security Council and the
troop-contributing countries would meet from the
outset of the planning phase to the follow-up and
assessment of missions under way. A more in-depth
dialogue among existing structures within the Security
Council and the Secretariat would allow for better
integration of our collective political, financial and
military expertise and also make it possible to ensure
that the mandate of a peacekeeping operation reflects
from the start its needs and challenges and those of the
individuals who must be protected.

Austria also welcomes in that context the idea of
organizing, on a more regular basis, meetings among
the Security Council, the Secretariat, commanders in
the field and troop-contributing countries to discuss the
implementation, progress and challenges of the various
operations under way.

Austria firmly supports strengthening the
mandates of peacekeeping operations in the area of
civilian protection and recognizes the important role of
such operations in the promotion of human rights, the
protection of children affected by armed conflict, the
strengthening of the rule of law and the role of women
in peace processes and in supporting peace.

In our view, an important challenge is the lack of
instructions and guidelines for force commanders and
troops on the ground for the specific implementation of
their mandates. Such instructions and guidelines should
be developed through close cooperation among the
Security Council, the Secretariat and the troop-
contributing countries, taking into account the review
of existing missions and best practices. This could also
play an important role for troop-contributing countries
in preparing troops for such tasks, including by
integrating those aspects into pre-deployment training.

Austria supports a study commissioned by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs that will
examine those issues. We also support the idea of
improving the assessment of current mission mandates,
including in terms of strategic objectives and
benchmarks. The lessons learned from a mission could
be an important source of information for the Security
Council in planning and following up on existing
missions. That process should also be shared with and
enriched by the troop-contributing countries.

In conclusion, we support and are very interested
in follow-up to this debate and are prepared to actively
contribute during our Security Council mandate.

