Mr. Simonovie (Croatia): The Republic of Croatia
shares the concerns of the international community on the
situation in Kosovo and the impending threat to
international peace and security which it constitutes.
Croatia, as a neighbour of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, is vitally interested in a speedy resolution of
the crisis.

Croatia believes that all political issues in Kosovo,
including its future status, must be resolved between the
Belgrade authorities and Kosovar Albanians through a
genuinely democratic political process. The dialogue has to
take into account both the opinions of the Arbitration
Commission of the International Conference on Yugoslavia
- The Badinter Commission - on the inviolability of the
borders of new States established following the dissolution
of the former Yugoslavia and the tradition of territorial
autonomy in Kosovo. The disrespect that the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia showed for the opinions of the
Badinter Commission regarding the territorial integrity of
neighbouring Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina is now,
regarding Kosovo, returning like a boomerang.

Croatia welcomes - and emphasizes the importance
of - the readiness of the international community to help
facilitate this process, as demonstrated by the resolution
that the Security Council has just adopted. My delegation
believes that the willingness of the international
community to play an active role in alleviating the tension
is vital for the achievement of a political solution. Croatia
supports all the efforts undertaken by the international
community in this regard, particularly the endeavours
made by the Contact Group and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) aimed at
halting the escalation of the conflict.

Croatia joins others in condemning the violation of
human rights in Kosovo and denounces all acts and forms
of terrorism, regardless of whether they are committed by
a State, a group or an individual, bearing in mind that
State terrorism represents the most dangerous form of
terrorism because of the resources available to States.

It is very clear that police repression is an
unacceptable method for resolving political issues in
Kosovo. Croatia expressed its disagreement with such
repressive methods used by Serbian authorities even
during the time of the former Socialist Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia, when the Socialist Republic of Croatia
withdrew its police forces from the federal units deployed
in Kosovo. Today, as an independent and sovereign State,
Croatia adds its voice to the efforts of the international
community in seeking a peaceful resolution of the
conflict.

Croatia is particularly concerned by the possible
humanitarian catastrophe which could be caused by the
present crisis. The international community cannot allow
the same pattern of humanitarian disasters experienced in
Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina to be repeated in
Kosovo. On this issue Croatia speaks from the experience
of a country which has during the past six years taken
care of more than 800,000 refugees and displaced
persons.

In this context, my delegation welcomes the fact that
the resolution calls on the authorities of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia to allow international
humanitarian organizations full access to Kosovo in order
to prevent a humanitarian catastrophe and to alleviate the

 
suffering of the civilian population. Croatia holds this to be
a humanitarian imperative.

Croatia acknowledges the importance of normalizing
relations between the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and
the rest of the international community. However, I should
like to stress that the participation of the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia in international institutions is conditional
upon its application for membership and the fulfilment of
all criteria for acceptance into those institutions, as is the
case with every new applicant. Consequently, it is the
understanding of my delegation that this is the only context
within which paragraph 18 of the resolution can be
interpreted. The issue of succession to the former
Yugoslavia cannot be linked to the Kosovo crisis, because
it is a matter which involves all the successor States to the
former Yugoslavia and must be resolved on the basis of the
opinions of the Badinter Commission and international law.

