Lord Ashdown: I thank you, Mr. President, for
your kind words.

As you have pointed out, Sir, my report has been
submitted to the Security Council. I shall therefore
endeavour to simply add supplementary comments in
the briefing I am about to give.

Seven months ago, when I last spoke to the
Council (see S/PV.5147), I said that I believed that the
following period - namely, the period immediately
after that report - would be decisive. Would the
political leadership of Bosnia and Herzegovina seize
the opportunity to show that the country had become a
viable State that was irreversibly on course to
European and Euro-Atlantic integration, or would it
lose that opportunity? Some six or seven months later,
the answer is clear: they did not reject that opportunity;
they took it. That period was decisive and the country
has now moved a step forward towards the next phase
of its development.

The Council has before it our detailed report on
developments in Bosnia and Herzegovina (S/2005/706, annex). However, things have moved on considerably
since that report was submitted. There is a huge
difference between where Bosnia and Herzegovina
stood in June and where it now stands, just a week
away from the tenth anniversary of the signing of the
Dayton Peace Accords. Bosnia and Herzegovina has
done what many said was impossible even a year ago,
let alone at the start of my mandate, in May 2002 - or
even further away, on the date that the Dayton Peace
Agreements were signed. The country now stands at
the gates that lead to the long path towards
membership in the European Union.

European Union foreign ministers announced on
8 November that they welcomed the recommendation
from the European Commission to start drawing up a
negotiating mandate for Bosnia and Herzegovina's
stabilization and association agreement. What that
means is that, if all goes according to plan, the
stabilization and association process negotiations will
be approved at the 21 November meeting of the
General Affairs and External Relations Council in
Brussels, precisely a full 10 years after the Dayton-
Paris Agreements were signed. The Council may
consider that to be a fitting anniversary present. When
that happens Bosnia and Herzegovina will join the rest
of the region on the journey towards accession to the
European Union. I believe that that is truly a
remarkable achievement for a country as war-torn as
Bosnia and Herzegovina was just 10 years ago.

As you have pointed out, Mr. President, this is
my last report to the Security Council as High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina. In
addition to updating the Council on the highlights of
the reporting period, I hope the Council will not think
it an abuse of this opportunity if I were to share my
impressions about how far Bosnia and Herzegovina has
come in the last three years and, above all, in the last
10.

May I first take this opportunity to thank the
Secretary-General personally and the Security Council
for the enormous support that I have received during
the three and a half years of my mandate.

Ten years after Bosnia and Herzegovina's brutal
war, the country has acquired the framework - and I
would underscore that it is a framework, and not yet
the substance - of a modern European State. I think
that the scale of that achievement can be judged if we
cast our minds back to Bosnia and Herzegovina
10 years ago, in 1995, with a people traumatized by
mass murder and ethnic cleansing, contending with the
material deprivation wrought by a collapsed
infrastructure and burdened with a completely
moribund economy. I therefore think that in that
period- measured against other peace stabilization
missions - progress has been real, substantial and, in
some cases, even miraculous. But I want to stress that I
think that has been utterly dependent not just on the
international community's efforts but also on the
unbelievable fortitude, hard work and good sense of
the ordinary people of Bosnia and Herzegovina. They
are the true heroes of that transformation.

At the start of 2005 Bosnia and Herzegovina
stood at a crossroads. For much of the year it was,
frankly, unclear and uncertain which direction the
country would take. In June progress appeared, to put it
bluntly, to have stalled. Obstructionism - particularly,
but not exclusively, from the Republika Srpska
Government - was rife. Most key State-level reforms
appeared at that stage to be blocked. Carla Del Ponte,
Chief Prosecutor of the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) had highlighted the
need to tackle systemic weaknesses in Bosnia and
Herzegovina's security institutions. Although defence
reform proceeded, despite repeated efforts by the
international community and the Council of Ministers
to find a way around the impasse, the Republika Srpska
still refused to agree to push forward with police
restructuring. Most important, at that date, the failure
to agree to police reform and the blockage by the Croat
National Union (HDZ) of the passage of the public
broadcasting legislation meant that the remaining
requirements for Bosnia and Herzegovina to begin
stabilization and association negotiations with the
European Union remained unfulfilled at that point.
Thus, when Serbia and Montenegro met the conditions
of the European Union's feasibility study on 5 October,
Bosnia and Herzegovina became the only country in
the Balkans that had no contractual relationship with
the European Union.

The last time I addressed the Council I said that
seasoned observers had a right to be sceptical about the
prospects for a change of heart on the part of the
Republika Srpska leadership. Well, scepticism is
always the safe default position in the Balkans. But
perhaps scepticism about the prospects of success was
particularly appropriate in June of this year. But I am
happy to report to the Council that that blockage has
now been removed: we have now moved decisively
into more promising territory.

Thanks to a combination of some enlightened
local leadership - perhaps especially in the Republika
Srpska - and consistent pressure from the
international community, the major obstacles to Euro-
Atlantic integration have now been overcome. Frankly,
defence reform has succeeded beyond all our
expectations. A consensus has been built, and
maintained, that has enabled the transfer of all defence
responsibilities and personnel to the State, as well as
the abolition of conscription and the establishment of a
small reserve force to back up the downsized
professional army. The three former armies of Bosnia
and Herzegovina are therefore now on the way to being
melded into a single, NATO-compatible military force
of some 12,000 members under, as it happens, one
Bosnian Serb defence minister. Let me pay tribute to
Nikola Radovanovic', Minister for Defence of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, who has been a major contributor to
that process. He has fulfilled his duties with
remarkable skill and is, I believe, one of the most
capable of the ministers new emerging from Bosnia
and Herzegovina's political strata.

But whereas the armed forces are essentially once
removed from popular perceptions of day-to-day
security, the police, on the other hand, are viewed by
many as the day-to-day protectors of the local
community. Whether you trust the police or not will
determine where and in which community you are
prepared to live. That is an issue that, apart from
anything else, has a direct bearing on refugee returns
and on reconciliation. Police reform was therefore
always going to be much more sensitive and much
more difficult.

The European Union, backed by the international
community - and if I may, I should like to pay a
special tribute to the work of the United States here -
made it very clear that the remaining conditions for
Bosnia and Herzegovina to begin the stabilization talks
were non-negotiable and not about to change. They
included police reform. The breakthrough on police
reform that came in October occurred, in my View,
because the international community held to a solid
and united position, and Bosnia and Herzegovina's
leaders grasped the meaning of that and were not
prepared to risk isolation and exclusion from the
European process. Bluntly put, when they realized that
we were serious, they got serious.

The entity and State parliaments have, as a result,
now endorsed a political agreement on police
restructuring in line with the European Commission's
three basic principles. Once implemented - and I do
not want to underestimate the task of implementation,
because that will be difficult too, and it must be fully
implemented - that agreement will provide the basis
for a modern and effective State-level police force, free
from political interference and working without the
constraints of ethnic boundaries.

I will not pretend that it has been easy to get
where we are today. The aspiration of European Union
membership has been a powerful draw, but it has taken
consistent and united pressure from the international
community over the last 10 years, together with
leadership from Bosnia and Herzegovina's political
bodies, to bring Bosnia and Herzegovina finally to the
gates of the European Union and NATO membership
through the Partnership for Peace.

Nowhere has that been clearer than in the area of
ICTY cooperation. When I spoke to the Council in
March, I welcomed the progress that had been made on
ICTY cooperation. Today, I can welcome even more.
Today, only five of the 15 major indictees indicted for
war crimes committed in Bosnia and Herzegovina are
still at large. The Republika Srpska authorities - and I
commend them for it - have transferred or assisted
Belgrade in the transfer of 12 indictees this year. That
is huge step forward, given the fact that, by 1 January,
the Republika Srpska authorities had transferred not a
single Hague indictee to The Hague for a full nine
years. In the intervening months, some 12 have been so
transferred.

However, another anniversary of the massacre at
Srebrenica - the tenth - has now passed without the
transfer of the two most wanted on that list: Radovan
Karadzic and Ratko Mladic. We need to signal, on this
tenth anniversary of Dayton, our utter determination to
ensure that this chapter of Bosnia and Herzegovina's
history is closed. Without the transfer of Karadzic and
Mladic, justice will not have been done and the
Balkans will not be able to enter fully this new,
European phase of its history. Bosnia and
Herzegovina's future can be built only on justice, on
truth, on accountability and, ultimately, on
reconciliation, and that cannot happen until Karadzic
and Mladic are where they should be - facing the
charges laid against them before The Hague Tribunal.

Other small steps have been taken, and some not
so small. One, for instance, is in the case of Mostar.
This time last year, I reported on the reopening of the
Mostar bridge, a powerful symbol of reconciliation. At
the end of this month, the Office of the High
Representative's unit dedicated to supporting the
reintegration of Mostar will be closed, having
successfully completed its work. Most of Mostar's
municipal institutions have now been unified or are in
the process of being unified. A majority of local civil
service positions have now been filled under the new,
European Union-standard Civil Service Law.
Nevertheless, a small but worrying number of the most
sensitive issues, such as street names and the
ownership of the local Croat television station, have
still to be resolved. They must be resolved, and soon. It
would be a blot on Mostar's progress towards unity if
its politicians were unable to resolve those issues.

So, there is more work still to be done, and I
regret to have to report to the Council that hardliners in
Mostar continue to try to disrupt the process by
continuing to place the interests of ethnic division
above the interests of Mostar and its long-suffering
citizens. Nevertheless, considerable progress has been
made. I think I can say that, despite those last, yet-to-
be-completed tasks, the process in Mostar and
elsewhere has proved that there is far more that unites
the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina today than
divides them.

The opening of stabilization and association
negotiations this year will mark a decisive break, I
believe, with the past. The key is whether or not the
opportunities created by the launch of the stabilization
and association process will be seized. In my View, the
two key words for the future phase are sustainability
and functionality. They are now the watchwords. The
last 12 months have demonstrated that there is the
political will to meet the requirements of Euro- Atlantic
integration, but in many cases, perhaps in most, the
really hard part of the reform process - its
implementation - is only now beginning.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is, I think, now moving
decisively from the phase of peace implementation to
the marathon task of establishing good governance and
the achievement of European standards on the way to
full European membership. That is something that the
international community cannot do for Bosnia and
Herzegovina. It is not our job. Our job is to enable -
to create viable institutions and place them in a
coherent legislative and practical framework, but it is
up to the citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina to make
those institutions work and to expand and strengthen
that State framework.

In that context, there has been much talk of the
relevance of the Dayton Constitution. There is, I think,
now a growing consensus that the Dayton construct in
its present form, while remaining essential as a
foundation for peace, has nevertheless reached the end
of its utility as a framework for the next phase of the
reform process. Bosnia and Herzegovina needs now to
consider the post-Dayton era and to find a new
template, within the European stability and association
process, to move forward in the next phase.

I subscribe to that general View. Dayton achieved
what it was designed to achieve, and it is remarkable
how successful it was. It ended the war and it
established a framework in which post-war recovery
could begin. Those are significant, perhaps even
remarkable achievements for an agreement which, I
think, was universally predicted to fail in the months
after it was first drawn up. Dayton did not fail; it has
succeeded. It now needs, in my view, to be adapted in
order to reflect the extent of Bosnia and Herzegovina's
progress towards a normal and prosperous European
future. Dayton will remain our foundation, but we need
to think beyond Dayton to what happens next.
This is not a question just of Euro-Atlantic
integration. The people of Bosnia and Herzegovina are
entitled to demand a Government that is accountable
and efficient, and no State can win the loyalty of its
citizens when it spends 70 per cent of their taxes on
Government and only 30 per cent on the citizens'
services. Constitutional change is now possible and
necessary, in my View, and that is the next phase that
we must now enter. It is important here, however, to
underline that this cannot be imposed by the
international community; it cannot be imposed by one
people over the other two; it cannot be imposed by two
over the third. It has to be reached through the
domestic institutions and through a process of
consensus.

But if constitutional change is now possible and
necessary for Bosnia and Herzegovina, then so is a
fundamental change in the role of the international
community itself. The signing of the stabilization and
association agreement should, I believe, herald the end
of heavyweight international intervention in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. It is time for the international
community to take a step back. Our posture should turn
from one of pushing reform to one of supporting and
enabling it. The Peace Implementation Council has, at
my recommendation, made it clear that once the
stabilization and association negotiations are under
way, it is ready to begin phasing out the use of the
Bonn Powers and replacing the Office of the High
Representative with a structure led by the European
Union Special Representative. That transition could
begin before the end of this year and might be
completed, if all goes well, by the time Bosnia and
Herzegovina goes to the polls in October 2006.

I believe that the Bonn Powers have worked.
They have worked in levering the country forward to
this point, doing so at reasonable pace, consistent with
the reform process and what the system will bear. But
the Bonn Powers - let us recognize it - have also
created a dangerous dependency, both in the Bosnia
and Herzegovina political establishment and, to be
very blunt, in the international community, too. It is
time to wean Bosnia - and ourselves - off them by a
progressive process that hands democratic power over
to democratic sovereign institutions and provides the
space for proper political opposition and a strong civil
society to grow.

That does not mean that the international
community or the Peace Implementation Council
should disengage. Bosnia and Herzegovina still needs
our concerted support, including of the support of the
non-European Union countries that have helped to
steer it over the past 10 years. It still needs the
European Union force (EUFOR), which, since its
deployment at the beginning of 2005, has established
itself as an efficient and credible force.

There remain major outstanding challenges that
require continued engagement, commitment and
allocation of resources by the international community.
A good example of that continuing need for resources
can be found in the judicial and penal system. The
rehabilitation of the police forces and judiciary is now
genuinely beginning to pay dividends. I should remind
the Council that just two weeks ago, the Bosnia and
Herzegovina security institutions successfully mounted
a very delicate and difficult operation against potential
suicide bombers transiting through Bosnia. That
demonstrates just how far the security institutions of
Bosnia and Herzegovina have come and how much
Bosnia and Herzegovina is taking its international
responsibilities seriously, as well as the necessity to
continue to keep vigilant on this front.

With increasing numbers of criminals being
brought to justice, and some war crimes cases now
being transferred from The Hague to the Court of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, that country is faced with the
problem that there is simply no prison in which to
incarcerate those who are convicted. There will be a
donors conference in February, and I hope that that will
take a step towards rectifying that problem.

There is also - and I regret to have to raise this
again - the outstanding issue of police decertification,
which we have discussed on many previous occasions
when I have reported to the Council. I understand that
the Council may give consideration to setting up a
review of the police certification process conducted by
the United Nations International Police Task Force
(IPTF). I encourage the Council, as I have over the past
two years, to do that without delay.

The certification of police officers by the IPTF
was an ambitious and largely successful attempt to
rehabilitate the ranks of police officers in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, many of whom had been compromised
by involvement in criminal activities during and after
the war. When the process was concluded at the end of
2004, regrettably no provision was made for reviewing
problematic decisions where credible evidence exists
that the right procedures were not followed. The
Venice Commission very recently commented on that
and called for a review process to be established. I
agree with it. A review mechanism would consolidate
the certification process by overturning or confirming
decisions that currently raise questions about the
process as a whole.

I hope that you will forgive me, Mr. President, for
offering a few final reflections as I prepare to depart
my role as High Representative.

Thirteen years ago, I stood on the tarmac of the
Sarajevo airfield, then held by the United Nations,
watching a murderous artillery duel take place over our
heads, smashing into the beauty of Sarajevo and the
wonderful valley in which it sits. My relationship with
Bosnia and Herzegovina started on that hot August
day. That relationship has taken me on a long, long
journey, one that eventually led me to my past three
and a half years as High Representative. I feel deeply
honoured to have had the privilege to work with the
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina in helping to rebuild
their country and putting Bosnia firmly on the path to
Euro-Atlantic integration.

Bosnia and Herzegovina will continue to demand
a unique approach from the international
community - an approach that combines the prospect
of European Union accession with an energetic,
proactive and comprehensive engagement. We will
continue to need to offer bespoke solutions for the very
complex challenges that this country continues to pose.
And we will need to pull all those elements together as
a determined team.

I do not want in any way to underestimate how
far there is to go. But Bosnia has already come through
the most difficult part of its long journey. In the end,
how those challenges are going to be resolved will not
be up to the international community. But it will be up
to the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina. I shall watch
developments with interest and, I confess, with love for
a country to which I have grown deeply attached, and
which, I am absolutely certain, will one day be a
member of the family of European Union nations and
regarded as one of its little jewels.

