Mr. Dejammet (France) (interpretation from French):
The Security Council was first seized of the situation in
Somalia at the beginning of 1992. The action taken by the
Council at that time had two main objectives: to promote
national reconciliation and to put an end to the very serious
humanitarian crisis besetting that country as a result of the
war.

The Security Council has devoted great energy to the
Somali crisis. It has adopted some 20 resolutions on this
subject. Those resolutions authorized the deployment of two
peace-keeping operations, at a cost of some $2 billion, and
of a multinational force of 37,000 men to enable the
Somalis to restore peace in the wake of a conflict in which
more than 300,000 people died, most of them of
malnutrition.

In humanitarian terms, the international community's
efforts were successful for a time. Farnine was checked,
health facilities were restored, schools were reopened, and
the country's economy seemed to be improving. The
Secretary-General made mention of this positive trend in
his latest report, submitted to us on 19 January 1996.
However, more recent information is much more disturbing,
leading us to fear a deterioration of the situation.

In the political sphere, however, there has been no
improvement. For more than a year, the process of national
reconciliation has been at a standstill. The Blue Helmets'
departure, as expected, led to a resumption of fighting
between factions. Following the withdrawal of the United
Nations Operation in Somalia (UNOSOM. II), it was
decided to maintain there a Political Office, which was
established on 31 May 1995, entrusted with continuing to
promote the process of national reconciliation. That Office,
established in Nairobi, was to be transferred to Somalia as
soon as circumstances allowed. This has not been possible.
The current situation suggests, unfortunately, that there
has been no change in that respect.

The situation is deteriorating daily, now endangering
the delivery of humanitarian aid. The warlords, in
particular General Aidid, bear full responsibility for this
deterioration. Testifying to their complete lack of civic-
mindedness, these leaders show every day that they prefer
the status quo to a negotiation under whose terms they
would have to make concessions.

Unfortunately, the civilian population is once again
paying the price. The Secretariat has informed us that
malnutrition is re-emerging throughout Somalia, despite
good harvests. The health situation is disturbing: cases of
cholera have been reported. Humanitarian agencies are
finding it increasingly difficult to deliver aid to certain
parts of the country. Since the port of Mogadishu was
closed in October 1995, the cost of transporting
humanitarian aid has considerably increased, as it must
now be sent by air.

This situation is not acceptable, and neither is the
recent decision by General Aidid to require, purely for the
purpose of obtaining recognition by the international
community, visas for those in Somalia who are trying to
help the Somali people. The faction leaders are
responsible for the safety of humanitarian personnel
working in that country. They must also know that the
international community does not have unlimited
resources. It is becoming more difficult day by day for
the agencies to mobilize donors for a conflict seemingly
without end.

France pays tribute to all those who are still working
in Somalia under increasingly difficult conditions. It
hopes that Somalia will not be left to its own devices and
that the Somali people will continue to receive aid. France
would also request that every effort be made to promote
national reconciliation and that no possibility, however
slim, of restoring civil peace in Somalia be overlooked.

If we wait too long, the entire country may collapse.
The north-west is already drifting away from the other
provinces. Soon it will no longer be possible to preserve
the territorial unity of the country, which had been a goal
of the Security Council.

What can the international community do to prevent
the collapse of Somalia? More precisely, what can we do
that we have not already tried? If the Somali factions are
not able to agree and to lead their country, and if an

 

action on the part of the Organization of the United Nations
does not satisfy them, perhaps we could, as is being done
in Central Africa, encourage mediation by African public
figures acceptable to the factions. Those public figures
would be charged with listening to the factions and then
organizing a reconciliation conference, the results of which
could then be supported by the international community.

Along these lines, we continue to believe that the
countries of the Horn of Africa, in cooperation with the
Organization of African Unity and the League of Arab
States, have a key role to play in restoring peace to the
region. Thus far, the efforts of regional actors have yielded
scant results. If those African countries could give their
concrete support to an initiative led by one or several
African public figures, mediation would gain strength and
credibility.

Finally, thus far the message of the Security Council
to the factions has had no impact. The factions believe that
the Council is expressing the particular interest of only
some of its members. Could we not show that this is not
the case and that the international community as a whole
disapproves of the policy pursued by the warlords? To this
end, we should consider organizing a debate in the General
Assembly. In this way, all the Members of the United
Nations would have an opportunity to express themselves
on the subject and to inform the parties to the conflict in
Somalia that the path of violence can only be a dead end.

