Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
today's important meeting and for coming to New York
to preside in person. At the same time, I welcome the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ghana, Nana Akufo-
Addo, and the Executive Secretary of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS),
Mr. Chambas.

Due to geographic and historical reasons, the
West African countries are deeply interconnected. The
situations in the region are deeply intertwined and
affect one another. As some delegations have pointed
out in their statements, illegal trafficking in small arms
and the use of mercenaries and child soldiers are
increasing in the region. They have not only
exacerbated the tension and turbulence of the countries
concerned, they have also had a negative impact on the
development of the entire region. They run counter to
the common aspirations of the West African countries
to seek peace and development. They are not
conducive to peace and stability on the African
continent.

A marked characteristic of the above-mentioned
issues is their transborder nature. Therefore, in order to
settle these problems, we must proceed from the
regional perspective to a comprehensive strategy. We
believe that we must make efforts in the following
three areas.

First, the solution to West African transborder
issues eventually depends on the efforts of the
countries themselves. We endorse the relevant
recommendations in the Secretary-General's report. We
support West African countries in taking effective
measures to seriously combat the spread of small arms
and to resolutely stop the illegal use of mercenaries and
child soldiers. At the same time, they should undertake
necessary reform of the security sector. We encourage
all countries to develop good-neighbourly relations and
to try to change border areas into places of friendly
exchanges, rather than safe havens for illegal weapons.

Secondly, we should allow the regional
organizations to play their role. ECOWAS has recently
made unremitting efforts to resolve conflicts in the
region and has achieved positive results. We appreciate
those efforts. At the same time, we hope ECOWAS will
assume cross-border issues as their next priority task.
Particularly, it might consider formulating a regional
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration plan.
We support the Mano River Union in playing its dual
role. We call on the international community to provide
financial assistance to ECOWAS and to help it enhance
its capacity-building.

Thirdly, the United Nations peacekeeping
operations in the region should enhance their
coordination and promote the peace process of the
West African countries. In recent years, the Security
Council has authorized United Nations peacekeeping
operations in Sierra Leone, Liberia and other countries,
making an important contribution to the stability of the
region. The United Nations will shortly dispatch a
peacekeeping operation to Cote d'Ivoire. We hope all
the peacekeeping operations will enhance their
cooperation and will tackle together cross-border
issues. That will play a positive role in stabilizing the
situation. In that connection, we believe the Secretary-
General's recommendation on joint border patrols
merits our serious study.

As the Secretary-General points out in his report,
small arms, cross-border mercenaries and child soldiers
are only symptoms. The fundamental way to achieve
lasting peace in West Africa is to promote
comprehensive social and economic development in
the region. We believe that the international community
must continue to actively help countries in West Africa
develop their economies, strengthen the rule of law,
improve the environment, eliminate disease and
achieve sustainable development in order to tackle the
root causes of cross-border problems in that region.

