Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): Before I begin my
prepared remarks, I hope that you would allow me to
add a brief impromptu comment. I was fortunate to be
here at l p.m. today when Sir Jeremy Greenstock was
speaking. I was actually very pleased that he was
responding spontaneously and off the cuff to many of
the comments that were made this morning, and I
thought that this is the sort of interactive dialogue that
we should encourage and have in the Security Council,
because it is one way of ensuring that some of the good
ideas that are put across in some of these open debates
are not, in a sense, thrown into a big, black hole and
forgotten, but are indeed bounced around and carried
forward and will perhaps remain alive in subsequent
meetings of the Security Council.
Please allow me now to begin formally by
congratulating you, Sir, on your diplomatic dexterity. It
is sometimes said that a diplomat is someone who can
tell a person to go to hell in such a way that the person
will feel that he is going to enjoy the journey. You have
performed an equal miracle - on the positive side -
by persuading the Council to discuss an issue that has
become virtually taboo: the shortcomings and failures
of the United Nations Security Council decision-
making on peacekeeping operations.

Peacekeeping operations are the heart and soul of
the work of this Council. It is the only activity for
which the Security Council has a unique mandate. No
other body can assume responsibility for peacekeeping
operations. A quick glance at the peacekeeping
operations budget will prove that this is once again a
sunrise industry, going up from $1 billion in 1998 to
more than $2 billion this year, we believe.

But the peacekeeping operations also suffered a
near-death experience in recent time. After the
disastrous experience in Somalia, many key Council
members almost developed allergic reactions to new
peacekeeping operations. In the your letter of 6
November 2000, you said:

"There have been cases in which the Council
decided to end a mission or to reduce
significantly its military component, only to have
those situations remain unstable, or worse,
descend again into violence and chaos soon
thereafter. This would seem to be in contradiction
to the Council's mandate as contained in the
Charter of the United Nations, which implies that
it should facilitate the establishment of a self-
sustaining peace, or at least a durable absence of
violence." (S/2000/1072)

There can be no better example to demonstrate
the point in your letter than the case of Somalia - a
classic example of a United Nations mission that
entered and exited a situation without clear long-term
goals. The experience of Somalia was also partly
responsible for the tragic experience in Rwanda. The
United Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda
(UNAMIR) was downsized to a token force, which was
helpless in the face of a preventable genocide there. If
we are to be honest with ourselves, we should admit
that the United Nations has still not exorcised the
ghosts of Somalia and Rwanda from our deliberations.
We hope that our debate today will be the first step in
this direction. It may also be useful to complement our
discussions here today by considering the topic "No
entrance without strategy". Getting the strategy right
before sending in a peacekeeping operation can also
help to ensure that it terminates in success instead of
failure. But we should also bear in mind that since
perfect conditions for deploying a mission can never
exist, the lack of such conditions should not be used as
an excuse for staying out. What is important is that the
strategy - not necessarily all the conditions - be
right before the mission is deployed.

In discussing both successful and negative
examples of mission closure and mission transition,
Mr. President, you mention three examples in your
annex: Mozambique, Liberia and Haiti. We agree that
these are three excellent case studies. Indeed, my
delegation would like to offer its special
congratulations to the Netherlands for adding another
important dimension to the Security Council's work:
reflecting in a lessons-learned mode on the successes
and failures of Security Council decision-making
regarding peacekeeping operations, as presented in the
case studies. But it may also be helpful in this debate to
cast our net wider and look at the full range of
peacekeeping operations. We hope that one concrete
outcome of today's debate will be that the Lessons
Learned Unit of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations will produce brief case studies of all
peacekeeping operations, as part of the revitalization
process of the Lessons Learned Unit. These studies will
provide the Council, the Secretariat and Member States
with a valuable record of past mistakes, failures and
successes in mission start-ups, transitions and closures.
It is to be hoped that by recording all this in the United
Nations institutional memory, some of the more
egregious failures of United Nations peacekeeping will
be avoided in the future. Let me also add here that the
need to review lessons learned was a point we heard
repeatedly this morning, including, I believe, in the
remarks made by Sir Jeremy Greenstock and of course
in the remarks just made by the Permanent
Representative of Germany, Mr. Dieter Kastrup.

Our problem in analysing peacekeeping
operations' successes and failures is that there is a huge
variety of peacekeeping operation, even though they
have only one name. In some ways, it is as useful to
talk about peacekeeping operations in general as it is to
talk about animals in general. Perhaps there is much in
common between elephants and mice, snakes and
monkeys, cats and dogs. But there are also important
differences. To understand how peacekeeping
operations can be terminated successfully, perhaps for
a start a clear distinction between the two normally
propounded types is necessary.

The first type - created during the cold war in
response to inter-State conflicts - provided the
traditional definition of peacekeeping operations. The
traditional peacekeeping operations were generally
single-faceted operations. Their sole purpose was to
monitor and supervise the lines of a ceasefire. The
operations would exit only when the two sides arrived
at a full peace agreement, unless they were compelled
to withdraw earlier by one or both parties. They were
peace monitors, not peacemakers or peace-builders. Yet
they have provided valuable service, as demonstrated
by their longevity. Many, of course, still exist: the
United Nations Military Observer Group in India and
Pakistan (UNMOGIP) after 51 years; the United
Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP)
after 36 years; the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force (UNDOF) after 26 years; the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) after 22
years; and the United Nations Iraq-Kuwait Observation
Mission (UNIKOM) now after 9 years. To the best of
our knowledge, no one is suggesting sunset clauses for
these operations. This is a light burden which the
international community seems ready to bear.

The second type of peacekeeping operations
emerged as a result of the burst of euphoria that
followed the end of the cold war. There was a genuine
feeling, justified in many cases, that many of the old
conflicts had been stoked by the cold war. Hence, in
the immediate post-cold-war period many could be
quickly resolved - and, I should add here, this was
partly because the Security Council was also able to act
in almost total unity. This paved the way for many
early successes in the peacekeeping operations
established to deal with internal situations, including in
Namibia, Nicaragua, El Salvador, Cambodia,
Mozambique, Tajikistan, Eastern Slavonia, Guatemala
and the Central African Republic.

It would be foolish to try to draw general
conclusions about why these peacekeeping operations
succeeded. But one key common factor that we should
take note of is that in all these cases, it appears that it
was the local populations that took ownership of the
peace process. As your annex notes, Mr. President, in
Mozambique

"the peace process enjoyed deep and patient

support from various elements of civil society."

(S/2000/1072, annex, para. 11)

It is also not possible to draw general conclusions
about the grounds for peacekeeping-operation failures,
such as in Haiti. As the same annex notes,
"In light of the never-ending political stalemate in
Haiti and the persistent related violence, one is
likely to View the United Nations efforts in that
country as a disappointment." (ibid., para. 13)

The annex goes on to state the reasons why. We
are, I must confess here, intrigued by the concluding
sentence, which states that

"some key Council members pursued objectives
in their own perceived national interests at the
expense of making firmer commitments to
resolve the Haitian conflict." (ibid.)

There was also, unfortunately, one major
disastrous failure in the immediate post-cold-war era:
Somalia, which has been referred to. We honestly do
not know enough about Somalia to be able to explain
the failure. Local factors played an important role. But
key external actors also made major errors of
judgement. The tragedy here is that the United Nations
was held accountable for this failure when its hands
were virtually tied throughout the operation. But the
United Nations decision to walk away completely
without leaving behind any kind of presence or
involvement to help improve the situation will also
remain a blot on the United Nations conscience. All
those who plan mission termination and mission
closure should have a section entitled "Remember the
lessons of Somalia".

Somalia almost killed new peacekeeping
operations. Fortunately, they survived as a species, and
new ones in the second mode were born: Kosovo, East
Timor, Sierra Leone and, possibly, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Kosovo and East Timor further
pushed the envelope of peacekeeping operations to
handle transitional administrations. Mr. Hedi Annabi
describes the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) as follows:

"UNTAET is a multidisciplinary operation, which
combines the following elements: humanitarian
relief, provision of security by a military force,
administration of the territory and capacity-
building for self-government, economic recovery
and development assistance. In other words, the
United Nations is employing in East Timor, as it
did in Kosovo, a comprehensive approach that

combines elements of peacekeeping,
enforcement, peace-building and development
assistance."

Any discussion of mission closure and mission
termination should look at these "live" case studies as
much as it looks at past case studies. In which of these
cases can we see a happy ending? And how do we
avoid unhappy endings in the rest? Does each one have
a unique strategy? Or are we, honestly, whistling in the
dark and hoping for the best?

Of these live cases, East Timor probably remains
the most hopeful. The reasons are complex. At the core
of it all, there is a capable group of leaders led by
Xanana Gusmao and Jose Ramos-Horta who are
prepared to accept local responsibility for peace-
building and nation-building. Sergio Vieira de Mello
has also done a truly excellent job as the chief
administrator. But - and this is an equally important
point - East Timor can succeed only if the
international community does not abandon it
prematurely.

We see a fair degree of hope for the local leaders
and population taking ownership of the peace process
in East Timor. However, we are not sure who will take
ownership of the peace process in Kosovo, and we
would very much like to be enlightened on this major
peacekeeping operation and its termination.

In conclusion, let me congratulate you once
again, Mr. President, on raising a very important
subject. It is not normal, as far as I can recall, to have a
title with two negatives in it, as in "No exit without
strategy". Letting the two negatives cancel each
another out would give us a positive statement, which
would read "Exit with strategy". We hope, therefore,
that our deliberations will lead to more strategically
considered rather than ill-considered exits as well as
entrances in key and important peacekeeping
operations.

