Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to thank Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman, for
his briefing and to express our grave concern over the
deterioration of the situation in eastern Ukraine.

Jordan would like to reaffirm Ukraine's right to
protect its territorial integrity and sovereignty and its
citizens from threats by the rebels in eastern Ukraine.
That is a right that is enshrined in international law.
What is happening in eastern Ukraine at the hand ofthe
rebels is a breach of law. The occupation of buildings
and installations by means of armed force and the threat
to the lives and security of people is not a peaceful
expression of opinion. If those committing those acts
believe that their claims are legitimate, their resort to
force removes any legitimacy from their actions.

Jordan would like to call for the immediate release
of the hostages detained by the rebels in Sloviansk,
in eastern Ukraine, including the monitors from the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
We call on the parties concerned to implement the
agreement concluded in Geneva on 17 April and to
bring pressure to bear on the rebels to disarm, withdraw
from the installations and buildings they occupy and
immediately cease, together with all parties and actors
in eastern Ukraine, from discriminatory and hate
speech.

We call upon the Ukrainian authorities to work for a
peaceful solution to the crisis, to abide by international
norms in dealing with the mutiny and to respect the
relevant human rights laws and principles.

We note the announcement by the Government of
Ukraine accepting the competence of the International
Criminal Court over the events that occurred from
November 2013 to 22 February 2014. That indicates
the readiness of the Ukrainian authorities to respect
international sanctions criteria and the primacy of
international law.

We call on all the parties concerned to push for the
restoration of stability and security in eastern Ukraine
and to assist the Ukrainian authorities in implementing
a successful political transition process and beginning
a comprehensive dialogue with all linguistic groups and
communities. We stress the importance of the holding
of the presidential elections as scheduled in May 2014.
