Mr. Faaborg-Andersen (Denmark): I join in
thanking you for convening this open debate today,
allowing us, along with the full membership of the
United Nations, to renew our pledge to the cause of
protecting civilians in armed conflict and to review the
progress to date. I would also like to thank sincerely
Mr. Egeland for his briefing and his recommendations,
which we wholeheartedly support. On occasions like
this, one cannot help hoping for good news. Yet, once
again, we are faced with insufficient improvements on
the ground.

We simply have to do better - the Security
Council, the United Nations, its agencies, its Member
States, non-State and other relevant actors.

Against this background, let me briefly touch
upon three issues. But before proceeding, I would like
to fully associate Denmark with the statement of the
European Union to be delivered later today by the
Permanent Representative of Luxembourg.

First, let me stress that Denmark fully subscribes
to the 10-point platform of action developed by the
United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA). The platform identifies
the most pressing challenges at hand and shows us
where to direct our future efforts. All points are equally
important and mutually reinforcing, but Denmark will,
for its part, pay special attention to issues relating to
impunity, to sexual violence, and to the special
protection needs of women and children in armed
conflict. In that connection, we welcome the fact that
we seem finally to be approaching agreement on the
long overdue draft resolution on children in armed
conflict, including on a mechanism to monitor those
who exploit children as combatants. Denmark would
also take a careful look at the role of armed groups,
even though they are non-State actors, and their
responsibility to protect civilians, allow humanitarian
access and, more generally, respect international law.

It is now time for us to go beyond merely
recognizing the scale of the difficulties and
complexities of protecting civilians. With the 10 points
as stepping stones, we must develop tools that will
translate our full commitment to protection into
improvements on the ground. We all acknowledge the
magnitude of the problem, but we have yet to develop
adequate tools to improve the situation. Against that
background, we strongly support Mr. Egeland's
proposal for more systematic reporting to the Security
Council, which it is hoped may form the basis for more
targeted Council action in this field.

In his report due in November, the Secretary-
General is expected to provide us with
recommendations on ways in which the Security
Council and other organs of the United Nations can
improve the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
We look forward to those recommendations, and to
working actively with partners in a sincere
commitment to bring about positive results.

Secondly, the Security Council is already
working on a host of themes relevant to the protection
of civilians. There is hardly one item on the agenda of
the Security Council that does not relate in one way or
another to the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
What they all have in common is that they concern the
principal responsibility of the international community
to protect individuals in humanitarian distress, in the
event that their own Governments fail to do so. We
sincerely hope that the forthcoming summit will
endorse this fundamental principle of international
behaviour. That would be a major milestone and add
further substance and direction to the work of the
Council in this area.

The expected establishment of a Peacebuilding
Commission will mark a new beginning for a
comprehensive approach to countries emerging from
conflict. In the post-conflict phase, the Commission
will provide a forum for coordination, in particular of
humanitarian issues. It is hoped that the 10-point plan
and the mechanisms to implement it will prove to be
useful tools for the Commission and for a more
targeted effort in the field.

Thirdly, women are a major resource in all phases
of conflict and crises, and we must endeavour to make
better use of them. As the Security Council recognized
in resolution 1325 (2000), the full participation of
women in peace processes significantly contributes to
the maintenance and promotion of international peace
and security. Nonetheless, women are often regarded
solely as victims of conflict. If we fail to include
women in the decision-making processes relating to all
phases of conflict, we miss out on a major opportunity
to ensure lasting and sustainable solutions.

I would like to ask Mr. Egeland to elaborate on
his assessment of the situation and, if possible, ideas he
may have on how better to address this deficiency.

Finally, we expect that the Security Council will,
subsequent to this debate, adopt a presidential
statement expressing its intention to take further
action. It is imperative that this be not merely a
promise of a declaratory nature, but that it contribute to
real change on the ground. We, for our part, stand
ready to contribute to that.

