Mr. Vieira (Brazil) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank France for convening this
debate. I also thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2017/821) and for his briefing on the subject.

Brazil associates itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Norway on behalf of States
sponsoring the Safe Schools Declaration.

In 1996, the Security Council created the post
of Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict, which was the result of the realization that
children were the main victims of armed conflicts.
Two decades later, the commitment of the international
community has resulted in a robust framework and
specific tools for initiating dialogue with parties to
a conflict and tackling violations against children.
Nevertheless, conflicts continue to have dire
consequences for children, who are deprived of even the
most basic human rights. Brazil reiterates its vigorous
condemnation ofthe recruitment and use of children, as
well as all other abuses and violations.

Brazil is deeply concerned about the impact on
children of asymmetric attacks by non-State armed
groups. We recognize the difficulties that States face
in responding to the threats posed by such groups, but
interventions that do not respect international law are
likely to inflict additional suffering on civilians and,
therefore, help the very groups that the Governments
concerned are trying to fight. Full respect for
international humanitarian law, human rights law and
refugee law must be the cornerstone of our efforts.
Brazil echoes the recommendation of the Secretary-
General to Member States involved in operations
against terrorist groups, acting alone or in a coalition,
to establish specific safeguards to protect children from
Violations, including by underscoring the principles
of discrimination and proportionality enshrined in
international humanitarian law.

We welcome the outcome that the Children, Not
Soldiers campaign has achieved so far. It has created
opportunities for dialogue with non-State armed groups
to stop the recruitment of children. The participation of
the United Nations in the talks between the Colombian
Government and the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia is a perfect example of that.
Not only are children used in combat, but they
are also exploited for sexual purposes. Once they are
released, many ofthem suffer from serious psychological
problems. Brazil underscores the Secretary-General's
recommendation that they be recognized as Victims.
Providing them with opportunities for reintegration
is, on the one hand, a moral and legal obligation and,
on the other, an important foundation for establishing
lasting peace.

Detention for reasons of national security is another
problem that affects thousands of children in today's
conflicts. It is outrageous that children suspected of
belonging to armed groups are increasingly being treated
as security threats rather than as victims, in particular
in the context of counter-terrorism operations.

Conflicts have also led to an increase in the number
of refugees and displaced persons, nearly half of whom
are children. The obligations incumbent upon States of
origin, transit and destination should not be abandoned
under the pretext of national security. Establishing
responsibility for violence against children is all too
rare. The protection of children against serious crimes
goes hand in hand with the fight against impunity.

Conflict prevention remains the most ethical and
effective approach to protecting all civilians, including
children, from the tragedy of war. In that regard, the
Peacebuilding Commission has a constructive role to
play in post-conflict countries in promoting policies
that foster social cohesion and make children and young
people less vulnerable to recruitment and Violations.

Children should not be deprived of their childhood
and their future. Brazil remains fully committed to
efforts to that end.

