Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): Let me to
congratulate you, Sir, on your country's presidency of
the Security Council. We wish you and your team good
luck. You can count on our full support for your work
in the weeks ahead. Let me also thank Ambassador
Nikki Haley and Ambassador Jonathan Cohen and their
teams for their excellent and transparent stewardship
of the Council over the past - and may I say, rather
hectic - month.

We last met in August to discuss counter-terrorism
(see S/PV.8330). It was then that I stressed that the
terrorist threat had changed but had not diminished.
That was proved once again last week in my country,
when authorities foiled a major terrorist attack. Seven
men were arrested. They had planned to carry out a
terrorist attack that would claim the lives of as many
victims as possible at a large event in the Netherlands.
In our View, that incident underlines that we cannot
be complacent. We cannot let our guard down. In that
light, we welcome our discussion today.

I would like to thank Ambassador Llorentty
Soliz, Ambassador Umarov and Ambassador Meza-
Cuadra for their briefings and excellent work as the
Chairs of the Committees. I believe that all of us in
the Council acknowledge the special responsibilities
and the additional workload of the Chairs involved. We
appreciate their important work to counter terrorism
and commend the efforts of their teams.

I would like to focus on three issues in my
intervention: implementation, transparency
and accountability.

First, with regard to implementation, resolutions
1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004) are the
foundation of the Council's work on countering terrorism
and weapons of mass destruction. The Council has built

on that foundation by adopting various subsequent
resolutions, most recently resolution 2396 (2017), on
returning and relocating foreign terrorist fighters. One
could look at those resolutions and compare them to
the structure of a house with several rooms. Together
with the foundation and structure, the rooms are part
of a sturdy, solid house. But for the house to weather
heavy storms, maintenance is crucial. Therefore,
implementing the resolutions is key. The work of the
Committees established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1373 (2001) 1540 (2004) and their expert bodies
is indispensable in that regard. However, the success
of their work depends on us - all the States Members
of the United Nations. We must take responsibility
in fulfilling the Commitments prescribed by the
resolutions. It is for that reason that last week my Prime
Minister handed over a full operational Passenger Name
Record (PNR) system to Secretary-General Guterres.
The system was developed in the Netherlands and can
now be used by the United Nations to support Member
States in meeting their PNR obligations, as stipulated
in resolution 2396 (2017). To that end, we call upon
Member States to join us and others in financing the
United Nations PNR outreach project.

Secondly, ontheissueoftransparency-iftheCouncil
will allow, I will continue with my metaphor - there is
no use building a house with rooms ifthe doors in those
rooms stay closed. The three Committees and their
expert bodies, which we are discussing today, have to
be transparent. The doors must be open. We therefore
encourage the Chairs ofthe Committees and the experts
to continue their joint briefings, travel and workshops.
We encourage them to share more information with
other parts of the United Nations, such as the Office
of Counter-Terrorism, the International, Impartial
and Independent Mechanism for Syria and the United
Nations Investigative Team for the Accountability of
Da'esh. We also encourage them to open the front door
and intensify their outreach to non-Council members
and non-United Nations organizations. In that context,
let me mention the Global Counterterrorism Forum,
which met here in New York last week. The Forum
has two co-Chairs, Morocco and the Kingdom of the
Netherlands. It is our joint ambition, as co-Chairs, to
work as closely as possible with the United Nations.

Lastly, with regard to accountability, as in any house,
some rooms are used more frequently, and therefore
require more maintenance than others. In the complex
fight against terrorism and the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction, we have to establish priorities.
Accountability should be the overarching driver of our
efforts. Terrorists should be held accountable for the
atrocities they commit, in particular war crimes, crimes
against humanity and genocide. In particular, we need
accountability for the mass atrocities committed by the
fighters of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham. The
security of our societies and the dignity of the victims
depend on it. That also applies in particular to sexual
violence in conflict, and we welcome the statement just
made by our Kazakh colleague on that important aspect.

In conclusion, the counter-terrorism house we have
built over the years is strong. But we cannot sit back
and relax. We have to maintain our common house.
And we have to be willing to renovate and expand,
where necessary, to address new threats. The Kingdom
of the Netherlands will continue to roll up our sleeves,
together with our landlords - the 1267, 1373 and 1540
Committees, their Chairs and expert bodies.

