Judge Meron: It is an honour for me to appear
before the Security Council today to address the
Tribunal's progress in completing its mandate as set
forth in the written report (see S/2012/354) recently
submitted to the Council.

I am pleased to report that the Tribunal has made
great strides in the implementation of the completion
strategy and in facilitating a smooth transition to
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals. Reforms have been implemented in a number
of areas and have already positively impacted the pace
of our work, without sacrificing due process.
At the same time, the Tribunal still faces difficult
challenges, particularly with regard to staff attrition.
Valuable and long-serving employees continue to depart
for more secure employment opportunities. In addition,
our preparations for the transition to the Residual
Mechanism have called for the resolution of a multitude
of novel practical and legal questions.

As explained in my report submitted on 23 May,
most of the Tribunal's ongoing trials are forecast to end
soon. Of the eight trials currently in progress, five are
expected to be completed by December 2012. However,
other trials, including those that involve the recently
arrested accused, namely, Karadzic', Mladie, and
Hadiie, will take longer to complete. It is anticipated
that the trials of Mladic' and Hadzic' may continue past
the indicated completion date of December 2014. The
Council may rest assured that the benches hearing those
cases continue to focus on innovative ways to minimize
potential delays while fully protecting the rights of the
accused.

In that respect, I note that due to efficiency measures
adopted in pre-trial proceedings, the Mladie case
commenced on 16 May 2012, which is six months before
the anticipated start date forecast in last November's
report (see S/2011/473) to the Council. While there has
been a short adjournment due to disclosure failures, that
delay is not likely to significantly impede the progress
of the case.

The Hadeie case is due to commence in October
2012, which is three months ahead of the anticipated
start date previously reported. During my last
presentation (see S/PV.6678) to the Council, I advocated
the reassignment of contempt cases to ad litem judges.
That reform, aimed at relieving the burden falling on
our permanent trial judges, some of whom were forced
to balance up to eight contempt cases alongside two
substantive cases, greatly helped us in moving those
substantive cases along. I would like to express my great
appreciation to the Council for supporting that reform. I
am pleased to report that the reassignment of contempt
cases has been one ofthe factors that have allowed cases
such as Hadeie to be trial-ready earlier than previously
anticipated.

The Tribunal's Appeals Chamber is also making
great progress towards the completion of the cases on its
docket. For example, due to the adoption of innovative
measures, the hearing in the Gotovina and Markae case
was held more than nine months earlier than previously
forecast. Likewise, preparations in the Perisie appeal are
advancing very rapidly. While great strides have been
made in those cases, the complexity of issues involved
in one multi-accused case, coupled with translation and
staffing issues, has caused that case to suffer delays.
The bench in that case is taking all possible measures to
minimize further delays. With respect to future potential
appeals, it is anticipated that any appeals in the cases
of the lately arrested accused - Karadeie, Mladic', and
Hadeic' - will fall under the competence of the Residual
Mechanism.

I would like to draw the particular attention of the
Security Council to the cases of Tolimir and Prlic' et al,
in which trial judgements are expected by the end of this
year, and to the 5235te case, in which a trial judgement is
now expected by March 2013. As members may recall,
during my last presentation to the Security Council,
I reported on measures I had adopted to reduce the
time required for translation in these cases by 50 per
cent. Those measures are still in place, but unforeseen
delays in the trials themselves have delayed the relevant
trial judgements. As a result, depending on when the
trial judgements are delivered and on the procedural

postures adopted by different parties, it is possible that
any appeals in some or all of those three cases will fall
within the jurisdiction of the Residual Mechanism, even
though the relevant translation times have been reduced
dramatically. If, however, appeals in those cases are
filed before the Appeals Chamber of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY),
based on current forecasts, that would lead the ICTY
Appeals Chamber and the Appeals Chamber of the
Residual Mechanism to operate in tandem until 2016.

I am frequently asked about the health of one
detainee, Mr. Vojislav Seselj. I would underscore that
Mr. Seselj, like all detainees, is entitled to and receives
the highest standard of medical care in the Netherlands.
I personally take great interest in ensuring that all
detainees receive the best medical care possible. While
medical information on individual detainees must of
course be, and remain, confidential, I can inform the
Council of my confidence that all possible measures are
being taken to ensure Mr. Seselj's health.

While the factors leading to delays are often beyond
my control, I can also assure Council members that I am
taking all possible measures consistent with principles
of due process and judicial independence to ensure
the completion of those cases, including the necessary
translations, as soon as possible.

Another reform that has benefited the Tribunal
during the reporting period is the waiver of the
prohibition on the direct hiring of interns maintained
by the Office for Human Resources Management of
the United Nations. The lifting of that prohibition has
already allowed the Tribunal to take steps to mitigate
the effects of staff departures in particular cases. While
the Tribunal is extremely grateful for the support
expressed for that reform during my previous visit to
the Council, I must emphasize that that measure is not a
panacea. Highly experienced and valued staff members
continue to leave the Tribunal in increasing numbers.
The Tribunal has made little progress in securing
support for the different staff retention measures that
it has presented to the United Nations over more than
half a decade. As set forth in my report, delays in
several ongoing cases can be directly attributed to staff
attrition. Given that unfortunate reality, the Tribunal can
only strive to ensure that staff departures do not unduly
impact the Tribunal's completion strategy, and that they
do not place too onerous a burden on the remaining staff,
whose extraordinary commitment, diligence and talents
are fundamental to the Tribunal's continuing success.

I shall now turn to the Tribunal's progress in
preparing for the transition to the Residual Mechanism.
I am very pleased to report to the Council that the
transition is proceeding smoothly, thanks in great part
to the Registrar of the Residual Mechanism and the
ICTY and to the Registrar of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR). In accordance with
resolution 1966 (2010), the Residual Mechanism will
commence operations on 1 July with the opening of the
Arusha branch of the Mechanism.

In anticipation of that milestone, we have taken
a number of important steps, including swearing in
all judges. We have also circulated the draft rules
of procedure and evidence to the judges for their
consideration. I have every expectation that the rules
will be adopted without delay. Thanks to the constructive
cooperation of my colleagues, therefore, we have been
able to complete the swearing in of judges. We hope
that the rules will be adopted expeditiously. I note that
by deploying innovative processes to complete those
tasks, we have conserved United Nations resources
to the maximum extent possible. We have also been
advertising vacancies in order to recruit the necessary
staff. I wish to express my appreciation to the Office
of Human Resources Management for authorizing
the Registrar of the Residual Mechanism to transfer a
number of staff from the Tribunal and from the ICTR
to the Mechanism via a transparent recruitment process
that avoids the delays sometimes associated with the
lnspira recruitment system of the United Nations.

In early May, the first Coordination Council
meeting of the principals of the Residual Mechanism
was convened in Arusha, followed by a first ever joint
Coordination Council meeting between the principals of
the Mechanism and the principals of the ICTR. Those
meetings enabled us to reach a number of vital decisions
related to the orderly transfer of ICTR functions to the
Mechanism, such as the monitoring of cases referred to
national jurisdictions.

Thanks to those preparations, on 1 July the Residual
Mechanism will be ready to assume competence over
all judicial and prosecutorial functions identified in
resolution 1966 (2010) in relation to the ICTR, including
the protection of victims and witnesses, the tracking
of fugitives, the enforcement of sentences, contempt
proceedings, and the monitoring of rule 11 bis transfers.

In addition, as Council members are aware, the
Residual Mechanism may soon be called upon to exercise
jurisdiction over the appeals, if any, in up to three ICTR
cases in which trial proceedings were recently delayed.
Appeals in those cases, originally budgeted for by the
ICTR, will require the assignment of an appeals bench
of Residual Mechanism judges and the support of legal
and administrative staff. They will therefore have
financial consequences for the Residual Mechanism not
previously foreseen. It is now understood that certain
other judicial activities provided for in the budget of the
Residual Mechanism will not occur. The funds budgeted
for those activities can therefore be used to support the
appeals, if any, in the ICTR cases. Nevertheless, the
overall cost to the United Nations will be greater than
formerly envisaged.

Finally, in accordance with resolution 1966 (2010),
the Tribunal continues to work with the countries of
the former Yugoslavia to facilitate the establishment
of information centres in the region. During the
reporting period, Croatia advised the Tribunal of its
commitment to the establishment of such a centre and
its identification of a building for that purpose. The
Bosnian and Croat members ofthe Presidency of Bosnia
and Herzegovina have also recently indicated their
support for the establishment of information centres
in Sarajevo. The Tribunal is currently collaborating
with partner organizations, including the United
Nations Development Programme, the United Nations
Interregional Crime and Justice Research Institute and
the Government of Switzerland in moving the project
to the next stage. The Tribunal is still awaiting word
from the Government of Serbia as to whether it wishes
to proceed with the establishment of information centres
on its territory.

The reporting period has been one of great
productivity on the part of the Tribunal, leading to
substantial progress towards the completion of its
mandate. That positive development is largely thanks to
the exceptional efforts of the Tribunal's judges and staff
and to the implementation of management reforms. I
would emphasize once more the great challenges related
to the Residual Mechanism and the stellar work of all
those involved in facilitating a seamless transition to,
and smooth commencement of, the Mechanism. They
should be congratulated for their dedication.

By establishing the Residual Mechanism, the
Council has helped to guarantee that the closure of
the two pioneering ad hoc tribunals does not open the
way for impunity to reign once more, whether for those
whose trials or appeals before the ICTY and the ICTR
will not have been completed or for those remaining
fugitives indicted by the ICTR who must still be brought
to justice. With the Residual Mechanism, the Council
has also helped to ensure that the rights of victims,
witnesses, persons whose cases have been referred to
national jurisdictions and persons tried or convicted by
the Tribunal and the ICTR will remain both respected and
protected, even after the two original ad hoc tribunals
cease to function. Furthermore, in creating the Residual
Mechanism, the Council has devised a means to protect
and, wherever possible, share the unprecedented body
of jurisprudence, evidence and other historic records
of the ICTY and the ICTR for generations to come. In
short, the success of the Residual Mechanism is not
simply important for the sake of that institution; the
Mechanism's effectiveness is also crucial to safeguarding
the Tribunal's own invaluable legacy.

On behalf of the Tribunal, I thank the Council for
its continuing support and for its commitment to making
sure that the very best traditions of international criminal
justice - which the Tribunal has helped to define for
nearly two decades - live on.

