Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke inFrench): The Senegalese
delegation welcomes this second biannual Security
Council debate convened this year on the progress in the
work of the International Tribunal for the Prosecution
of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991 (ICTY),
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution
of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other
Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan
Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such
Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring
States between 1 January 1994 and 31 December 1994
(ICTR) and the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals.

The Senegalese delegation would like to take this
opportunity to congratulate Judge Carmel Agius,
President of the ICTY; Judge Theodor Meron, President
of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals; and Mr. Serge Brammertz, Prosecutor
of the ICTY and Prosecutor of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. I also
extend my thanks to Ambassador Elbio Rosselli,
Permanent Representative of Uruguay, whom I warmly
congratulate, as well as his team, for the outstanding
work carried out as Chair of the Informal Working
Group on International Tribunals.

Without any doubt, the establishment of the Criminal
Tribunals was one of the most relevant initiatives of the
United Nations and, at the same time, an important
contribution to the preservation and development of
international law, the execution of justice, international
criminal jurisprudence and the fight against impunity.
That ad hoc judicial system has also benefited from the
support of the international community, in particular
the Security Council, and the cooperation of every State
to carry out its mission. It is against that backdrop hat
we must contextualize the decision taken by Senegal to
take in prisoners of the ICTR, the implementation of
which is in its final phase.

That broad support can be explained by the
primary goal of implementing a preventive mechanism
to prevent the repetition of atrocity crimes, which
are a "shame on humankind". Nevertheless, it is
regrettable that abominable violations of international
humanitarian law continue to be committed throughout
the world. The international community must be seized
of such Violations regardless of their political interests
to show the perpetrators of those despicable crimes
that they are an affront to our collective conscience
and that the perpetrators cannot escape justice. The
same international community must also acknowledge
that the politicization of the pursuit of justice not only
compromises the neutrality and quality of the decisions
delivered but also, and above all, severely affects
international peace and stability, the preservation of
which is the raison d'etre of the Council. It is, moreover,
more important than ever that national judicial systems
finally take the baton to ensure the continuity of the
efforts of the international community. It is particularly
incumbent upon States to work at the national level to
combat impunity and establish equal justice for all.

This debate is taking place in a special context
marked by the arrest of one of the Mechanism's judges,
Mr. Aydin Sefa Akay, who was accused of belonging
to a terrorist organization. Obviously, the Senegalese
delegation is closely following that situation and
commends the work being carried out by the Office
of Legal Affairs of the Secretariat and the Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals to find
a solution. And we also appreciate Turkey's valuable
cooperation. We call on all parties to maintain dialogue
and consultations to ensure that the law - the guarantor
of peace and security - prevails.

In resolution 2256 (2015), the Security Council
called on the ICTY not only to respect the timetable for
the completion of its work, but also to reduce the duration
oftrials. The issue ofthe reintegration ofthose who have
been acquitted or who have served their sentences, the
optimal use of financial and administrative resources,
access to archives, the issue of the resettlement of 14
Rwandans and the audit practices within the Tribunal
and the Mechanism to improve their functioning are,
inter alia, challenges that cannot be overlooked. The
same goes for the issue of attrition of staff, which also
deserves special attention. In that respect, we welcome
the commitment firmly demonstrated today to respect
those time frames.

Moreover, the cooperation by the ICTY in the
Office of Internal Oversight Services (OIOS) review
of the Tribunal's working methods, in accordance with
resolution 2256 (2015), is very encouraging. We remain
convinced that the process of evaluation is perfectly
compatible with respect for judicial independence. It is
also a guarantee of the proper administration ofjustice,
which itself remains a guarantee of the credibility of the
international criminal justice system. Furthermore, the
follow-up to the OIOS recommendations concerning
the establishment of, on one hand, a code of conduct
and a disciplinary mechanism applicable to judges and,
on the other hand, a system of centralized information
on downsizing, remain paramount to us.

Finally, the temporary nature of the Tribunal's
mandate, as well as that of the Residual Mechanism,
implies the need to adopt management that embraces the
diversity of systems and ensure a balanced geographical
representation within it. Those are principles for which
no derogation will be tolerated, taking into account the
survival of our institutions and the future of our planet.

