It is my pleasure to salute you, Madam President, on your assumption of your country's presidency of the Security Council for the month of November. The sovereign principle of equality of rights among nations speaks loudly, as I see a small island developing State, following the momentum that represented your election, take the lead of this prominent organ of the United Nations. I would like to congratulate you and say that you can count on the support of my delegation as far as a non-member State of the Security Council can be of some assistance in that context. I also commend you, Madam President, for the choice of the topic for the signature event of your presidency to debate the contemporary drivers of conflict and insecurity and thank you for the invitation to submit written statements on the issue. It is a timely discussion as we look at the global picture and see how the world, while running across so many crises, is now being hit by the coronavirus disease, adding to the pre-existing conditions, the consequences of the pandemic and its overall impact, which open up an ocean of uncertainty for the next years. To combat the pandemic, one can say, and agree, that we need to respond rapidly against the health threat, save lives, recover economically and socially by protecting businesses, affected people and jobs and, finally, build back better and place ourselves on the track to achieving the Sustainable Development Goals. Galvanized as we are by the spirit of the Declaration on the Commemoration of the Seventy-fifth Anniversary of the United Nations (General Assembly resolution 75/1), we call for a reinvigorated multilateralism to act together and better and a renewed resolve for solidarity to make the difference in favour of more inclusive and tailored assistance, especially for the poorest and the most vulnerable. We are also driven to mobilize more resources and towards increased coordination. The response to the coronavirus disease, while urgent, is a top-down approach that, in order to be efficient and effective, needs to be anchored in, and supported by, bottom-up solutions that can address, in a structural manner, the drivers of conflict and insecurity that pre-exist, surround and may ultimately undermine the chances for an adequate response to the pandemic and the way forward. Let us take it from the beginning. The legacy of the founders stands in their determination "to save the succeeding generations from the scourge of war", and their decision to "establish an international organization to be known as the United Nations". It received the mandate to take appropriate measures to "maintain international peace and security", "to achieve international cooperation" for economic and social progress and "to promote and protect human rights and the fundamental freedoms". Furthermore, the United Nations would be "the centre for harmonizing the actions of nations in the attainment of these common ends", which attributes the primary responsibility to Governments, on the one hand, and to their multilateral action, on the other hand. Over the 75 years since the creation of the United Nations, the world has not experienced a global outbreak. However, it has not been spared from countless conflicts arising from unresolved national or regional political discontent and other causes, such as illicit economic gains and a climate-induced shortage of resources, among others. They are also due to several conflict accelerators, from poor governance, poverty and social injustice, ideological, faith- and ethnic group-based terrorism, the arms race and the proliferation of weapons, including cybercrime and insecurity, to xenophobia, racism and hate speech. For the purpose of our debate, I welcome the most recent report of the Secretary-General on peacebuilding and sustaining peace (S/2020/773). The report is based ona clear description of the contemporary drivers of conflict and insecurity, while elaborating on the "comprehensive cross-pillar approaches to building and sustaining peace" and "the work of the United Nations to promote ... coherence ... in support of national Governments and their people" (S/2020/773, para. 10). It is an accurate demonstration of the nexus, dear to the Secretary-General, between sustaining peace and sustainable development, highlighting the importance of conflict prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding, interacting with humanitarian, development and human rights. In conclusion, Cabo Verde, my own country, supports this debate and any other initiative that contributes to less conflict and more security in the world and invests in drivers for peace and more appeased societies as foundational conditions for the stability and progress of all.
