Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, on behalf of my delegation,
I would like to express our thanks to Ms. Mueller,
Mr. Khiari and Ms. Marcaillou for their respective
detailed and useful briefings.

The overall outlook for the humanitarian and
security situation in Syria, widely described in the
statements of the representatives that took the floor
before me, means we cannot help but voice our concern
for the safety of the civilian population. Humanitarian
needs have increased significantly, while the statistics
after eight and ahalfyears ofwar continue to be alarming.
There are currently more than 6 million internally
displaced persons and approximately 6 million refugees
being hosted in neighbouring countries and in Europe.
Throughout the country, the death toll exceeds 370,000,
one third of whom are civilians.

Faced with this appalling situation, the Government
of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea encourages the
United Nations and its partners to spare no effort to
provide a scaled-up collective response that will help
to prevent further deterioration of the humanitarian
situation in Syria. To mitigate the humanitarian impact,
it is also incumbent upon the Security Council to ensure
that humanitarian partners can continue to provide aid
to people in need wherever access is possible. We must
continue to support displaced persons in communal
shelters and host communities, as well as those
internally displaced persons in camps and informal
settlements such as Rukban and Al-Hol.

The international community has unanimously
expressed its concern regarding the humanitarian
situation in Syria. My Government commends the
negotiations between the United States and Turkish
Administrations, which have led to a ceasefire that
should allow, as agreed, oversight of the withdrawal of
Kurdish forces from the border between Turkey and the
Syrian Arab Republic.

In that connection, we also wish to welcome
the signing of the memorandum of understanding
between Russia and Turkey on the normalization of
the situation in north-east Syria and, in line with
the recent statements by the Secretary-General, we
commend initiatives aimed at reducing the escalation
of the situation. We believe that that agreement is a
step towards maintaining stability in the region. The
Government of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
hopes that such agreements will help to ease Turkey's
concern over its security and the terrorist threat and
that the parties honour their commitments, including
the withdrawal of arms, forces and equipment from
Kurdish units.

Finally, I would like to emphasize that the latest
Russian-Turkish agreement is fully in line with
Equatorial Guinea's position, which has always
supported negotiations between the parties, inclusive
dialogue and a peaceful approach to resolving
any dispute.

We believe that we are now making decisive progress
in the resumption of the peace negotiations in Geneva
within the framework of the Constitutional Committee.
Only an inclusive and credible political process will be
able to provide a lasting solution to the conflict in Syria
in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015).

