Mr. Quinlan (Australia): Like others, we welcome
Ms. Guebre Sellassie to her first Council briefing as
Special Envoy.

Today's meeting is important in maintaining the
spotlight on the ongoing humanitarian, governance
and security challenges in the Sahel region and on the
United Nations response. As we have been warned time
and again, we cannot forget the Sahel or we will face
more crises like the one experienced in Mali.

Recent developments are very worrying. They
include clashes between the Government and armed
groups in northern Mali, the deteriorating security
situation in Libya, and the increasing impact of Boko
Haram. Civilians across the region face the persistent
threat of violence and food insecurity. Terrorism and
organized crime are harming legitimate economic
opportunities, undermining Government capabilities
and creating political instability. That in turn is allowing
armed groups to expand their influence. There are new
flows of refugees and internally displaced people.

As we know, just as the problems transcend
borders, so too must their solutions. The United Nations
integrated strategy for the Sahel provides a truly cross-
regional platform to address those challenges. The
focus must now be on the implementation of all three
pillars of the strategy - governance, security and
resilience - prioritizing the highest impact activities. I
will focus on three issues.

First, we must look at coordination. The Sahel
strategy is a tool for coordination, both within the
United Nations and more broadly, internationally. It
should assist in promoting coherence of the actions
of regional and international actors so that time and
resources are not wasted. We are encouraged by the
growing leadership from the region, including through
the ministerial coordination platform, which met in
Bamako in May. We welcome United Nations and
African Union support for the platform. We also note
the establishment of the Group of Five for the Sahel
to facilitate coordination among Burkina Faso, Chad,
Mali, Mauritania and the Niger. Complementarity and
the synchronization of those initiatives will obviously
be vital.

Secondly, we must deal with terrorism. Africa,
as we know, has become a central theatre in the fight
against terrorism. The evolving nature of the Al-Qaida
network poses particular threats to the Sahel region,
where terrorist attacks increased last year by an
alarming 60 per cent - the highest level in the past
12 years. Al-Qaida affiliates in the Sahel exploit local
conflicts. Their leadership is younger, more prone to
brutal violence and less responsive to community
leaders, and they are more independently resourced,
raising money through the taking of territory, organized
crime and kidnapping for ransom.

Tackling the terrorist threat requires measured
security and law enforcement approaches coupled with
community-based action to counter violent extremism.
Regional Governments need to diminish the appeal of
terrorism to vulnerable populations, especially youth,
who are at particular risk of radicalization and who form
the largest demographic constituency in the region.

Countering violent extremism is complex, but
it is more relevant than ever in preventing terrorism
and conflict. We welcome the Secretary-General's
increased focus on the issue and the priority the
Regional Working Group on Security has given it. That
policy leadership now needs to be followed by concrete
activities. Strengthening engagement between the
Department of Political Affairs, the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate will continue to be
important, and we urge the United Nations to leverage
the full range of development and security entities to
build community resilience against terrorism.

The Council has a specific instrument to tackle
the Al-Qaida threat - namely, the Al-Qaida sanctions
regime. However, its effectiveness depends upon the
ability of affected States to use the regime as part of
their national and regional counter-terrorism strategies.
We need to do more to empower and encourage
the countries of the Sahel to do so. As Chair of the
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989
(2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals
and entities, we have worked to improve collaboration
with regional authorities to identify individuals and
entities who should be targeted by the regime.

Finally, on resilience, which is the third pillar of the
strategy, over 20 million people in the Sahel - a number
equal to the population of Australia - are threatened
by food insecurity, including 5 million children facing
acute malnutrition. An entire generation is at risk.
As the number of people confronting food insecurity,
weather extremes, instability and violence grows, the
need for a comprehensive approach to preventing and
addressing those threats is self-evident. We welcome
the efforts to date of the Regional Working Group on
Resilience towards promoting systemic change on
resilience.
We are pleased that the humanitarian community's
three-year strategic response plan for the Sahel is well
aligned with the Regional Working Group's efforts. We
encourage the international community to continue
support in line with that strategic approach. Australia's
humanitarian assistance to the Sahel region, which
amounted to over $60 million in the past year, has
aimed to bridge the gap between humanitarian relief
and development by building community resilience and
addressing the root causes of chronic malnutrition.

In conclusion, we are confident we have the tool,
in the integrated strategy, to help address the region's
interconnected challenges in an integrated way.
The focus, self-evidently, must now be on concrete
initiatives. We look forward to the release of the 2014-
2016 implementation plan very soon, and we wish the
Special Envoy well in her work and stand very ready to
support her.

