Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation joins others in thanking
Mr. Mark Lowcock for his detailed and useful update.
We reiterate our full support for him and his work.

As Mr. Lowcock described, the overall picture
of the humanitarian and security situation in Syria
remains troubling, given that the civilian population
in the north-east of the country continues to suffer
terribly as a result of air strikes, land attacks, shootings,
executions and fatalities due to improvised explosive
devices and remnants of war. This deplorable situation
shows that the ceasefire agreed to last month by the
United States and Turkey in order to supervise the
withdrawal of Kurdish forces from the border between
Turkey and Syria continues to be violated. The security
situation in the north-west, particularly in Idlib, has
not improved either, with increases in both land and
air attacks, as well as deliberate bombings of medical
facilities, which constitute war crimes, as we have
frequently emphasized.

Considering this appalling situation, we must
continue in our efforts to de-escalate the situation and
protect civilians in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations and international humanitarian law.
The Government of Equatorial Guinea is particularly
concerned about the precarious human rights,
humanitarian and security situations in Syria that
thousands of highly vulnerable civilians, including
women and children, are dealing with while being held
in inhumane conditions in the overcrowded Al-Hol
and Rukban camps. We urge the United Nations,
humanitarian organizations and the entire international
community to spare no effort in providing an adequate
response to help prevent further deterioration of the
humanitarian crisis in Syria. As UNICEF recently
highlighted, that will involve a response plan estimated
at $3 billion for improving water supplies, providing
sanitation and hygiene services and health and nutrition
assistance and vaccinating thousands of children. While
the hostilities persist, my Government also affirms that
the delivery of cross-border humanitarian aid remains
a priority that must be guaranteed by the Security
Council. To that end, it would be very helpful if as
usual we were unanimous regarding the next renewal
of that aid.

Finally, we want to once again highlight the
significant progress that has been made in the political
process within the framework of the Constitutional
Committee, which continues to be the only viable
means of providing a lasting solution for normalizing
the situation in Syria, in accordance with resolution
2254 (2015).

