Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): I would like to begin by
congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month, and
to thank you for organizing this debate. I wish to thank
the Secretary-General for his report (S/2012/43) on the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT). By the same token, I wish to welcome the
presence of His Excellency Jose Ramos-Horta,
President of the Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste. I
thank him for his statement and for his kind words
about my country. I also wish to thank Ms. Ameerah
Haq, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Timor-Leste, for her comprehensive briefing.
Malaysia is very much encouraged by the
progress achieved in Timor-Leste. We wish to
congratulate the leaders and people of Timor-Leste,

who, with the assistance of UNMIT and other
international partners, have been successful in
maintaining peace and stability in the country. The
encouraging security situation is testimony to the
capability of the judicial and security institutions of
Timor-Leste, especially the Policia Nacional de Timor-
Leste (PNTL) in carrying out its policing
responsibilities. In that regard, we call for continuing
efforts in strengthening security and judicial
institutions and in implementing the Joint Transition
Plan and the recently announced Strategic
Development Plan.

Malaysia is pleased to see the progress made by
the Government of Timor-Leste towards
democratization and good governance. The upcoming
elections are important, and we call on all parties to
respect the outcome so as to ensure that stability
continues to prevail. We are prepared to consider
sending election observers to monitor the elections, if
there is a formal invitation from the Government of
Timor-Leste.

Malaysia supports the Secretary-General's
recommendations for the extension of UNMIT's
mandate until 31 December. As the withdrawal of
UNMIT is nearing, Malaysia calls for an early
discussion on the long-term United Nations
engagement in Timor-Leste. We believe that a post-
UNMIT United Nations presence in Timor-Leste is
necessary. We are always prepared to assist in
promoting law and order in Timor-Leste. Malaysia
stands ready to support a post-UNMIT presence in
Timor-Leste, as part of our contribution towards the
development and rebuilding of the country. We believe
that economic and social development is crucial for
ensuring long-term peace and stability in Timor-Leste.

Malaysia fully supports Timor-Leste's application
to become a full member of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN). In the recent
ASEAN Coordinating Council meeting held on
17 November 2011, in Bali, Malaysia reiterated its
position that Timor-Leste's application should be
favourably considered, in line with article 6.2 of the
ASEAN Charter and the fact that Timor-Leste meets
the geographical criteria stipulated in therein. We look
forward to welcoming Timor-Leste as a full member of
ASEAN soon.
Malaysia has been actively participating in
Timor-Leste since 1999. To date, Malaysia has a total
of 230 police personnel and two military observers
serving in the country. At the request of the United
Nations, Malaysia has approved the deployment of an
additional 20 police personnel to UNMIT, bringing the
total to 250. Currently, Malaysia is the top police-
contributing country in Timor-Leste. In November
2011, UNMIT requested Malaysia to consider
extending the tour of duty of 20 Malaysian United
Nations police officers until December 2012, which we
have agreed to do. Those officers are part of the core
group that is directly involved in the capacity-building
activities of UNMIT. Our active participation in
UNMIT is a manifestation of Malaysia's long-term
commitment to Timor-Leste's development.

Malaysia is continuously committed to assisting
Timor-Leste in its nation-building efforts. We have
provided substantial assistance to Timor-Leste,
especially through the Malaysia Technical Cooperation
Programme (MTCP) and the Malaysian Defense
Cooperation Programme (MRCP).

Since 2001, Malaysia has provided assistance to
Timor-Leste in the area of human resources
development through various training programmes. As
of November 2011, a total of 350 officials from Timor-
Leste have been trained through the MTCP in the areas
of public administration; crisis management and
diplomacy; the training of trainers for the Timor-Leste
Police Academy; airport management; microfinance;
prison administration and management; community
nursing; road construction and management; and
agriculture. Commencing in 2008, with third-party
funding, mainly through the Japan International
Cooperation Agency, Malaysia has also provided
technical expertise in the fields of agriculture,
procurement, macroeconomics and statistics.

Since 2002, a total of 43 officers from the Timor-
Leste Armed Forces have attended MRCP programmes.
Courses have included instruction for ship divers;
language training; a course on law in armed conflicts;
instruction on joint warfare and a course on United
Nations military observer service.

In 2003, Malaysia contributed $2.56 million as
part of it efforts to assist Timor-Leste in developing its
defense forces. Malaysia has also extended bilateral
assistance in capacity-building programmes and
training for PNTL personnel Malaysian police training
centres since 2001. Malaysia has also conducted
training programmes for participants from Timor-Leste
with joint financial assistance from Australia.

Malaysia is pleased with the excellent state of
relations it has with Timor-Leste. Malaysia is strongly
committed to working closely with Timor-Leste to
expand that relationship by harnessing the right
synergies for the mutual benefit and prosperity of our
two countries and peoples.

