Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would also like to
thank Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for his
comprehensive briefing. Allow me to also praise our
colleagues from Kuwait and Sweden for their efforts
and their leadership in leading the process of very
difficult negotiations. I am very pleased to see the
result, and I congratulate them again on their work.

We welcome the outcome of today's vote on
resolution 2449 (2018), which renews the cross-
border deliveries mechanism. We have underlined our
strong support for that renewal many times. It enables
humanitarian supplies to cross into Syria, provides aid
to those in urgent need and supports the delivery of
basic services.
The conflict in Syria has caused violence and
violations of the international law, including human
rights law, and has brought suffering to the civilian
population of Syria. The continuing impunity for
serious violations of international humanitarian law
remains for us a grave concern.

After a period of relative calm over the past
two months, we are alarmed by the recent negative
impact of armed conflict on civilians in many parts
of Syria: the north-west and north-east of the country
in particular. Any military operations should take all
feasible precautions to avoid harm to the thousands of
civilians who are trapped in the middle of the fighting
on the ground.

We again see a risk of humanitarian catastrophe in
Idlib governorate and the surrounding areas. Civilians
across Idlib and the surrounding areas have continued
to face a range of security threats, while massive
humanitarian needs have persisted. We consider the
agreement between Russia and Turkey on the Idlib
de-escalation zone a right move towards avoiding a
humanitarian catastrophe. But, at the same time, we
again stress that all parties to the conflict should ensure
the full implementation of the agreement.

While underlining the obligation of all the
parties to the conflict to protect civilians and civilian
infrastructure, we insist on practical measures to
alleviate civilian suffering. That is why we strongly
believe that cross-border assistance remains a vital
component of this major humanitarian response, which
reaches millions of Syrians each month. It has to be
noted that, according to humanitarian workers, one
third of the people in need of humanitarian assistance
are in areas that cannot be accessed from inside Syria,
including nearly to 2 million internally displaced
people in the Idlib de-escalation zone. Aid delivered
from Turkey and Iraq continues to save lives.

Let me conclude by underlining that there can be
no military solution to the Syrian conflict. A political
agreement remains the only way towards peace. That
requires a genuine political transition in line with
resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communique
(S/2012/522, annex). In that context, I want to express
our regret that no tangible progress was made during
the last meeting in Astana in overcoming the stalemate
on the composition of the constitutional committee. The
efforts of the Special Envoy to establish a legitimate,
credible and balanced constitutional committee in his
remaining time in office have our full support.
