Mr. Sermoneta (Israel): Mr. President, at the
outset, I would like to join my colleagues in expressing
my thanks to you for having convened this meeting. I
would also like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Ms. Coomaraswamy, for her
valuable contribution to today's meeting. Finally, I
would like also to thank the Executive Director of
UNICEF, Ms. Veneman, for her work and for that of all
UNICEF staff in this important area.

Israel ascribes great importance to protecting
children during armed conflict and is encouraged by
the continued efforts of the Security Council and the
Secretary-General to that end. We believe that children
in particular should live without fear of physical,
psychological, and all other forms of abuse emanating
from conflict. It is our responsibility to protect them
and to instil in them a reverence for life and respect for
all their fellow human beings, under whichever
national flag they may live.

Israel is concerned about the ongoing cases of
violence against children during times of conflict
throughout the world. We appreciate the emphasis in
recent reports on protecting children in armed conflict,
and we believe that continuing grass-roots efforts,
alongside greater government involvement, can alter
this disturbing trend.

We note with particular interest the observation
of the Council's Working Group that the majority of
conflicts today occur within national boundaries. Many
of the most infamous civil conflicts of recent decades
have been in Africa. But Israel also bears the burden of
a neighbouring failed State: the failure of Lebanon to
fully extend its sovereignty over the whole of its
territory and the growth of an ingrained terrorist
infrastructure and ideology that has moved into that
vacuum. We can sympathize with the inhabitants of
those areas who are held hostage to an ideology of hate
and death, because we too are held hostage to
Lebanon's failure.

In the north of Israel children are the victims of
wave after wave of rockets and mortars - thousands
of them by now - launched indiscriminately by
Hizbollah terrorists. May I remind the Council that
Israel completely withdrew from that area more than
six years ago.

Israel must further note the cynical and dangerous
exploitation by the State supporters of the Hizbollah
terrorist infrastructure, Syria and Iran. By deliberately
embroiling the civilian population of Lebanon in this
conflict, they have reduced these innocents to mere
pawns in their regional strategy.

In the south of Israel children have also been
subjected to an ongoing barrage of Qassam rockets
launched from the Gaza Strip, an area administered by
the Hamas-led Palestinian Authority. Israel disengaged
from that area almost one year ago.

Hundreds of thousands of children in my country
have no summer vacation - no time to play in the
fields and playgrounds with their friends in what
should be a time in their lives free of stress and
anxiety. Instead they hear the wail of sirens and know
the look of fear on their parents' faces as they scoop
them up in their arms and run to bomb shelters. And
they are the lucky ones who have not personally
experienced the damage and death visited by terrorists'
rockets.

Palestinian children are victims of a culture of
hate and violence. They are indoctrinated from a tender
age by their teachers and by textbooks and learn to
denigrate and delegitimize the other. Finally, in the
ultimate act of hate, they are brought to the point
where they are willing to embrace their own early
deaths for the sake of other people's deaths. What more
shocking abuse of children could one imagine than to
strap bombs around them and send them on suicide
missions to kill other innocent civilians - when they
have probably not had an opportunity to play football
with other children and school mates more than a few
times?

Schoolbooks from all over the region, including
from Member States that took the floor only minutes
ago, similarly call on children to sacrifice themselves.
In a typical example, one text instructs schoolchildren
that martyrs have nothing to fear and nothing to be sad
about. We must put an end to such virulent
indoctrination if there is to be any hope for our future
generations to live together in peace. This is probably
the most extreme example of the opposite of education.

The reality on the ground has created difficult
questions for us as a nation, such as how States are
effectively to fight terrorist organizations that
deliberately endanger both the civilian population they
target and those they use as human shields. How can
States exercise their legitimate right to take defensive
measures against terrorism without causing undue
harm to the civilian population? We wrestle daily with
the strategic and ethical complexities of this balancing
act. It is, we have observed, a debate that has not
entered the halls of government of some of our
neighbours, especially those of Lebanon, Syria and
Iran.

Our foremost obligation as a nation is to protect
our civilian population from violence. That is not only
an obligation, it is a right recognized by the Charter of
the United Nations. Yet we must also take great pains
to minimize any harm to other civilian populations,
thereby preserving the fundamental values, principles
and the democratic rule of law that defines Israel as a
nation, which we proudly embrace. We grieve for all
civilian casualties on all sides. We hold those who have
knowingly and deliberately precipitated this violence
fully responsible.

We must emphasize the difference between
terrorists that deliberately target innocent civilians -
especially children - including the States that sponsor
them, and those States that, acting defensively, target
these lawless terrorists. Not to make that distinction is
to lend equal legitimacy to terrorists who carry out
unprovoked terrorist acts and States acting in self-
defence. That would run counter to all international
precedent and the Charter of the United Nations itself
and would serve to encourage terrorists to commit ever
greater numbers of terrorist acts.

We have heard today of Israel's alleged
indifference to the lives of children in the region. I
must say here emphatically that we want nothing more
than to ensure the safety of all children, in Israel and
throughout the region. The most direct path to that goal
is the cessation of terrorist acts emanating from these
areas. We have shown time and again that when there

is peace on our borders we have no interest in
interfering in the internal matters of our neighbours.
On the contrary, the terrorist organizations of Hamas
and Hizbollah, the Governments of Syria and Iran and
the Palestinian Authority have all shown callous
indifference to all children in the region by instigating
and perpetuating terrorist acts against Israel.

Finally, we must ask: What of the children who
survive these conflicts around the world? Who can
gauge how they will grow up? We cannot sit idly by
while these vile, callous terrorists and their sponsors
and purveyors of death around the world create
countless more lost generations. We have finally
06-44100

learned the lesson of the past that implores us to
resolutely resist the creeping ideology of hatred and
violence that threatens us all. All nations here must
recognize the danger posed by this terror to their own
States and, ultimately, to their own children, whom
they have the most sacred duty to protect. We ask the
entire international community to stand with us and
against the devastation visited on children by wanton,
indiscriminate terrorism and violence.

