The Deputy Secretary-General: I am pleased to be
here today to share some thoughts on the role that
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration play in
United Nations peacekeeping.

The conflicts with which the Security Council is
grappling today have given these tasks particular urgency.
Those conflicts are more often than not internal civil
wars, with some degree of cross-border or international
implications. They tend to take place in poorer countries,
with vast movements of internally displaced persons as
well as refugees.

Easily available light arms, including landmines, are
the weapons of choice. And often, one finds among the
combatants young children conscripted as soldiers. These
are, in short, highly complex and volatile situations. For
us, as outsiders, the task of helping the afflicted countries
find the path of peace and development presents an
enormous challenge.

Within that challenge, disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration are distinct tasks, but ones which often
overlap, and which must in any case be approached as
part of an integrated peace-building process.

These are also highly sensitive tasks. They involve
fundamental questions about the extent of State authority,
about the course of economic development, and about
societal cohesion. Moreover, in most instances, success is
based both on the will of the parties to surrender their
weapons and on the unstinting support of the international
community - a difficult combination to find.

The United Nations has been mandated to undertake
disarmament in peacekeeping operations in Africa, South-
East Asia, Central America, and the Balkans. Each is a
different experience, reflecting a particular country's

 

circumstances, the terms of the peace agreement and the
mandate approved by the Security Council. But some
general definitions apply.
Strictly speaking, disarmament is the assembly and
cantonment of combatants and the voluntary handing over
of their weapons to peacekeeping troops, who then ensure
the safe storage of the weapons and their final disposition.
In most cases, the responsibility for the assembly of
combatants lies with the party to be disarmed, as provided
for in a peace agreement.

Technically, demining is a separate task in its own
right. But that, too, is an essential feature of most
peacekeeping and post-conflict peace-building operations,
and is much easier when the active cooperation of the
parties to the conflict can be secured.

As a rule, the disarmament of civilians is not the
responsibility of a peacekeeping mission, but rather a task
incumbent upon national authorities, sometimes with
assistance provided by the international community.
However, by supporting efforts to strengthen national law-
enforcement capacity, a peacekeeping operation can play a
key role in creating an environment in which the general
populace does not deem weapons to be necessary.

Buy-back programmes have been considered a useful
means of accelerating disarmament and advancing the peace
process in post-conflict periods and in regions marred by
insecurity. When timed properly, they can be very
beneficial. However, experience has shown that, if timed
wrongly, weapons exchanges which involve direct financial
payments to individuals may actually be destabilizing.

For example, civilian buy-back programmes may
inhibit military disarmament, in which combatants are
instructed by their leaders to hand over their weapons but
are not paid to do so. Furthermore, the establishment of a
high price for weapons to promote disarmament could
create an artificial market for weapons, and spark an
overwhelming movement of weapons into the country and
surrounding region.

So a cautious approach is highly desirable, even when
non-monetary incentives are used. The final decision should
take into account the overall context of proliferation and the
potential effects at the local, national and regional levels.
Weapons-collection programmes may need to be linked
with incentives such as provision of jobs or training, which
are not easily converted into cash, and related to
development initiatives that benefit entire communities.

Experience has also shown that if ex-combatants do
not have the means of sustaining themselves as civilians,
they can be tempted into carrying arms and committing
acts of banditry, thereby destabilizing the peace process.
Therefore, disarmament needs to be complemented by
comprehensive demobilization and reintegration
programmes.

The process of demobilization involves registration,
medical examinations, assistance to combatants to meet
their immediate basic needs and transportation to their
home communities or, sometimes, absorption into a
unified military force.

Finally, reintegration denotes a variety of steps to
help ex-combatants adapt successfully to a productive
civilian life. This assistance has to be given to returning
refugees and internally displaced persons as well as to
demobilized combatants and their families. It includes
employment and micro-credit programmes, vocational
training and education.

Clearly, reintegration is a long-term social and
economic process which needs to continue even after a
peacekeeping operation has completed its mandate.

This will no doubt be a wide-ranging debate. What
should not be questioned is that the international
community can offer significant support to disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration processes. Allow me to
suggest that success will be determined to no small extent
by how well we bear in mind the following
considerations.

First, terms for the disposal of arms and ammunition
should be included within peace agreements when they
are first negotiated, so that the issue does not become an
obstacle to peace at a later stage.

Secondly, predictable financing is critical. Starting a
programme without the funding to complete it may raise
expectations on the part of ex-combatants that cannot be
fulfilled. This, in and of itself, can prove to be highly
destabilizing. Voluntary financing of demobilization
projects can also be a problem, as any delays in receiving
contributions can place the entire process in jeopardy.
Member States are encouraged to contribute to the United
Nations Development Programme Trust Fund that has
been established to deal with small arms, and which
includes a weapons collection and destruction component.
International institutions such as the World Bank can also
provide valuable technical and financial support, but there

 

must be close coordination between the Bank and the
peacekeeping operation involved.

Thirdly, the special needs of child soldiers, including
girl soldiers, should, where appropriate, be seen as a crucial
element in a peacekeeping operation's mandate. It has been
estimated that more than 300,000 children under 18 years
of age were used as soldiers in conflicts around the world
between 1995 and 1997. Some United Nations
peacekeeping operations have included a special focus on
the demobilization of child soldiers. United Nations bodies
such as the United Nations Children's Fund, and
non-governmental organizations, provide special
programmes for them, including counselling, education and
family reunification.

But much more needs to be done. The problem will
not be solved until the international community adopts a
concerted approach, which must address the causes as well
as the consequences of child recruitment, that is, the social,
economic and political factors which make children
susceptible to it. The Security Council should in future
make the needs of child soldiers a central concern when it
considers specific crises, when it mandates peacekeeping or
peacemaking missions and when it designs peace-building
programmes. It is also worth remembering that
demobilizing child soldiers and children who are pressed
into the war effort in other roles can be an opportunity as
well as a problem. It can be the first thing the parties to a
conflict are able to agree on, and so become the starting
point for a dialogue which later leads to a ceasefire and a
broader agreement.

Fourthly, the deployment of a follow-on political
mission after the termination or withdrawal of a
peacekeeping operation can be a useful means to avoid
setbacks and relapses into insecurity. The inclusion within
such missions of expertise in disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration might not be an obvious step, but it would
certainly prove beneficial.

Finally, a rigorous media and publicity campaign to
educate and mobilize popular support for disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration efforts must be built into
the operation from the start.

The process of post-conflict disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration is rooted in and feeds into
a broader search for peace. The international community,
working through the United Nations, has a real contribution
to make. I look forward to hearing the Council's views.

