The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of the Central African Republic,
Chad and the Czech Republic, in which they request to
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item, Without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Poukre-Kono
(Central African Republic) and Mr. Allam-mi
(Chad) took seats at the Council table; Mr. Palous
(Czech Republic) took the seat reserved for him at
the side of the Council Chamber.

The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Edmond Mulet,
Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations.

It is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2009/ 199, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in
the Central African Republic and Chad. I should also
like to draw the attention of members to photocopies of
a letter dated 21 April 2009 from the Secretary-General
2

to the President of the Security Council, transmitting
the two reports on the activities of the European Union
military operation in the Republic of Chad and the
Central African Republic, which will be issued as a
document of the Security Council under the symbol
S/2009/2l4.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Edmond Mulet, Assistant Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations. I now give the
floor.


