Mr. Fernandez-Taranco: We are nearing a
turning point in the efforts to promote direct
negotiations between Israel and the Palestinians. Since
May, the parties have engaged in seven rounds of
proximity talks, mapping out areas of mutual interest
and laying out their respective issues of priority. We
appreciate the constructive involvement of the United
States mediation in this regard, and the tireless efforts
of Senator Mitchell, who again met with President
Abbas and Prime Minister Netanyahu on 10 and
11 August, respectively.

The Secretary-General is himself personally
active in this regard. He remains in contact with
Senator Mitchell and has spoken directly to the
Palestinian, Israeli and Arab leaders to encourage
movement in the peace process. On his behalf,
Mr. Serry has been fully engaged in coordination and
consultation with other Quartet envoys.

Success will require sustained regional and
international support. In this regard, we welcome the
decision taken by the Arab League Foreign Ministers in
Cairo on 29 July to give their backing, in principle, for
President Abbas to enter into direct negotiations when
he deems it appropriate. President Abbas also
2

continued his consultations with Arab leaders, meeting
with King Abdullah of Saudi Arabia on 4 August, with
President Mubarak of Egypt and King Abdullah of
Jordan on 12 August, and with Emir Sheikh Hamad bin
Khalifa al-Thani of Qatar on 13 August. Prime
Minister Netanyahu also met with King Abdullah of
Jordan on 27 July.

The parties are currently holding internal
discussions with a View to deciding on whether they
will enter into direct talks. We urge them to be
forthcoming in their deliberations and are hopeful that
leaders on both sides will seize this opportunity and
engage in a path of decisive progress towards a
sustainable, mutually acceptable two-State solution
within a realistic time frame. To support them in taking
this step, we remain in close contact with Quartet
partners to promote the start of meaningful direct
negotiations as soon as possible.

If these negotiations are to succeed, it is crucial
to maintain an enabling climate on the ground. Parties
should adhere to their Road Map commitments and
obligations under international law, as re-emphasized
by the Quartet on 19 March in Moscow.

The partial moratorium on settlement
construction in the West Bank is due to end on
26 September. We urge the continuation of the
settlement halt beyond its scheduled expiry and its
extension to all settlement activity in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem. Let me
recall that, under the Road Map, Israel is obligated to
freeze all settlement activity, including natural growth,
and to dismantle outposts erected since March 2001

On the occasion of the Muslim holy month of
Ramadan, Israeli authorities removed three obstacles to
movement in the West Bank, extended the operation
hours of some checkpoints, and slightly eased access to
Jerusalem for Friday prayers on the Temple Mount.
The number of obstacles to movement throughout the
West Bank remains over 500. Easings on movement
and access should be expanded, including with regard
to barrier-related obstacles.

We are also concerned about the increase in the
demolition or dismantlement of Palestinian-owned
structures in Area C that has displaced or otherwise
affected 212 people. The situation is particularly
worrisome in Al Farisiye, in the northern Jordan Valley,
where two families currently face the demolition of the
shelter provided to them by the Palestinian Authority
10-48700
with international support, following their eviction
from their homes earlier this year.

During the reporting period, Israeli security
forces conducted 313 incursions in the West Bank,
resulting in one Palestinian being shot dead by Israeli
soldiers on 22 July while he attempted to intrude into
the settlement of Barkan. Overall, 15 Palestinians were
injured and 162 Palestinians arrested, while three
Israeli soldiers were also injured. Demonstrators
against the barrier often clashed with Israeli forces,
resulting in nine Palestinians being injured while
others were arrested or suffered from gas inhalation.

Violence by Israeli settlers against Palestinians
amounted to 22 incidents, resulting in seven
Palestinians being injured and damages to property.
Following the demolition by Israeli forces of structures
in the Bracha settlement near Nablus on 26 July, Israeli
settlers attacked the Palestinian village of Burin on the
same day and again on 30 July, as part of so-called
price-tag retaliation.

On 15 August, the Palestinian Authority, under
Prime Minister Fayyad, issued a report taking stock of
progress on the Government's two-year State-building
agenda, observing that substantial progress was made
in building sound institutions and a stable society. The
United Nations welcomes this achievement. However,
without significant additional external financing, the
Palestinian Authority will face a serious liquidity crisis
in September and will have difficulty paying August
salaries. Financing to date of $507 million falls almost
$200 million short of the budget. The Palestinian
Authority has also nearly exhausted the scope for loans
from commercial banks. Current initial estimates of
donor commitments through 2010 suggest that the
financing deficit will exceed $300 million. To reinforce
stability, which is critical in the context of renewed
negotiations, donors must reaffirm their support.

In Jerusalem, the comparative restraint of the past
few months has been eroding as announcements of
construction, demolitions and evictions have
recommenced. This included the deplorable forcible
takeover by Israeli settlers of a building housing nine
Palestinian families, on 29 July, in the Muslim Quarter
of East Jerusalem's Old City. On 27 July, the Jerusalem
municipality demolished five commercial structures in
the area of Hizma village, affecting the livelihoods of
the families involved. On 2 August, the Jerusalem
10-48700
municipality authorized the construction of 40 homes
in the East Jerusalem settlement of Pisgat Zeev.

The situation of the four Hamas-affiliated
Legislative Council members remains unresolved. The
trial of one has been postponed until November. He
remains in Israeli custody, while the three others are
still in the care of the International Committee of the
Red Cross. We call on the Israeli authorities to find a
positive solution to this unsustainable situation.

We continue to follow the impact of the new
Israeli policy on Gaza following the announcement on
20 June by the Israeli Government of a package of
measures aimed at easing the blockade, and on 5 July
the move by Israel from a positive list of goods
allowed into Gaza to a negative list of goods whose
entry is prohibited or restricted. The volume and
variety of supplies entering Gaza have continued to
increase over this reporting period. The weekly average
of imported truckloads has reached 1,006 - an almost
30 per cent increase over the average from the last
reporting period, which was 780, and an 80 per cent
increase over the 2010 weekly average before the
policy change, which at the time stood at 553.

The Israeli decision to allow 100 million new
Israeli shekels in cash into Gaza, as well as the
exchange of 31.5 million in spoiled new Israeli shekel
banknotes since mid-July was an important step in
alleviating the immediate liquidity crisis in Gaza, and
is welcome. Further steps and regularized banking
arrangements will be critical to meeting cash needs and
salary payments.

While these are positive developments, imports
into Gaza still remain far below the weekly average of
truckloads before the closure was instituted in 2007.
The current extent of easing cannot meet the crucial
longer-term construction and rehabilitation needs of
Gazans and resuscitate the legitimate economy. To
achieve this, the Quartet called in its statement of
21 June for a comprehensive solution that would
ensure the unimpeded flow of humanitarian aid,
commercial goods and persons to and from Gaza;
address Israel's legitimate security concerns, including
an end to weapons smuggling into Gaza; and promote
Palestinian unity based on the Palestine Liberation
Organization's commitments and the reunification of
Gaza and the West Bank under the legitimate
Palestinian Authority and consistent with resolution
1860 (2009).
3
The Rafah crossing remained open for
humanitarian purposes and transit to other countries for
foreign visa holders, including for religious
pilgrimages. Egypt continues its efforts to counter
smuggling along its border with Gaza, discovering and
closing some 17 tunnels that were used to smuggle
cement, steel and other construction materials.

Similarly, while we welcome Israel's recent
approval of 11 United Nations construction projects in
Gaza, we are nonetheless concerned about bottlenecks
in project implementation if the current cumbersome
procedures for approval and entry of materials are not
streamlined. Procedures have already resulted in
substantial delays in projects previously approved. The
Khan Younis housing project, approved at the time of
the Quartet meeting on 19 March, took three months to
move from approval in principle to approval in
practice. Due to strict requirements imposed on project
approval and entry, project costs have doubled.

In View of the newly approved projects, it will be
important to improve the efficiency of the applicable
procedures. We look forward to continued effective
dialogue with the Israeli authorities to facilitate the
smooth implementation of these and future United
Nations projects in priority areas.

On a separate note, the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) warned on 16 August that it is running an
$84-million deficit that could soon force it to shut
schools and clinics in the Gaza Strip. I call on the
international community to help UNRWA fulfil its
important mission in health, education and social
services in Gaza and elsewhere in the region.

Palestinian efforts continued during the reporting
period to overcome the electricity crisis that is causing
hardship for the population in Gaza and endangering
the operation of hospitals and such. We urge the
Palestinian parties involved to resolve their internal
disputes and to achieve a sustainable solution to restore
a reliable electricity supply for Gaza.

The date of 4 August marked the 1,500th day
since the capture of Israeli Corporal Gilad Shalit. We
very much regret that international calls for his release,
immediate humanitarian access and the completion of a
prisoner exchange agreement have not been heeded.

During the reporting period, Palestinian militant
groups fired six rockets and three mortars from Gaza
into Israel, causing no injuries. In a serious incident, a
Grad rocket was fired on 30 July from Gaza on the
Israeli town of Ashkelon, causing no injuries. We
continue to condemn rocket fire that indiscriminately
targets civilians. This attack was followed by an Israeli
air strike on Gaza overnight that killed one Hamas
commander. Israeli security forces conducted 11 air
strikes and 11 incursions into Gaza, resulting in the
deaths of three militants; two militants were injured, as
were 22 civilians and five policemen. We urge calm
and full respect by all parties of international
humanitarian law. Israeli security forces continue to
restrict Palestinian access to land areas in Gaza located
up to 1,000 to 1,500 metres from the Green Line and
sea areas beyond three nautical miles from shore,
thereby severely impacting livelihoods.

I am disappointed to report a lack of progress in
intra-Palestinian reconciliation within the framework
of the Egyptian-mediated proposal, in spite of
mediation visits to Gaza by prominent independent
Palestinian figures. We urge Palestinian factions to
work together to overcome Palestinian internal
divisions. In a positive development, on 11 August a
number of prisoners were released in Gaza as a
humanitarian gesture for the start of Ramadan, in
parallel with a release of prisoners in the West Bank,
which I referred to earlier.

On 2 August, the Secretary-General announced
the launch of a Panel of Inquiry on the flotilla incident
of 31 May. This unprecedented development followed
intensive consultations with the leaders of Israel and
Turkey. The Secretary-General thanked the leaders of
the two countries for their spirit of compromise. The
Panel is composed of former Prime Minister of New
Zealand Mr. Geoffrey Palmer, as Chair; former
President of Colombia Mr. Alvaro Uribe; an Israeli
Panel member, Mr. Joseph Ciechanover; and a Turkish
Panel member, Mr. Ozdem Sanberk.

The Secretary-General expressed his hope that
the Panel would fulfil its mandate in light of the
statement by the President of the Security Council
(S/PRST/2010/9) and with the fullest cooperation of
the relevant national authorities of the two countries.
The Panel will examine and identify the facts,
circumstances and context of the flotilla incident, and
recommend ways of avoiding future incidents. For that
purpose, the Panel will receive and review reports of
national investigations into the incident and request
such clarifications and information as it may require
from relevant national authorities. For the conduct of
its work, the Panel will decide what steps it will take
and will work with the national authorities. It is not
designed to determine individual criminal
responsibility.

The Panel convened in New York for two full
days on 10 and 11 August. Its members met with the
Secretary-General, who outlined the nature of the task
he envisaged for them. The Secretary-General stated
his hope that the agreement concerning the Panel
would impact positively on the relationship between
Turkey and Israel, as well as on the overall situation in
the Middle East. The Panel began its substantive
discussions on how it will conduct its work. The
members of the Panel will meet again in early
September. They will strive to produce for the
Secretary-General an interim report on 15 September.

Under the chairmanship of Justice Turkel, the
Israeli Commission to examine the maritime incident
of 31 May 2010 continued its work and heard the
testimonies of Prime Minister Netanyahu, Minister of
Defense Barak and Army Chief of Staff Ashkenazi
during the week of 9 August. On 12 August, the
Turkish Government also announced the establishment
of a national commission of inquiry on the events of
31 May.

Turning to regional matters, the situation in the
occupied Syrian Golan remained stable, although
settlement activity continued. Unfortunately, I have to
report a number of serious incidents in the region
during the period. On 2 August, five rockets were fired
towards Eilat, Israel, and Aqaba, Jordan, killing one
Jordanian civilian and injuring three others. Countries
concerned must cooperate to bring those responsible
for this act of terrorism to justice.

As this Council has already been briefed, there
was another serious incident, this time on the Blue
Line, when an exchange of fire took place on 3 August
between the Lebanese Armed Forces and the Israel
Defense Forces. This incident was the most serious
since the adoption of resolution 1701 (2006). An
investigation by the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL) into this incident is under way and
the Security Council will be briefed on its outcome
accordingly. Throughout the month, aerial overflights
of Lebanese territory continued almost daily,
constituting a violation of resolution 1701 (2006) and
of Lebanese sovereignty. On 20 July, the Prime
Minister of Lebanon requested that the Security
Council extend the mandate of UNIFIL for a further
period of one year without amendment.

Some significant political and security
developments also took place in place in Lebanon
during the reporting period. On 31 July, the President
of Lebanon hosted a joint meeting in Beirut with the
King of Saudi Arabia and the President of Syria. Also,
the Emir of Qatar conducted an official visit to
Lebanon from 31 July to 2 August, including a tour of
villages in the south of the country. Those visits, which
signalled a strong commitment by Lebanon's Arab
neighbours to the maintenance of calm in the country,
took place against a backdrop of increased tension
generated by speculation, rumours and allegations
regarding potential indictments by the Special Tribunal
for Lebanon.

On 14 August, the alleged leader of Fatah
al-Islam, Mr. Abdul Rahman Awadh, and his associate
Mr. Abu Bakr Mubarak, were killed in an ambush set
in the Bekaa Valley by the intelligence branch of the
Lebanese Army. Fatah al-Islam, a radical Islamist
group, became notorious as a result of a three-month-
long conflict against the Lebanese Army in the
Palestinian refugee camp of Nahr el-Bared in 2007.

The Lebanese parliament met today and
considered a draft law granting some civil rights to
Palestinian refugees. This follows a month of intense
debates over the scope and applicability of the law. The
United Nations has urged all political parties to
improve the legal regime applicable to Palestinian
refugees in Lebanon, without prejudice to their right of
return.

The United Nations has also continued to work
closely with the Lebanese-Palestinian Dialogue
Committee on a number of pending issues pertaining to
the situation of Palestinian refugees in Lebanon, such
as restrictions on access to the Nahr el-Bared refugee
camp and the situation of Palestinians with no official
identification papers. While the reconstruction of the
camp is progressing, we remain concerned about the
shortfall in UNRWA's funding requirements, both for
the reconstruction of Nahr e1-Bared and for its general
fund. It is imperative that the generous financial
contributions of donors towards basic social services
such as health and education not be cut back and that
the reconstruction of Nahr el-Bared continue.
5

We remain convinced that direct and meaningful
negotiations are the only avenue towards a
comprehensive, sustainable solution that fulfils the
aspirations of the Israeli and the Palestinian peoples
and ends the occupation that began in 1967. The
United Nations stands ready to provide support to this
process, in accordance with relevant Security Council
resolutions and within the framework of relevant
international agreements. Strong leadership from both
parties to make progress at the negotiating table and
realize the aspirations of both peoples will be required,
as will the continuation of the parallel process of
Palestinian State-building, sustained regional and
6

international support and the pursuit of a
comprehensive regional peace as envisaged in the
Madrid terms of reference, Security Council
resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative.

