Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
should like to welcome the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) back to the Security
Council and to thank him for his report and his
comprehensive briefing on his investigation into the
situation in Darfur. I should also like to take this
opportunity to thank the Prosecutor and his team for
their efforts to bring justice to the victims of the
serious crimes that have been committed in Darfur.

My Government is encouraged by progress over
the past six months, which the Prosecutor has reported,
in relation to one of the cases which he has opened in
respect of Darfur. We welcome the voluntary
appearance at the ICC of Bahr Idriss Abu Garda to
answer charges of war crimes in relation to the June
2008 attack on African Union and United Nations
peacekeepers at Haskanita. It is encouraging that some
parties to the conflict in Darfur are now showing
willingness to cooperate with the ICC, and we call on
all the others to do likewise.

My Government remains deeply concerned,
however, by the continued lack of cooperation with the
ICC by the Government of Sudan. Once again, the
Prosecutor appears before us to report no movement on
this issue, in particular over the outstanding arrest
warrants. There are no relevant proceedings under way
in Sudan in relation to the indictees. Nor has the
Government of Sudan given any indication of an
intention to investigate or prosecute these cases. I
should like to underline that, as the Prosecutor stated,
Sudan is under a legal obligation to cooperate with the
ICC by virtue of resolution 1593 (2005), and we
reiterate once again our call on Sudan and all other
parties to the conflict to provide full cooperation to the
Court.

My Government is also very concerned to hear
the Prosecutor's analysis that very serious crimes
continue to be committed in Darfur, in particular
attacks on civilians, including humanitarian workers,
sexual violence, forced returns and the use of child
soldiers.

The United Kingdom welcomes the steps the
Prosecutor is taking to monitor these unacceptable
attacks on the civil population of Darfur. We also
welcome the Prosecutor's continued contacts with
other relevant international and regional actors, in
particular his engagement with the African Union
High-level Panel on Darfur and its preparation and
implementation of the recommendations in the Mbeki
report (S/2009/599, annex I) on combating impunity
and promoting peace and reconciliation in Darfur. We
consider the Mbeki Panel report, which we shall be
discussing later this month, to be thorough, detailed
and balanced, with much that offers scope for progress
on peace, justice and reconciliation.

In conclusion, I would like to underline that the
United Kingdom remains a strong supporter of the
International Criminal Court and of its work to combat
impunity in Darfur. We commend Prosecutor Moreno-
Ocampo's continuing efforts to achieve this.

