Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, allow me to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I also congratulate
your friendly country on its accession to membership
of the Council, as well as Germany, Indonesia, Belgium
and South Africa on theirs. We wish them every success
in working to maintain international peace and security.
I also thank the countries whose membership of the
Council has come to an end and wish them every success
in their work within other United Nations bodies.

The Palestinian people continue to suffer a tragic
plight. Seventy years have passed and the world
continues to bear witness to the most destructive
human tragedy, in which a people has been displaced
from the land that was rightfully its own and handed
to those who did not own it. The Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia reaffirms its unequivocal rejection of all
Israeli policies, practices, void and illegal plans aimed
at perpetuating racial discrimination against the
Palestinian people, obliterating their national identity
and infringing on their legitimate rights. We call on the
international community in general and the Security
Council in particular to shoulder their responsibilities
by immediately intervening to put an end to Israeli
settlement projects and to protect the Palestinian people.
Work must be done to ensure Israel's compliance with
international resolutions, including resolution 2334
(2016), in order to lift the siege of the Gaza Strip, open
border crossings immediately and definitively, and
end the humanitarian and economic crisis facing the
Palestinian people.
My country stresses the importance of a
comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East
as a strategic option to put an end to the Arab-Israeli
conflict, in accordance with international benchmarks
and the Arab Peace Initiative of 2002. That initiative,
introduced by my country, includes the establishment
of a Palestinian State on the borders of 4 June 1967,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, as well as the return
of refugees and an end to the Israeli occupation of all
Arab territories, including the Arab Syrian Golan and
the occupied Lebanese territories.

The Syrian people continue to suffer the worst
crisis that humankind has yet witnessed this century.
The former Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, completed his mandate
without having achieved his desired objectives of
making progress on a political process and convening
the constitutional committee, owing to the intransigence
of the Syrian regime and its unwillingness to reach a
just political solution to put an end to the plight of the
Syrian people. We welcome the new Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Geir Pedersen,
wishing him every success and underscoring that he has
the full support of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia in his
efforts to reach a political solution based on resolution
2254 (2015), which emphasizes the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Syria.

My Government stresses the importance of
reaching a just political solution in order to put an end
to the suffering of Syrians, both within and outside
Syria. We call for the withdrawal of all foreign forces
and foreign fighters - especially the Iranian forces
and their militias - from all Syrian territories. We also
condemn and reject any use of chemical weapons in
Syria and call on the international community to hold
to account those responsible for such crimes.

The region has recently witnessed new
developments in the Yemeni file, the most prominent
of which was the holding of consultations in Sweden in
December 2018 resulting in the Stockholm Agreement,
which is considered a new breakthrough towards
achieving a political solution in Yemen. The Council
also adopted resolution 2451 (2018) in support of that
agreement between the parties, emphasizing the need
for a political solution to the Yemeni crisis in line with
the provisions of resolution 2216 (2015).

However, the recklessness shown by the
Houthis - who are supported by the Iranian
regime - suggests that their intentions to adhere to
the agreement are not sincere, as demonstrated through
the brutal attack of the Houthis by an Iranian drone
on Al-Anad military base that left six martyrs of
Yemeni officers and many injured, as well as the attack
against the Redeployment Coordination Committee in
Al-Hudaydah, which was also carried out by Houthi
militias. Independent observer reports have also shown
that Iran continues to support the Houthi militias by
providing them with weapons and military expertise.
The Council must therefore compel Iran to abide by the
relevant Council resolutions, in particular resolutions
2231 (2015), 2140 (2014) and 2216 (2015).

Houthi militias have violated the ceasefire
agreement 679 times to date, in addition to the
recent attack against the Redeployment Coordination
Committee and the theft of humanitarian aid that was
reported by the World Food Programme on 31 December
2018. The Houthis have shown a total disregard for all
United Nations and regional efforts aimed at resolving
the Yemeni crisis, proving that they are unwilling
to engage in any efforts that seek to bring happiness
back to Yemen. We stress the importance of reaching
a comprehensive political solution in Yemen that will
guarantee State sovereignty across its entire territory,
with one national army. We reiterate our commitment
to the three principles for peace in the region, namely,
the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative, the outcomes
of Yemen's National Dialogue Conference and the
relevant Security Council resolutions - especially
resolution 2216 (2015). My country will continue to
support the brotherly Yemeni people and its legitimate
leadership by responding to its humanitarian needs at
any time.

