Mr. Djangone-Bi (cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): First let me say that my delegation is very
happy to see you, Sir, presiding over the work of the
Security Council in March 2003, which has witnessed
the establishment of the Government of National
Reconciliation under the Linas-Marcoussis Agreement.

Things have never been so difficult for the
international community, as current challenges, to
which pressures are added, are numerous and seem
insurmountable.

However, assured by your excellent qualities of
diplomatic experience, we do not doubt for one
moment that the proceedings of this distinguished
institution will be completed successfully.

We would also like to congratulate the
representative of Germany who, last month, conducted
the work of the Council with the great competence we
know he possesses.

I would like to begin my statement by saying that
my delegation approves of most of the
recommendations that have been made, particularly
those by the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Senegal
and Benin. Since almost everything has already been
said, I will confine my statement to a few words about
the existence of so-called Liberian fighters supposedly
in the Cote d'Ivoire army. In fact, this morning, in his
statement to the Security Council, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Liberia stated, without providing a
shred of evidence and in spite of the denial of the
Government of Cote d'Ivoire that was published by a
number of press agencies, that particularly in the
western part of Cote d'Ivoire, Liberian mercenaries
were fighting alongside the national army of Cote
d'Ivoire.

It is highly regrettable that Liberia has turned this
workshop that has been so carefully organized into a
trial against cote d'Ivoire. In a spirit of peace, and
despite the averred collusion of fraternal countries with
the aggressors against cote d'Ivoire, my country has
not deemed it necessary to pour oil on the fire by
publicly denouncing anybody. We are trying to prepare
the post-crisis period, given that teeth and tongues are
condemned to live together, in spite of the accidents
along the way.

Given the falsehoods related by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Liberia aimed at distracting the
international community, my delegation would like to
issue the following clarification.

We do not know the sources of the representative
of Liberia. However, the truth is that Liberian
mercenaries are part of the aggressors against Cote
d'Ivoire and have been since the night of 18 to 19
September 2002. All the diplomatic Missions were able
to see on Ivorian television Liberian mercenaries,
among others, that the national armed forces had taken
prisoners after heavy fighting. Some of those
mercenaries even admitted that they belonged to the
Liberian army. President Charles Taylor assured
President Gbagbo that those mercenaries had no
connection with the Liberian army. The Ivorian
authorities noted that. At any rate, if they are not
soldiers of the Liberian army, then they are Liberian
mercenaries.

There can be no doubt, because the English
accent of Liberia is quite different from that of the
other anglophone countries in West Africa. The
majority of those mercenaries can be easily confused
with the border populations of Cote d'Ivoire, given that
they speak the same languages and are part of the same
ethnic groups as those populations.

To then say that Liberia mercenaries are Ivorians
is a large step to take - a step that the critics of Cote
d'Ivoire, including the Minister, blithely took.

My delegation vigorously protests such
fabrications that attempt to present the victim of
aggression, Cote d'Ivoire, as being the culprit in this
matter.

A number of Liberian mercenaries have come
from the ranks of armed groups that are trying to
overthrow President Taylor's regime. Those Liberian
mercenaries, who have fanned out across West Africa
and are currently aggressing against Cote d'Ivoire, can
be defined in terms of the following paradigm. First,
they are, for the most part, totally under the control of
a drug empire. Secondly, they are merciless. Thirdly,
they systematically pillage plantations, houses, and so
forth.

Fourthly, they kill indiscriminately; one could
even say that they kill for the fun of it, which explains
why there are so many mass grave sites in rebel areas.
Fifthly, they have no regard for women and girls,
whom they rape on a daily basis.

The Liberian Ministry of Foreign Affairs
certainly forgot that since that fraternal country has
been unstable - which has been for at least a
decade - Cote d'Ivoire has taken in refugees; at times
half a million people have been accepted. The United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees can testify to
that.

There is one specific thing that should be pointed
out. Contrary to what is done elsewhere, instead of
putting people into camps in cote d'Ivoire, Liberian
refugees are received by families and integrated into
the population. At the meeting in Serta, Libya, my
country was congratulated by the African Union for
that hospitality, which was described as being second
to none.

The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Liberia
certainly forgot to point out to the Security Council
that, for more than a decade, the combatants of the
various factions fleeing the fighting were coming into
Ivorian territory with their supplies of arms and have
largely contributed to the insecurity that is
undermining my country today, and which is
characterized by ambushes, hold-ups and other acts.

The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Liberia
certainly does not know that, before the aggression that
we are talking about, Cote d'Ivoire did not hesitate to
send regular teams of military doctors and medicines to
Liberia.

The list is long. Therefore, allow my delegation
to conclude with the following. Contrary to partisan
reports that have been made to the Council by actors
who are destabilizing Cote d'Ivoire, first, Liberian
mercenaries that are spreading desolation in the
western part of Cote d'Ivoire have no connection with
the regular army; they should in no way be considered
as extra recruits of the national armed forces of Cote
d'Ivoire. Secondly, in the western part of the country,
as well as at Bouake, Liberian mercenaries, recruited
and paid by the aggressors against Cote d'Ivoire, are
fighting alongside and are on the payroll of the latter.

Thirdly, Liberian thieves are acting
independently, profiting from this situation in the
western part of Cote d'Ivoire. Fourthly, Liberian
mercenaries arrested by the French forces in the region
of Duekoue Bangolo have no connection with the
regular forces of cote d'Ivoire. That is the truth that
the international community should know.

