Mr. Dah (C6te d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks Ms. Jayathma Wickramanayake, the
Secretary-General's Envoy on Youth, for her briefing.
Our thanks also go to Mr. Graeme Simpson, lead author
of the progress study on youth, peace and security (see S/2018/86); Ms. Sophia Pierre-Antoine, member of
the Advisory Council of the World Young Women's
Christian Association; and Ms. Kessy Ekomo-Soignet,
Executive Director of the Organisation URU in the
Central African Republic.

My country welcomes the Security Council's
consideration of the this agenda item, which gives
perspective to the consideration of young people and
their manifold contribution to the problems of peace
and security in the world. If we accept that the world
today has the largest-ever proportion of young people, it
is important to involve them in efforts to transform our
societies, particularly in protecting them, as advocated
by the Secretary-General through his commitment to
place prevention at the heart of his agenda.

To that end, in accordance with its authority, the
Security Council adopted resolution 2250 (2015), which
formally recognizes the positive role and rights of
young people to work towards lasting peace, including
inviting Governments, international organizations and
other actors to support them in such a role. The main
goal remains, as Mr. Simpson clearly underlined in his
study on the issue, to prevent violence and promote the
integration of young people in an effort to put their
inherent energy at the service of peace and security in
the world.

As the Secretary-General said, "We must not
only think about projects for young people, but with
them." Therefore, instead of seeing them through
the prism of negative stereotypes, it is important
to consider young people, in accordance with the
approach of resolution 2250 (2015), as peacemakers
whose efforts and contributions must be recognized
and supported with a view to encouraging them to
become involved as agents of change in our societies.
One ofthe key lessons to be learned from Mr. Simpson's
study concerns the ability to fully trust young
people to demonstrate their capacity for action and
initiative. Young people are a dynamic entity, capable
of strengthening the abilities to react and adapt and
demonstrate resilience in their communities.

The comprehensive implementation of
Mr. Simpson's study, which favoured a participatory
approach, is based on a number of case studies in
various countries around the world, including Cote
d'lvoire. Taking into account my country's recent
past, the progress study on youth, peace and security
highlights the demographic weight of youth, where the
most striking statistic shows that three out of every four
people are under 35 years of age.

The changing impact of young people in
the promotion and consolidation of peace and
security in Cote d'Ivoire requires clear initiatives,
namely, understanding youth diversity and
strengthening the capacity of young people to
better understand their contribution to peace, bolstering
their legitimacy as peace stakeholders and promoting a
model of youth commitment to peace. The lessons of
the study show the importance of the effective inclusion
of young people at all levels, as part of an approach
centred on national ownership.

Imbued with that reality and inspired by a forward-
looking vision, His Excellency Mr. Alassane Ouattara,
President of the Republic of Cote d'Ivoire, has made
the issue of young people one of the main pillars of
his Government's policy with a View to strengthening
peace and security in Cote d'Ivoire. Accordingly, the
establishment of a ministry exclusively dedicated to
promoting youth and youth employment and the civil
service aims, inter alia, to develop and implement
comprehensive policies concerning youth, to establish
strategies to inculcate civic values, to encourage youth
forums, to counter violent extremism, to bolster the
empowerment of young people and to strengthen their
role in promoting peace and security.

In that connection, the Ivoirian Government
has created a one-stop shop for employment, the
Youth Employment Agency, to support Government
initiatives promoting youth employment. Moreover,
in collaboration with the African Development Bank,
the Ministry of Youth has joined the ENABLE Youth
programme, which aims at strengthening capacities
of young graduates wishing to launch businesses
in the agricultural sector. Within the framework of
community life and the empowerment of youth, Cote
d'Ivoire has established the National Youth Council, a
forum that makes it possible to better address young
people's concerns.

My delegation welcomes the timeliness ofthe report
requested by the Security Council in its resolution 2250
(2015), as well as the recommendations of the excellent
study by Mr. Simpson (see S/2018/86), which will
be a source of inspiration for Member States in their
approach to youth, peace and security.

Lastly, it is hardly necessary to recall that the
participation of young people in peace and security
processes at the local, national, regional and
international levels requires the establishment of viable
and appropriate structures in the decision-making
process at every level so that the skills ofyoung people in
matters ofpeace and security can be taken into account.
Investment in young people is essential to ensure that
peace is sustained for successive generations.

