Mr. Pujalte (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): First of
all, I would like to express the satisfaction of my
delegation at seeing you, Madam, presiding over this
meeting of the Security Council. This is a clear
demonstration of the interest of your country in sharing
its experiences and establishing new and lasting forms
of national reconciliation.

In September, the Security Council had an
opportunity to examine the general theme of justice
and the rule of law. Now, thanks to the leadership of
Chile, it has decided to analyse the specific issue of
national reconciliation in post-conflict situations. That
issue is of key importance for the success of any
strategy aimed at achieving peace and security at a
given time and place.

The first element that must be highlighted is the
fact that, in the context of the current international
system, mechanisms aimed at achieving reconciliation
and justice in transitional regimes are gaining in
importance as necessary tools for the achievement of
peace and security, which, in turn, can be strengthened
and take root, in a lasting manner - provided that such
mechanisms are set up in conformity with international
law and that they are truly aimed at the promotion of
reconciliation, the prevention or resolution of disputes
and the provision of appropriate compensation for the
victims.

A second element is the fact that national
reconciliation can be approached from a number of
different perspectives. It can be seen as being
necessarily linked to the idea of meting out criminal
justice so as to prevent impunity; as complementary to
criminal justice mechanisms; as independent of them;
or as in conflict or antagonistic to such mechanisms. In
this respect, the perspective adopted by any national
reconciliation effort will depend, to a considerable
extent, on the context and the specific situation in
which it is applied.

It is clear that there is no one model; each society
must be flexible in considering which formula is most
appropriate, taking into account its historical, political
and legal tradition and ensuring that such reconciliation
mechanisms can genuinely contribute to compensating
the victims of a conflict.

Thirdly, while there has been progress with
regard to such mechanisms, a great deal remains to be
done in order to fully develop and perfect them. To
date, the international community has been trying
various configurations and is seeking the optimum
combination. We are still at an experimental stage, but
we see some positive trends.

Basically, the option chosen will depend on the
approach that is to be taken. If pride of place is to be
given to political means of achieving national
reconciliation, then amnesty, exoneration, investigation
and the establishment of truth commissions are the
mechanisms used. In such cases, it is believed that
making public the facts and the illicit actions
committed, as well as the names of the perpetrators, is
a significant step towards providing satisfaction for the
victims and maintaining social peace. In such situations
there have also been purges to prevent the perpetrators
from ever again reaching a position of power.

The other approach is based on criminal
justice- the prosecution and punishment of those
accused of grave violations of human rights. The
perpetrators can be held accountable through the
establishment of individual or group criminal
responsibility, outside of the criminal justice system
but in the context of mechanisms that are open to
public scrutiny, or through a combination of those
approaches. Sierra Leone provides a good example of
this, as it has been able to combine a special tribunal
and a truth and reconciliation commission. The delicate
balance among the objectives of justice must always
been borne in mind with a View to preventing impunity
and achieving national reconciliation. It is for each
society to decide whether it wishes to achieve
reconciliation through the criminal justice system or by
recourse to other mechanisms.

If a truth commission is chosen, it must help to
create a faithful account of events, based on
information from the victims and the perpetrators, so as
to make it possible to arrive at a well-balanced history
of the society in question and to establish a positive
attitude towards the future.

Despite all of these factors, this is an area in
which States have the flexibility to try different
configurations and, in fact, create entirely novel
systems for their own specific situations.

There is no doubt that the role of criminal justice
is of great relevance and that at times it is the best
instrument for prosecuting persons with the greatest
responsibility for the most serious crimes. We are
encouraged by such examples as the former
Yugoslavia, Rwanda, Sierra Leone and Timor-Leste,
and by the internal machinery that has been set up in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. In this respect, the
International Criminal Court can also make a
significant contribution to bringing about peace and
reconciliation in States parties to the Rome Statute.

However, all of these aspects must dovetail with
the realities of a society that is intent on succeeding,
and it must be determined whether it is in the interests
of justice for such a society to decide to use
mechanisms other than judicial ones.

Amnesties, to which certain societies have
resorted, must be used with extreme caution and only
where there is a genuine need for them. There has to be
democratic consensus and a series of prior
considerations, such as the existence of alternative
mechanisms for the attribution of guilt.

Immediate expectations for a process of national
reconciliation involve the creation of a climate that is
conducive to peace, the restoration of fair and
democratic institutions, the flourishing of an
independent and impartial legal system, the
development of human rights, and the existence of
minimum guarantees for social coexistence. All of this
will help to build an environment of confidence and
security that can contribute to the development of a
society that is emerging from a post-conflict situation.
For that reason, financial institutions devoted to the
promotion of development should envisage the
provision of resources in those areas.

From our point of View, there are more questions
than answers in all these cases. But what is certain is
that the United Nations has a crucial role to play in
guiding and supporting these processes in cases when a
State is making genuine efforts towards a genuine and
lasting reconciliation. This is consistent with the
purposes and principles of the United Nations and in
particular with the promotion and maintenance of
international peace and security.

