Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (spoke in Spanish):
First and foremost, I should like to thank Spain and
Foreign Minister Jose Manuel Garcia Margallo for
convening this timely open debate. Coming as we
celebrate the seventieth anniversary of our Organization,
it should serve as a basis to commit ourselves as an
Organization to one of the most important pending
issues before us - making the Palestinian State a
reality and allowing its people to live in peace and
security.

At the most recent Council debate on the situation
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question
(see S/PV.7490), we marked the first anniversary of
the latest war on Gaza. At that time three months ago,
we noted the continued construction of illegal Israeli
settlements, the confiscation of Palestinian land and
the demolition of Palestinian houses and orchards,
and called on the Council to meet and take action to
ensure implementation of its resolutions regarding the
question of Palestine. We also warned that ongoing
Violence in a land so sacred to many peoples and faiths
was particularly troublesome.

Today, the situation in Jerusalem is reverberating
throughout the occupied Palestinian territory and
Israel, and has reached a point of conflagration that,
sadly, validates our darkest fears and predictions. The
despairing Palestinian youth in Jerusalem and the West
Bank are desperate and being driven to acts of violence,
as the only way they feel they will be heard. Israeli
communities are acting out of fear, engendering a mob
mentality that is adding a dangerous dimension to this
current upsurge in violence.

The construction of walls between ethnically
different neighbourhoods will not solve any of the
problems that led to the current situation. In fact,
cementing the borders of illegal Israeli settlements in
East Jerusalem will only exacerbate the conflict. The
only sustainable way out is to seek a comprehensive
solution to the Palestinian question, based on the
implementation of the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council. That will require an end of the Israeli
occupation in all its facets and the emergence of a
sovereign and independent State of Palestine, based on
the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital.

Unless we, the United Nations, and the Council can
provide both peoples with a blueprint of hope for a just
solution and an end to this seemingly endless battle i for
a future where both can live in peace and dignity - we
will be complicit in the further deterioration of the
conflict, which month after month, year after year,
becomes increasingly difficult to resolve.

Three months ago, we spoke of a new international
awareness that 20 years of bilateral negotiations,
plagued by interruptions, had not yielded the expected
result, and that a comprehensive solution to the
Palestinian question might need multilateral efforts.
The Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian people therefore salutes
the Quartet's efforts to provide such a multilateral
framework. We likewise reiterate our position that the
initiative of the League of Arab States, which proposes
a comprehensive peace agreement that would include
the normalization of relations between Israel and the
entire region, remains a historic opportunity to bring
peace to the Israeli and Palestinian peoples, as well
as to their neighbours near and far. We urge Israel to
seriously weigh that initiative before events on the
ground sweep it aside.
This year, which marks 70 years since the
founding of our Organization and the fortieth year
of our Committee, the Security Council should
urgently assume its responsibility for ensuring that the
Palestinian people are able to exercise their inalienable
rights. Failure to do so would have severe consequences
far beyond Jerusalem, Israel and Palestine. If the
nations of the world, united through our Organization
and in the Council, wish to win the fight against
violent extremism in the Middle East and elsewhere,
the Council must find and implement a solution to the
question of Palestine, with the formula of two States
living side by side in peace and security.

Meanwhile, as an immediate priority, the Council
should urgently act to guarantee the status quo with
respect to the holy sites in Jerusalem. The proposal to
station international observers is promising as a first
step towards relieving tensions and re-establishing
stability. The Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian people reaffirms
its commitment to the principle of a peaceful solution
to the conflict on the basis of those premises.

