Ms. Ziade (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank the Prime Minister of Timor-Leste for his
important statement. I also thank Ms. Ameerah Haq for
her briefing and for her efforts as head of the United
Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT)
aimed at promoting security and stability and helping
the Government and people of Timor-Leste to build
their national institutions.

My delegation welcomes the contents of report of
the Secretary-General (S/2011/32) with regard to the
security and stability that Timor-Leste is experiencing.
We look forward with optimism to further steps to
strengthen national unity, as well as to positive
economic indicators that augur well for a better future
for the people of Timor-Leste. That was underscored
by the Prime Minister himself in his statement today.

Joint efforts between the authorities of Timor-
Leste and UNMIT must be redoubled during the
remaining period of the Mission's mandate, to the end
of 2012, in order to complete all major tasks entrusted
to it, in particular, security sector reform, strengthening
the rule of law, achieving socio-economic development
and reinforcing a culture of dialogue and democratic
governance. In that regard, we would like to make the
following observations.

First, concerning security sector reform, we
welcome the fact that the National Police of Timor-
Leste is taking responsibility for security in 10 of 13
districts. We would like to stress the need for the
rehabilitation of the national police to be completed so
that it can undertake its security responsibilities in the
three remaining districts. That will pave the way for
the Mission's smooth exit.

Secondly, with regard to reinforcing the rule of
law, we pay tribute to the recent measures undertaken
to fight corruption. We underscore the importance of
reactivating the role of the judiciary, in particular with
regard to accountability and preventing impunity,
especially as concerns the crimes committed in 1999
and during the crisis of 2006 and since. This is
considered as one of the basic principles necessary for
ensuring permanent security.

As for economic and social development, we
welcome the national development plan for the period
2011-2030, which the Government is preparing in line
with the Millennium Development Goals. In that
regard, we would like to highlight the importance of
the development plan covering all sectors of Timorese
society. This will contribute to political stability and
security.

As for ensuring a culture of dialogue and
democratic governance, we welcome the democratic
path taken by the Government of Timor-Leste. We
believe that the presidential and parliamentary
elections scheduled to take place in 2012 are indicative
of the return of stability after the events of 2006. In
that regard, we reiterate the importance of joint
cooperation between the Mission and the election
authorities in Timor-Leste.

In conclusion, there is no doubt that UNMIT
represents a success story for the international
community. Together with all the United Nations
agencies, it has helped to strengthen democratic
practices and build State institutions. We call upon all
parties to make maximal use of its experience during
the remaining period. We support the recommendation
of the Secretary-General to extend the mandate of
UNMIT for another year.

