Mr. Kolby: It is an honour for me to introduce
the report of the recent Security Council mission to
Eritrea and Ethiopia. Thanks to the efficiency of the
Council and the Secretariat, the report has already been
available for some days, and we should all have
received a copy.

Before going into the more substantive aspects of
the report, however, I would like to take this
opportunity to express the sincere gratitude of all the
members of the Council to the two countries and their
leaders for the warm welcome and hospitality extended
to the mission in Addis Ababa and Asmara, as well as
during our Visit in the field. Indeed, it was a great
privilege for me to lead a mission under such positive
and conducive circumstances in both countries.

I would also like to take this opportunity to
express the mission's appreciation to the United
Nations Mission in Eritrea and Ethiopia (UNMEE); the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ambassador Legwaila; and the Force Commander,
Major General Cammaert, as well as the Secretariat
branch, for effectively facilitating the logistics during
the trip, allowing us to cover a lot of ground in three
days and to experience UNMEE firsthand.

We also visited an internally displaced persons
camp and areas affected by the war. The insights
gained during the mission will be useful in the
Council's further considerations of and support for the
process.

Finally, I thank my fellow Council members for
their constructive participation in the mission. That
support, extended to my delegation throughout the
mission, was exemplary. The fact that all members of
the Council participated in the mission testifies to the
importance being given by the international community
to the peace process between Ethiopia and Eritrea. I am
honoured to say that the report before the Council
reflects a united Council, a Council committed to
actively assist the parties in implementing the Algiers
Agreements and to contribute to the completion of the
peace process.

The mission revealed that the parties remain
committed to the implementation of the Algiers
Agreements. The meetings held with Prime Minister
Meles Zenawi in Addis Ababa and with President
Isaias Afwerki in Asmara further underscored the
parties' desire to work closely with the United Nations
to this end.

On our side, the mission emphasized to the two
leaders the commitment of the Security Council to
fully play its role in this regard. The mission strongly
commended the contributions to date by UNMEE in
discharging its mandate and towards improving the
situation of the people, especially in the Temporary
Security Zone. The mission understood that quick-
impact projects have been particularly helpful. The
arrangements for such projects ought to be continued.

Our meetings in the two capitals were all
convened in a very constructive spirit. The meetings
with Prime Minister Zenawi and President Afwerki
highlighted the progress made in the peace process to
date and the upcoming final legal settlement of the
border issue. The mission welcomed recent statements
by both sides reaffirming that the decision by the
Boundary Commission is final and binding. The
mission commended both parties for having chosen to
resolve their differences through an international
conflict-solving mechanism. It also commended both
parties for having given the United Nations such a
central role in implementing the Boundary
Commission's decision.

The mission emphasized that the implementation
of the Boundary Commission's decision must
commence immediately upon its announcement. The
process should be expeditious and at the same time
ensure that stability is maintained in all areas affected
by the decision. The mission impressed upon the
parties the need to work closely together with the
United Nations in the implementation phase ahead and
to refrain from any kind of unilateral action, which
could have seriously destabilizing effects.

In accordance with article 14 of the Agreement
on Cessation of Hostilities, the security arrangements
are to remain in effect. Accordingly, arrangements for
the separation of forces, as achieved by the Temporary
Security Zone, will continue to be of key importance.
UNMEE must continue its important work in this
regard until the demarcation has been completed.

It is of paramount importance that transfer of
territory and civil authority, as well as population and
troop movements, take place in an orderly manner
under an agreed framework. The parties must cooperate
constructively with the Special Representative,
Ambassador Legwaila, and members of the Council to
this end. A significant amount of good will on both
sides will be necessary to avoid delaying the process.
Together, we must firmly move the process forward
and, hence, actively help the situation of people in
affected areas.

To this end, demining will be critical. The
mission understood both parties to be ready to move
the demining forward, in cooperation with UNMEE, as
a matter of utmost priority. The concrete follow-up in
this regard will be critical for the process of
demarcation. During the mission, we received a
briefing by the UNMEE Mine Action Coordination
Centre, which underlined the importance of the
demining for the demarcation work as well as for the
safety of the people. No efforts can be spared in this
regard.

Concerning the outstanding operational issues,
the parties reiterated to the mission their well-known
positions. The mission strongly urged both parties to
comply fully with their obligations under the Algiers
Agreements to provide UNMEE with the working
conditions it requires. At the same time, the mission
urged both parties to look to the future in order to find
constructive modalities for cooperation and coexistence
on the basis of the Boundary Commission's decision.

The mission particularly highlighted the parties'
obligation under international humanitarian law and
under the Algiers Agreements to release and return
without delay all prisoners of war and civilian
detainees.

The mission also met with the Secretary-General
of the Organization of African Unity (OAU), Mr.
Amara Essy, and with representatives of the diplomatic
community, United Nations agencies, international
non-governmental organizations and civil society in
both countries. The mission was briefed on the
humanitarian situation in both countries. The mission
commended the integrated approach taken by United
Nations agencies and international donors and non-
governmental organizations in their efforts to alleviate
the suffering and to promote the peace process.

The mission underlined the importance of a broad
approach to confidence-building between the two
countries. It acknowledged in that regard the recent
progress in the dialogue among religious leaders and
encouraged representatives of civil society in the two
countries to pursue other initiatives to enhance mutual
trust.

The mission visited the Mereb river bridge, on
which I gave a brief speech. I indicated that a bridge
between minds also needed to be developed for the two
neighbouring countries to live in the prosperity that the
people so much crave and deserve.

In the important period ahead, the OAU and the
facilitators and witnesses of the Algiers Agreements
are strongly encouraged actively to support the process
and to stand firmly behind the efforts of the United
Nations, in close cooperation with the parties.

In our consideration of the renewal of the
mandate of UNMEE, later this month, we need to
provide as much clarity with respect to the
implementation phase as possible. We must clearly
define the tasks ahead and the division of labour.
However, as the Boundary Commission's decision will
not be available at the time of the consideration of the
mandate, the Council should stand ready to further
consider how the United Nations can fully support the
demarcation process in close cooperation with the
parties once a decision is announced.

