Mr. Liden (Sweden): First, I would like to associate
myself with the statement made by the representative of
Luxembourg, who spoke on behalf of the European
Union.

The Angolan peace process is at serious risk. No
efforts should be spared to put it back on track. The
mechanisms for achieving a lasting peace in Angola have
been clearly defined in the Lusaka Protocol. We urge
both parties to fulfil all their obligations under that
Protocol and commit themselves once and for all to
reconciliation and peace.

It is evident to us that UNITA is delaying the peace
process. UNITA has not taken the necessary irreversible
steps to meet its obligations under the Lusaka Protocol.
We believe it is time for the Security Council to take a
decision that will send an unambiguous message to
Mr. Savimbi that the international community will no
longer tolerate his obstructions.

The draft resolution before us is very clear. It tells
UNITA exactly what to do to avoid sanctions. The
measures, which will come into effect if UNITA does not
comply with the demands of the Council, are aimed at the
UNITA leadership. They would not affect ordinary
Angolans. All necessary exceptions are made for
humanitarian purposes. The possibilities for dialogue and
the continuation of the peace process will not be
hampered.

Sweden will vote in favour of the draft resolution.

Angola needs national reconciliation. This can be
realized only through negotiations and dialogue conducted
in good faith. Any attempts to seek victory by force are

 

short-sighted and would only extend the suffering of the
Angolan people.

President Dos Santos and Mr. Savimbi should show
their continued commitment to the peace process by
meeting in person as soon as possible. Such a meeting
could provide important and necessary impetus to the peace
process.

The situation in Angola is putting the personnel of the
United Nations and other international organizations at risk.
Sweden urges both parties, and in particular UNITA, to
cooperate fully with MONUA and to guarantee the free
movement and safety of the personnel of the United
Nations and other international organizations. Harassment
and mistreatment of the men and women who are in
Angola to help is unacceptable.

We are pleased that the Secretary-General, in
completing the withdrawal of the United Nations military
units from Angola, will continue to take into account both
the situation on the ground and the progress in the
remaining aspects of the peace process. The threats to peace
in Angola have made it necessary to decide to postpone the
withdrawal of United Nations troops from Angola.

Sweden would like to express its appreciation for the
work carried out by the Secretary-General, the Special
Representative, Maitre Beye, the three observer States -
Portugal, the Russian Federation and the United States -
and the personnel of MONUA. Their efforts continue to be
essential for bringing peace to Angola.

