Mr. Bahah (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me,

at the outset, to thank you, Mr. President, for inviting
us to participate in this meeting of the Security Council
to adopt presidential statement S/PRST/2014/ 18, on the
situation in Yemen.

Once again, the Council has spoken unanimously
in support of the political process under way in Yemen.
With the support of the Gulf Cooperation Council
Initiative and the various related mechanisms, it is again
clearly reaffirming the provisions of resolution 2140
(2014), which warns individuals and entities seeking
to hinder the national process designed to produce
peaceful change in Yemen, and affirms the Council's
decision to take punitive measures if they attempt to
disrupt the political process.

Every member of the Security Council continues
to take an exemplary position of international
responsibility in support of the aspirations of the Yemeni
people in their efforts to achieve peaceful change and
build a federal State founded on respect for human
rights, freedom of expression and women's rights,
as emerged from our National Dialogue, which has
produced an extraordinary degree of unanimity among
every element of Yemeni society. The cooperation of the
Security Council and other United Nations entities with
the Gulf Cooperation Council is also a great example
of how good offices can succeed, internationally and
regionally, in ending or reducing tensions. In that
regard, we would like to thank Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon and his Special Adviser on Yemen, Mr. Jamal
Benomar, the staff of the United Nations working under
Mr. Benomar, both in Sana'a and New York, all the
United Nations representatives in Yemen and the 10
Embassies and representatives of the diplomatic corps
in Sana'a.

While the political leadership represented by
President Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi Mansour continues
to make progress in working towards peaceful change
and national concord in order to achieve the various
objectives of the transition period - that is, submitting
a draft constitution to the institution that will deal with
supervising the implementation of the outcomes of the
National Dialogue and preparing for the referendum
and the next elections - it is also working tirelessly
to address the issues of living conditions and the
difficult humanitarian and economic situation across
the country. At a time when it is working under
very difficult conditions and with extremely limited
resources in its efforts to deal with extremism and
terrorism on the security and military fronts, the
leadership is extending its hand to all, inviting all to
move forward together on the path of dialogue and of
implementing the outcomes of the National Dialogue
Conference on which every element of Yemeni society
is agreed, including our brothers in Ansar Allah and
the Houthi movement. The Security Council has called
on the latter to support the country and the outcomes of
the national dialogue, rather than imposing a new status
quo at gunpoint and fighting wars that have destroyed
Yemen over the past 50 years.

