Mr. Carmon (Israel): At the outset, I would like
to join my colleagues in congratulating you, Sir, on
assuming the presidency of the Council and to thank
you for convening this open debate. We trust that, with
your able stewardship, you will aptly guide the work of
the Council in dealing with the various challenges that
the international community faces around the world.

I also wish to thank Under-Secretary-General
Egeland for his briefing and for his dedication to
addressing humanitarian concerns across the globe
over the past years. We wish him much success in the
future.

Israel assigns vital importance to the protection
of civilians in armed conflict and is encouraged by the
continued efforts of the Security Council, the
Secretary-General and his staff in that area. We believe
that all individuals should live without fear of physical,
sexual, psychological and other forms of abuse
stemming from conflict.

As Mr. Egeland said this morning, the
international community must demonstrate that it has a
"depoliticized [and] truly shared interest" in ensuring
the protection of civilians. Efforts will be "judged by
the extent to which our actions have made a
difference". To that extent, Israel appreciates the
emphasis in recent reports on protecting women and
children, and believes that continued grass-roots
efforts, alongside greater governmental engagement,
can help end that deeply troubling phenomenon.

In recent months, we have been reminded of the
vulnerability of and danger posed to civilians in our
region by forces of extremism and instability, as
evidenced by the conflict with Hizbollah in Lebanon
and the ongoing Palestinian terror war against Israel.
We have been reminded again that no side has a
monopoly on victimhood or human suffering, and that
the jagged shards of armed conflict can cut deep and
wide, affecting all civilians - Israeli, Lebanese and
Palestinian.

Over the summer, Hizbollah terrorists operating
in southern Lebanon fired some 4,000 Katyusha
rockets into northern Israel, explicitly targeting
civilians in their homes and places of work.
Hizbollah's onslaught of raining rockets forced nearly
1 million Israeli civilians to flee their homes, causing
insufferable damage to civilian life and infrastructure.

Similarly, the relentless Qassam rockets fired by
Palestinian terrorists in the Gaza Strip at Israeli
communities in the South within the past year - more
than 1,000 rockets to date - were all direct and
targeted attempts on the lives of civilians, attacks
against schools and synagogues, kindergartens and
classrooms, shopping malls and playgrounds.

The blatant disregard of terrorists for the value of
human life is a brutal maliciousness that we have seen
even among their own populations. Hizbollah stored its
rockets inside homes and launched attacks from
positions nestled within the fabric of civilian life. In
using civilians as human shields, Hizbollah sought to
evade responsibility and accountability for its crimes.

Palestinian terrorists, too, have employed
civilians as shields. Recently, Palestinian civilians in
Gaza were specifically called to surround the home of
a known terrorist. Human Rights Watch recorded the
incident, declaring that

"[c]alling civilians to a location that the opposing
side has identified for attack is at worst human
shielding, at best failing to take all feasible
precautions to protect civilians from the effects of
attack. Both are violations of international
humanitarian law".

The deliberate blurring of the distinction between
terrorist and civilian is a terrorist tactic. It is a gross
injustice that endangers civilians and betrays the
principles of human dignity and life.

It is the obligation of all nations first and
foremost to protect their people from all harm, but it is
also the obligation of all nations to ensure that they and
their citizens not endanger others. It is an obligation
which Israel embraces. No doubt, strategic and ethical
complexities regarding counter-terrorism exist; we
addressed Israel's perspective on the issue when we
last spoke before the Council on this subject. But in the
quest to secure our world and protect all peoples, we
must strike the proper balance. Failure to hold terrorist
groups accountable gravely endangers the vitality of
the human project and will only encourage them to
increase their abuse, manipulation and exploitation of
civilians.

The ceasefire in our region, initiated and agreed
upon by Prime Minister Olmert and Chairman Abbas
one week ago, is a sign of promise for all citizens of
the region - all civilians, no matter their nationality.

06-6406]
But we must see to it as well that the underlying
tensions of the conflict and Hamas's disregard for its
internationally accepted obligations - recognition of
Israel, renouncing violence and terror, and abiding by
previous agreements - are addressed.

The past few months have been difficult, with
difficulties levied particularly on civilians, but the past
cannot be changed and the victims of the conflict
cannot be returned. What remains is the course we
chart together for the future. Prime Minister Olmert
reasserted that position in his remarks just last week:

"All we can do today is prevent further tragedies
and bequeath to the younger generation a bright
horizon and hope for life."

Let us hope that all sides will keep to their
commitments identified within the ceasefire and that an
authentic Palestinian partner will emerge from it,
dedicated to the vision and cause of peace.

