Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We would also like also to thank Mr. Griffiths and Mr. Lowcock for their briefings. Just a few weeks ago, we enthusiastically welcomed the news of a prisoner exchange agreement between the Government of Yemen and the Houthis. We are pleased that today we begin to see that agreement bear fruit. We also draw hope from the fact that the situation in southern Yemen may have begun to stabilize thanks to the Riyadh agreement. However, clashes overrecent days in the governorates of Al-Durayhimi and Ma'rib have increased, and the situation in the port of Al-Hudaydah is seriously undermining the Stockholm Agreement as well as the efforts of the Special Envoy to ensure that the parties fully implement it. It is important to stress that 70 per cent of Yemen's imports pass through that port, and that fighting in the surrounding area further hinders humanitarian assistance operations. We condemn this increase in hostilities, while at the same time we stress that only a political solution to the conflict could lead to lasting peace. According to the information gathered by civilian population monitoring project, the number of civilian casualties in Yemen in September was the highest since the last November, with 67 dead and 123 wounded. I would like to turn now to the most recent report of the Panel of Expert on Yemen. Besides troubling reports of illegal attacks against civilians, the report includes evidence of the recruitment and use of child soldiers. This is alarming and deeply worrisome. All parties to the conflict must comply with the rules of international humanitarian law, as well as having a moral duty to halt hostilities immediately. We are extremely concerned about the imminent collapse of the economy. The falling value of Yemeni rial and the fuel crisis mean that the few people with access to capital cannot purchase food and that the transport of people, supplies and goods is ever- more precarious. And injection of foreign currency, as performed in 2018, would be critical to avert catastrophe. In addition, food insecurity worsens by the day. We are deeply concerned that several areas in Yemen are fast approaching conditions that amount to famine and that additional factors, such as the locust plague, increase the complexity and gravity of the situation. The saddest aspect of this situation is that we know how to resolve it. It is a completely avoidable tragedy. International organizations have sounded the alarm. Aid groups know what they have to do. We are encouraged by reports that donor countries, especially regional partners, are rising to the occasion, making greater funds available to Yemen. In that regard, and in conclusion, we would like to urge donor countries to continue increasing their support to mitigate this immense humanitarian crisis and to step up their official development assistance for those countries most affected by the pandemic and its devastating consequences. We know that the uncontrolled spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) continues in Yemen. And we call once again for the vaccine and other health technologies needed to tackle COVID-19 be made accessible in an equitable manner and for assurances that they will be distributed to all human beings around the world. Thus the role of the World Health Organization, together with donor countries and the private sector, is essential to achieving this goal the spirit of cooperation, solidarity and justice.
