Mr. Kleib (Indonesia): I would like first of all to
join others in welcoming Under-Secretary-General
Holmes once again to the Security Council and in
thanking him for his briefing on his Visit to Somalia
and Uganda.

My delegation shares the View that the
humanitarian situation in the two regions under
discussion remains deeply troubling. The humanitarian
needs are particularly great in Somalia, owing to the
scale of the recent crisis there. We are nonetheless
encouraged by the gradual improvement in the Great
Lakes region as peace emerges, albeit slowly, in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and in northern
Uganda.

In Somalia, the deteriorating humanitarian
situation is a matter of grave concern. We deeply regret
Mogadishu's return to conflict and instability,
especially given that it enjoyed a measure of peace and
stability last year. Many of us have already referred to
the current situation as the worst humanitarian crisis
since the early 1990s. Indeed, an estimated 300,000
people have fled Mogadishu in recent months due to
the heavy fighting; more than a thousand have
perished; and an additional 1.8 million people continue
to be in need of urgent humanitarian assistance. All
sides in Somalia must respect international
humanitarian law, protect civilians and allow
humanitarian access to those in need.

The deteriorating humanitarian situation is a
direct consequence of the continued failure by Somali
parties to find a political solution to their differences. It
is therefore imperative that an all-inclusive national
reconciliation process commence urgently, as called for
in Security Council resolution 1744 (2007).

In the final analysis, the Somali problem is for
the Somalis to resolve; the international community
can only encourage and help the process to take place.
In that regard, we support the Secretary-General's
efforts to facilitate and assist in the reconciliation
process. We commend the African Union for its efforts
to find an early solution to the longstanding conflict,
including through the deployment of the African
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). We condemn the
recent killing of AMISOM. personnel. We look forward
to the full deployment of AMISOM. and urge the
international community to strengthen its assistance to
AMISOM. in the implementation of its mandate.

Turning to the Great Lakes region, my delegation
also regrets that the humanitarian situation there
remains grave. We are, however, hopeful that the
current political resolution of some conflicts, such as
those in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in
northern Uganda, will bring relief and, indeed, a
gradual improvement in the humanitarian situation.

With regard to Uganda, we support the "triple
effort" approach being taken by the humanitarian
community involving the provision of aid to those still
in camps; assistance to those in the process of
returning; and early recovery aid for those who have
already returned to their homes. We share the view that
greater efforts could be made to assist the more than
one million displaced persons who are still living in the
camps. We believe that progress on the political and
diplomatic front, in particular with respect to the Juba
peace talks, would lead to an improvement in the
humanitarian situation, and we must therefore ensure
the continuation and progress of the peace process.

My delegation stresses that, as the international
community continues with its humanitarian assistance
efforts as well as its support for the peace process, it is
important also to start looking at how development
assistance could also be provided in order to sustain
the gains that are being made.

My delegation deems it essential that, in order to
ensure the success of humanitarian efforts, such noble
endeavours should always observe international
principles of humanitarian assistance, which include
respect for the principles of humanity, neutrality and
impartiality; full respect for the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and national unity of States and for the
primary role of the affected State in the initiation,
organization, coordination and implementation of
humanitarian assistance within its territory; and, lastly,
the observance of international and national laws as the
basis for cooperation to address situations and to
strengthen the emergency response capacity of affected
countries.

Finally, in areas where humanitarian
organizations operate, such as the Great Lakes region
and the Horn of Africa, coordination with the local
authorities is imperative if the operation is to enjoy
local ownership and be successful and sustainable.
While the short-term needs of refugees and internally

displaced persons (IDPs) must be urgently addressed, it
is also essential to ensure that the long-term social,
economic and political impact on the local community
remains beneficial.

