Mr. Serry: As the peoples of the Middle East
face a period of extraordinary challenges and turmoil,
establishing the groundwork necessary for a credible
Israeli-Palestinian peace process remains a core priority
for the United Nations. President Obama's visit to the
region last week marked an important opportunity
to reinvigorate efforts towards a two-State solution.
President Obama met with leaders on both sides. He
also visited His Majesty King Abdullah of Jordan, who
has been central to recent dialogue initiatives. In a
direct follow-up to the visit, the United States Secretary
of State Mr. John Kerry met with President Abbas in
Amman and returned to Jerusalem to meet with Prime
Minister Netanyahu.

The United Nations welcomes the continued
commitment of the United States to the peace
process, and we appreciate President Obama's strong
reaffirmation of a two-State solution as necessary, just
and possible in his speech of 21 March, in which he
called for an independent and viable Palestine while
emphasizing Israelis' right to insist on safeguarding
their security. The United States President also recalled
that he had previously proposed principles on the
issues of territory and security that he believes can be
the basis for talks, and called on Arab States to take
steps towards normalized relations with Israel. On
22 March, regarding an important related development
and a hopeful signal for the stability of the region,
the Secretary-General welcomed the news that the
Governments of Israel and Turkey had agreed to restore
normal relations between each other and expressed his
appreciation for President Obama's role in reaching that
positive outcome.

On 18 March, a new Israeli Government was
confirmed by the Knesset. In his congratulatory letter to
Prime Minister Netanyahu, the Secretary-General stated
that he counted on the Prime Minister's commitment
to the two-State solution, and he expressed the view
that it will be critical this year to achieve substantial
results that would strengthen Israel's security, as well
as its regional and international standing, and fulfil the
legitimate aspirations ofthe Palestinians to a sovereign,
independent and viable Palestinian State.

Both Prime Minister Netanyahu and President
Abbas reiterated their commitment to the two-State
solution as essentially the only prospect for the future of
Israelis and Palestinians, while they undeniably differ
on its terms and on how to attain it. It is incumbent
upon us, as the United Nations, and the international
community, to help them bridge those differences.
Much work lies ahead. We should not underestimate
the difficulties, but neither should we belittle the real
possibility of overcoming them. It is now time for all
of us to come together in concerted action and support
a serious international initiative, including through a
revitalized Quartet that engages more broadly with key
Arab partners and regional and other stakeholders.

Efforts currently under way offer the chance
for a new beginning and a renewed push for serious
political progress. Therein lies opportunity, but we
worry that it will not last if the volatile situation on
the ground is not urgently addressed at the same time.
Both parties should undertake constructive steps and
work to reverse negative trends. In that context, we
note that there were no new settlement announcements
during the reporting period, and that three structures
in settlement outposts were demolished on 18 March.
The period also registered fewer incursions by Israeli
security forces in the West Bank, including in Area
A, as well as a decrease in demolitions of Palestinian
structures.

The United Nations position is clear and firm on all
the aforementioned issues. It is now our hope that those
initial signals that the negative measures on the ground
are being reversed will take hold and create a conducive
environment for a meaningful political process to take
shape.

Overall, it must be said that the levels of violence
remained high. Several clashes took place during
protests, including in solidarity with Palestinian
prisoners, which caused the death of one Palestinian.
The use of rubber-coated bullets by Israeli security
forces continues to result in a high number ofPalestinian
injuries, including those of a 23-year-old man who
recently died from wounds suffered when hit on his
head by a rubber-coated bullet on 22 February. A third
Palestinian died on 15 March after an Israel security
forces gas canister had earlier entered his taxi in East
Jerusalem. Thirteen Israeli soldiers were also injured.

Tensions also extended to Jerusalem, with multiple
clashes taking place at the Temple Mount/Haram
al-Sharif compound, including on 3 and 6 March,
and again on 8 March when dozens of Israeli police
officers entered the compound and fired stun grenades
at Palestinians throwing rocks and Molotov cocktails.
The Secretary-General stresses the importance for
protests to remain strictly non-violent and for the right
to peaceful protest to be fully respected.

Settler violence against Palestinians continued,
injuring six. On 12 March, a Palestinian man died of his
injuries after he had been run over by a settler vehicle
near Salfit on 9 March. Settler attacks on Palestinian
orchards resulted in damage to over 590 trees, while
stone throwing at Palestinian vehicles in the West Bank
resulted in material damage. Israeli security forces
arrested a total of nine settlers suspected of assaulting
Palestinians in the West Bank.

Israeli security sources have also reported an
increase in stone throwing, including against settlers,
that injured a total of 10 during the reporting period.
Palestinian attacks on settlers included a suspected
shooting on 18 March that resulted in injuries to one
settler. A suspect in that shooting was arrested by
Palestinian security forces on 20 March. Stones and
Molotov cocktails thrown at Israeli vehicles in the West
Bank reportedly resulted in a road accident on 14 March
that injured six settlers, including a three-year-old,
critically. Similar attacks on 6, 11 and 15 March resulted
in slight injuries to six Israelis.

We remain concerned about the situation of
Palestinian prisoners in Israeli custody, which we
understand was the subject of discussion during this
week's high-level meetings. One long-term hunger
striker agreed to stop his strike in exchange for being
released and deported to Gaza by Israeli authorities on
17 March. Five other prisoners remain on hunger strike,
one of whom is reportedly in grave, life-threatening
condition. Activities in their support continued in the
West Bank and Gaza Strip, including a demonstration
in front of United Nations offices in Ramallah on
16 March, during which a letter was delivered by the
families of prisoners and transmitted to the Secretary-
General. The United Nations reiterates that those held
in administrative detention without charge should
be charged and face trial with judicial guarantees,
in accordance with international standards, or be
promptly released. We also recall the importance of full
adherence by all sides to the 14 May 2012 agreement.

Palestinian security forces have continued working
to maintain law and order in the West Bank, in
coordination with Israeli security forces and supported
by training and equipment from international partners.

I have just come from Brussels, where the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee for the Coordination of International
Assistance to Palestinians (AHLC) met on 19 March.
Two years after the donors - based on reports from the
United Nations, the World Bank and the International
Monetary Fund - gave their positive assessment
of the State readiness of the Palestinian Authority
regarding the institutions studied, I highlighted again in
my report to the AHLC on behalf of the United Nations
the growing disconnect between the widely recognized
success ofthe Palestinian State-building agenda and the
continued impasse in the political process. I expressed
my concern that State-building achievements could be
eroded, given the deteriorating reality on the ground,
negative socioeconomic and security trends, and the
dire fiscal situation of the Palestinian Authority. Those
concerns were widely shared by participants in the
meeting.

The AHLC underscored the importance for
Israel to transfer Palestinian clearance revenues to
the Palestinian Authority in a timely, transparent and
predictable manner, that the Palestinian Authority
continue with structural reforms, including fiscal
containment, and that donors provide adequate and
predictable assistance to the Palestinian Authority.
The general feeling at the AHLC meeting was that it
is an illusion that we can preserve the current situation
indefinitely. The alternative to progress is sliding back,
and a political horizon must be restored without delay.

With regard to other developments during the
reporting period, as the Council is aware, the Secretary-
General submitted to the General Assembly his report
on the status of Palestine (A/67/738), which reviewed
progress made in the implementation of General
Assembly resolution 67/19 of 29 November 2012.

I would also like to highlight the activities of
Palestinian women's and human rights organizations
in the West Bank and in Gaza to mark International
Women's Day on 8 March. Numerous events called
attention to the situation of Palestinian women and
their demands, including an end of the occupation
and the full realization of Palestinian statehood.
Unfortunately, it was also in this reporting period
that the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East had to cancel the
annual Gaza marathon because the de facto authorities
would not permit the participation of women.

In Gaza, the reporting period saw a serious setback
in the implementation of the ceasefire brokered on
21 November. On 21 March, rockets were fired from
Gaza into Israel for the second time since the ceasefire.
In reaction, Israel rescinded the extension of the fishing
limit, bringing it back to three nautical miles, and
restricted travel by Palestinians into and out of Gaza.
It also closed the Kerem Shalom crossing, bringing
the movement of goods to and from Gaza to a halt for
the second time after the closure from 27 February to
3 March, following the previous rocket fired.

The United Nations condemned the firing, in line
with our consistent position that rocket fire into civilian
areas is completely unacceptable. We also urged Israel's
continued restraint. It must be very clear to the parties
to the understanding reached on 21 November that full
adherence to its terms is required by all if work is to
continue to solidify the calm, prevent the smuggling of
weapons into Gaza, advance the lifting of the closure
and have a chance to fully implement resolution 1860
(2009). The United Nations will continue to support
Egypt's important efforts to restore and solidify the
calm.

Israeli forces conducted five incursions into Gaza,
and a total of six Palestinian civilians were injured by
Israeli fire, mostly while attempting to approach the
border fence.

There was no progress on Palestinian reconciliation
efforts during the reporting period and no meetings
between the sides. The Palestinian Central Elections
Commission has announced that the updated voter
register, including electors from Gaza, will be available
on 10 April in spite of Israeli authorities not having
authorized the transfer of registration forms from Gaza
to Ramallah.

The situation in the Syrian Arab Republic has
continued to worsen since the Council was briefed
by Under-Secretary-General Feltman last month
(see S/PV.6926) and by Under-Secretary-General
Amos, High Commissioner Guterres and Special
Representative Bangura. The continuing pursuit of
a military victory by both sides, and their reckless
disregard for civilian lives and their protection are
of deep concern to the United Nations. Impunity is
widespread; human suffering and destruction are
pervasive.

As the Secretary-General has said repeatedly, the
prospects for a political solution in the Syria will remain
slim unless the parties abandon violence and instead
commit to a political solution. Limited signals by the
parties towards the possible start of a dialogue have
so far not materialized. The opposition coalition has
elected an interim Prime Minister and will participate
in the upcoming summit of the League of Arab States
in Doha.

A consensus position of the international
community and a common position on the part of the
Security Council are critical to a political settlement.
Joint Special Representative Brahimi is working
tirelessly to achieve that objective. He is counting on
the Council's united and meaningful support to his
efforts.

In the meantime, the United Nations is doing
its utmost to respond to the tragic humanitarian
consequences of the conflict, which continue to grow
dramatically by the day. Nearly 1.2 million refugees from
Syria are seeking safety in neighbouring countries. We
are grateful for the generous hospitality shown towards
these refugees by regional Governments, which face an
increasingly heavy burden on their own economies.

Funding for our humanitarian efforts remains a
challenge. Regrettably, only about 20 per cent of what
was pledged during the Kuwait pledging conference
on 30 January has been received thus far. We continue
to appeal for those pledges to be translated into real
commitments as soon as possible.

Last week, the Secretary-General announced his
decision to conduct an investigation into the alleged use
of chemical weapons in Syria. He acted on the request
of the Syrian Government, which was soon followed
by requests from the Governments of France and the
United Kingdom. He believes that all allegations should
be taken seriously. The Secretary-General responded
promptly to the Governments concerned, formally
informing them of his decision and seeking additional
information pertaining to the incidents reported to
facilitate the investigation. He also sent a letter to the
President of the Security Council. He has been in close
contact with the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons and the World Health Organization.
Both organizations have assured the Secretary-General
of their full support. The terms of reference for the
mission will soon be finalized.

The deteriorating situation in Syria has also affected
significantly the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force (UNDOF) area of operation, with
clashes between Government and opposition forces
intensifying in recent days. The continued military
activities in the area of separation have the potential
to escalate the situation between Israel and the Syria
andjeopardize the ceasefire between the two countries.
There was a worrisome incident yesterday in that
regard, as heavy machine gunfire from the Bravo side,
which reached across the ceasefire line, was answered
by the firing of an Israel Defense Forces missile into
the area of limitation. UNDOF is still ascertaining the
facts with both sides. The Department of Peacekeeping
Operations will brief the Council in detail tomorrow on
the situation in the Golan, including that most recent
incident.

In Lebanon, the resignation of Prime Minister
Mikati on 22 March has cast further uncertainty over the
political process at a time of increased tensions across
the country, most notably in Tripoli. The Secretary-
General has called on all the parties in Lebanon to
remain united behind the leadership of President
Sleiman; to work together with the institutions of
the State to maintain calm and stability; to respect
Lebanon's policy of disassociation, consistent with their
commitment in the Baabda Declaration; and to support
the role of the Lebanese Armed Forces in sustaining
national unity, sovereignty and security.

Let me recall that only 10 days ago, following the
briefing by the Special Coordinator of the Secretary-
General for Lebanon on 14 March, the Council clearly
recognized the fragility of the situation in Lebanon,
expressing deep concern at the impact of the Syrian
crisis on the country's stability. Since then, there have
been more security concerns.

First, on 17 March, four Sunni religious scholars
were assaulted in Beirut. The attacks were widely
condemned, and the Lebanese Armed Forces deployed
to contain ensuing tensions. In the northern city of
Tripoli, the Lebanese army deployed in force to contain
renewed clashes since 20 March, which had left nine
persons, including a Lebanese soldier, dead as of
yesterday.
Secondly, on 18 March, Syrian helicopters were
reported to have entered Lebanese airspace and fired
rockets at two locations close to the north-eastern
border town of Aarsal. There were no casualties. The
Secretary-General expressed grave concern at the
reported strikes, which President Sleiman condemned
as an unacceptable violation of Lebanese sovereignty.
The Syrian Government has denied the incident. On
21 March, there was a new report of a further rocket
that was fired by a Syrian helicopter and landed in
the same area. Also on 20 March, there were reports
of Syrian shells landing on the outskirts of Al-Qasr in
Lebanon's north-eastern region of Hermel.

Meanwhile, the situation in the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) area of operations
and along the Blue Line remained generally stable,
but Israeli violations of Lebanese airspace continued
at a high level. The total strength of the Lebanese
army presence in UNIFIL's area of operation is
now at approximately two brigades, following new
redeployments out of the area to address security
challenges elsewhere.

In that context, consultations on a new Government
are expected to begin this week. The Secretary-
General urges all concerned to engage positively with
the President to agree on the way forward through
dialogue, in accordance with Lebanon's constitutional
requirements and in full respect for the democratic
process. As called for by the Council, it remains
important for Lebanon's continued stability that all
parties make swift progress to ensure that parliamentary
elections take place on a consensual basis within the
legal and constitutional framework.

Allow me to conclude. We now have an opening
to develop a serious and substantial political initiative
to achieve the negotiated two-State solution that we all
hope for and that will best serve the interests, rights
and aspirations of Israelis and Palestinians alike. The
months ahead will not be easy. Both sides will now have
to demonstrate political will and determination to make
progress, and the concerted action of the international The President (spoke [n Russian): 1 thank Mr. Serry
community, including the region, will be needed to for his briefing.

support their efforts. The United Nations is committed
to playing its role in shaping the conditions for a return
to meaningful negotiations in the period ahead.

I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.

The meeting rose at 10.30 a.m.
