Mr. Cengizer (Turkey): My delegation
congratulates you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council and wishes you
every success in that very important work. We also
wish to express our appreciation of the excellent way
in which Ambassador Ole Peter Kolby of Norway
conducted the Council during the crucial previous
term.

Turkey aligns itself with the statement of the
European Union. It should be a sobering call on both
parties to assume their responsibilities to their people
and to most of the international community. The
eruption of outright and dangerously escalating conflict
in the Middle East continues unabated, and we are
meeting for the second time within the space of not
even 96 hours, testifying to the seriousness of the
situation. Tragedy abounds; fear and foreboding spill
throughout the region. Certainly, this situation is more
dangerous than many can bring themselves to avow
and is getting more out of hand by the hour. Not only
are the Israelis and the Palestinians at the brink, but the
whole region is exposed to wider dangers, and this at a
time when the international community must deal with
a number of other problems and problem areas of
unprecedented scope and urgency.

The Middle East is important to the world. So
many unsurpassed achievements and great faiths trace
their origins to the heart of this region that no one can
afford to have the false sense of comfort that a
misplaced disinterestedness or an imaginary sense of
control are apt to create.

The Middle East is important to Turkey, because
it was in Anatolia and in the Middle East that we first
met two ancient and cherished friends. It is because of
the way in which these friendships have unfolded over
nearly a millennium now that we are privileged to be
within the fold and at the forefront of the great faiths
and traditions of mankind. We have shared friendship,
wisdom and timeless memories that we nurture today
with the Jewish and Arab nations. Their well-being was
important to us in the past; it is important today and
will be so tomorrow.

That is precisely why the current situation is
unbearable for us. We can accept neither suicide
bombings, which are sheer and simple terror in one of
its most frightening forms, nor aggression against the
legitimate leader of the Palestinian people, President
Arafat. Sadly, we are horrified by almost every scene
that reaches us from that part of the world these days:
civilians covered with blood, headquarters under a
barrage of bombs and gunfire. We cannot bear to see
this self-destruction.

The events of the past few days and the manner in
which this situation is unfolding make clear that the
parties cannot be left to their own devices and that the
international community, particularly the United States,
has a responsibility to intervene to draw the parties
back to the negotiation process.

The way to bring the crucial element of
negotiation back into the picture is to stand at a fair
and equal distance from both parties. In fact, both we
and the parties need that, because these rampant
delusions about a militarily achieved solution are
dangerous, not only to those who have them but also to
the region as a whole. The entire geography is being
dragged towards a major crisis that might lead to a
collapse of stability in more than one sense of the
word. Those are reasons enough for the United States,
which had the principal role in all previous peace
initiatives, not to pause in carrying out its
responsibility. Its influence should be brought to bear
on the prospects for a peaceful settlement.

Let me be clear on one point: we vehemently
condemn the terror perpetrated through suicide
bombings, and we fully share the agony of the Israeli
people. There can be no plausible degree of terror nor
any redeemable reason or understandable motives for
it, and there can be no leniency with regard to it. All
Palestinians and their leadership have the responsibility
to do everything they can to prevent the recurrence of
these acts of terror.

At the same time, we strongly protest the
treatment to which President Arafat is being subjected
by the Israeli Government. No one has the right to
commit such disrespect towards a nation's elected
leader and to dismantle and destroy its administrative
apparatus and mechanisms. What other action, if not
those, will push the Palestinian people to succumb to
the pressure from the extremist fold? The majority of
the Palestinian people keep their faith in peace. We
need to safeguard that reality today more than ever, and
we must find ways for it to prosper - not, of course,
paving the way for the clouds of darkness that
extremists wish to bring upon their people.

Security Council resolution 1402 (2002) must be
implemented forthwith. Israeli troops must withdraw
from Palestinian cities. The Palestinians' human rights
are being violated and they urgently require
humanitarian assistance. Everyone is asking about the
true scale of the ambition behind this military
campaign. The world is worried about the
destabilization that the campaign is bent on producing.

We cannot bite our tongues while we watch both
parties help each other commit suicide. Indeed, Turkey,
aware of its historical and contemporary
responsibilities, is determined to act in a way that
befits our implacable friendship with all peoples of the
region. As a matter of fact, the situation requires
assistance from every quarter. We deem it essential to
draw up a concrete plan that will end occupation,
violence and terror. We think all the interested parties
should act in a concerted manner to have an effect on
developments in the region, on the basis of the Madrid
and Oslo Agreements. Turkey is working creatively
towards this end.

Turkey has always assumed a conciliatory role in
the Middle East conflict. Our forebears achieved peace
for no less than half a millennium in that region. For
centuries, Turkey ensured that mutual respect and
tolerance reigned among the adherents of the three
great religions, who were divided into nearly 100
different nations and groups.

I must repeat: we cannot bear this sight of
fighting and violence between those who are especially
dear to us. As a nation that has traditionally had good
relations with both Israel and Palestine, we ask them to
let us help them. Better and more honourable prospects
are not yet lost. The appeals of the international
community, along with the sentiment of friends, are
there to be received in good faith.

