Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): In the interest of
time, I will just say that I agree with every
complimentary word that Ambassador Koonjul just
spoke. But I want to add two other important
compliments. First, I would like to express our strong
support for this new concept of the workshop. I think
that this is the first time that we are having a workshop
in the Security Council Chamber. It is a useful idea to
work on, because one of the structural weaknesses of
the Council is that even though we have been sent here
to shoulder the collective security responsibilities of
the United Nations, more often than not we wear our
national hats rather than our collective hat around this
table. I hope that in this dialogue that we are having,
we will focus on the collective responsibilities that we
face as members ofthe Security Council.

The second compliment we would like to pay is
to the United Kingdom for the exceptional role that it
has played in Sierra Leone. I think that it is no secret
that without the significant British support we would
not see the success that we see today in Sierra Leone
compared to the situation that we saw just two or three
years ago. When the history books are written,
historians will be puzzled as to why that nation carried
out such an exceptionally altruistic act in international
relations.

As we look ahead, I think that the best
contribution we could make is to look at what might be
the problem areas. I would like in the five minutes that
I have to focus on two key problem areas and, if there
is time, two or three other minor points.

The first key problem area, which has already
been touched upon, is the sore question of resources.
Here, I shall touch on a sacred cow that I have
occasionally touched upon in previous discussions of
the Council: how do you move smoothly from
peacekeeping to peace-building? The fundamental
structural problem we have is that when it comes to
peacekeeping, we have scales of assessments; we can
generate $500 million or $800 million. In the case of
the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL), as I have said in the Security Council, as
of 31 December last year, we had already spent $1
billion on UNAMSIL - probably $1.5 billion by now.

But, ifI may use an analogy, when you complete
a peace-building operation, it is like walking through a
garden which has been well tended with a wonderful
sprinkler system. You remove the sprinkler system and
then say now the garden will depend on people walking
in with buckets of water. It is very hard to bring in
enough buckets of water to replace a sprinkler system
that is established in the garden.

This is a structural problem that I think applies to
all peacekeeping operations, but certainly to the case of
UNAMSIL, which has been one of the best-funded
operations. Look at the discussion that we have already
had today, for example when Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno
spoke this morning about the difficulty of raising $13.5
million - which I think is less than 1 per cent of what
we have already on UNAMSIL - to pay for
disarmament, demobilization and rehabilitation (DDR).
If you do not take care of DDR and do not find a way
out for the combatants, you are basically giving the
combatants an incentive to return to combat, because
there is no other choice for them. If you have already
spent $1.5 billion on UNAMSIL, why can you not find
a secure system of funding?

There are, by the way, very strong theological
arguments that have been put forward as to why you
cannot have assessed contributions for peace-building.
I think there is some merit to those arguments. But can
we not create a twilight zone, so that when we move
from peacekeeping to peace-building we ensure that we
do not remove the sprinkler system completely? Can
we not have a phased removal of the sprinkler system,
and ensure that resources continue to be plowed in for
the Revolutionary United Front (RUF) and the other
ex-combatants and for their integration when the
peacekeeping operation is finished? Here, I think, it is
those countries which have invested the most in the
success of UNAMSIL that have the greatest vested
interest in ensuring a smooth transition to peace-
building.

The second problem that I was going to touch
upon is one, frankly, that I am glad has already been
touched upon frequently this afternoon - the whole
question of the regional approach. We have succeeded
in creating a pool of stability in Sierra Leone. There is
a pool of stability in Guinea. But now, as Sir Kieran
Prendergast said, we have come full circle in Liberia.
We have gone from civil war to elections and peace
and back now to civil war. Everybody has agreed, from
what I can tell, that all the success we have secured in
the Mano River Union will be endangered if we do not
fix the problems in Liberia.

Here, the question that you posed, Madam
President, to Sir Kieran - what can the Security
Council do? - should have actually been posed to the
Security Council. IfI speak honestly, as you say, in my
capacity as Chairman of the sanctions Committee on
Liberia, I know the sticks that the Committee on
Liberia is applying to Liberia, but I do not know what
carrots are being applied. We had a very frank
discussion at lunch today - which we cannot repeat,
obviously, in this Chamber - about how to find
possible solutions for Liberia. But the theme that is
emerging is the need to find a policy of constructive
engagement of some sort with Liberia. I am looking at
the Human Rights Watch report that someone dropped
on our table here. They all say, let us focus on Liberia.
I have not read this report, but that is what the theme
is. So I hope, as a result of this debate, that we will
find a fuller answer to the question that you posed to
Sir Kieran.

I would like to raise three minors points that Ijust
think we should pay attention to. One is, of course, that
in the case of Sierra Leone we have set up a Truth and
Reconciliation Commission and a Special Court. How
to find the balance between the two is always a
challenge. Secondly, in terms of the Special Court that
has been set up, the question of resources has come up
already. Of course, we do not want to see a repetition
of the International Criminal Tribunals for the former
Yugoslavia and for Rwanda, which have become
enormously expensive. That is why there is no real
formal court for Sierra Leone. But how do you ensure
that there are enough resources for this?

My third and final point builds on a point that
Ambassador Koonjul just made about the question of
refugees - and I agree with him that Guinea has been
exceptionally generous in hosting refugees from Sierra
Leone and Liberia. Can we in the Council begin to look
at refugees not purely as a humanitarian problem, but,
as Ambassador Koonjul said, as a leading indicator that
conflict may be on the way? Perhaps we should
monitor the refugee flows that are taking place. If they
begin to rise, then clearly this is an indication that
trouble is coming. If we are looking forward, we
should pay attention to this.

