Mr. Monchotte: Before I begin today, I would
like to thank the Security Council for this opportunity
to speak on how the police component of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
helps develop the policing capacities of the Haitian
National Police (HNP).

On behalf of all MINUSTAH police personnel and
colleagues, let me also express gratitude to the Security
Council and the police-contributing countries for their
continued support for Haiti's ongoing stabilization
efforts and their solidarity with the people of Haiti,
following the tragic loss oflife and destruction inflicted
by Hurricane Matthew.

In 2004, when MINUSTAH was established with a
mandate to contribute to the restructuring and reform of
the HNP and to create a secure and stable environment,
the HNP was only nine years old and had an inadequate
budget. The security situation in Haiti was a cause for
concern, with only approximately 6,300 insufficiently
equipped and trained police officers, who were not able
to maintain law and order. The majority of the HNP's
facilities were damaged or destroyed during the fighting
and looting experienced in the early months of 2004.
Key branches of the HNP and other institutions were
dysfunctional or did not exist, including the General
Inspectorate and the National Police Academy. Armed
gangs competed for control over areas in Port-au-
Prince. High homicide and kidnapping rates aggravated
social instability, and the population's confidence in the
HNP was very low.

Originally, MINUSTAH was authorized to have
6,700 military and 1,622 police personnel. Changing
political and security circumstances and the capacity-
building requirements of the HNP resulted in the
progressive reversal of the military-to-police ratio, with
the police component currently having an authorized
strength of 2,601 police personnel while the military
component has an authorized strength of 2,370 troops.

Following the earthquake in January 2010,
MINUSTAH, including its police component, redirected
significant amounts of resources to supporting the

emergency and recovery efforts ofHaiti. For 18 months,
capacity-building activities were partially suspended.

Throughout MINUSTAH's existence, the police
component carefully tailored its assistance in key
policing areas to the priorities of the Ministry of
Justice and Public Security and the HNP, specifically
professionalizing the HNP, strengthening its operational
capacity, developing its institutional capacity and
reinforcing the national and international institutional
relationships of the HNP. This approach resulted in
the sustained development and implementation of
several five-year plans, namely, the HNP Reform Plan,
covering 2006 to 2011, and the HNP Development Plan
2012-2016, which will expire next month. In June, the
HNP initiated the development of a strategic plan for
the period 2017-2021, and its adoption is expected in the
coming months. The plan sets a direction for long-term
HNP institution-building goals to create an effective
response capacity for addressing the variety of threats
Haiti faces.

The co-location of MINUSTAH police officers,
together with close coordination with national and
international partners that have generously contributed
to training, logistical support and the reconstruction of
facilities, has resulted in visible progress in a number
of areas, such as an increase in the police-to-population
ratio, strengthened human-resources management,
improved practices related to strategic planning and
community-oriented policing through training at all
police levels, augmented capacity of the judicial police
and increased prevention of crime and violence.

Allow me to elaborate with a few examples. The
HNP's presence throughout the country has expanded
through the construction and reconstruction of police
facilities and an increasing quantity and quality of
officers deployed nationwide. At present, the HNP has
an overall strength of about 13,100 officers, of whom
9 per cent are women, meaning a police-to-population
ratio of around 1.3 officers per 1,000 inhabitants. This
ratio has increased from 0.6 per thousand citizens,
which was the level in 2004, and will gradually increase
with the graduation of the twenty-seventh and twenty-
eighth classes of recruits scheduled for February and
November 2017, respectively. With these graduating
classes, the HNP will reach a minimum force of around
15,000 officers.

The recruitment and training system has been
strengthened, including through the implementation
of a seven-month curriculum deployed in 2009, which
is in line with international policing and human-rights
standards. The system replaced the four-month training
programme that had been used since 1995.

With respect to improving capacities, the HNP
has made tremendous efforts to implement a vetting
process and strengthen the General Inspectorate, which
is responsible for the competence and integrity of
HNP officers and removes those who have committed
crimes or are involved in human-rights violations or
corruption. Moreover, the HNP has increasingly been
able to tackle the kidnapping phenomenon and reduce
the number of homicides by dismantling existing or
emerging criminal groups, even though the adoption
of a national crime-prevention strategy to ensure
sustainability is still awaiting adoption. The HNP has
also assumed greater responsibility and leadership in
securing recent elections.

Since 2004, the HNP has increased its capacity to
maintain law and order, including through augmented
territorial coverage, good crowd-control practices
and anti-kidnapping and anti-narcotics operations.
Nevertheless, challenges remain. They include, but are
not limited to, capacities to maintain and repair assets,
police intelligence and organized crime, firearms
control, institutional policies, budget execution and
strategic planning, as well as civil protection and
community-oriented policing. The promotion and
implementation of justice and corrections reforms
in parallel to police reform is essential to ensuring
access to justice, inclusiveness and, ultimately,
sustainable development. The recent Office of Internal
Oversight Services evaluation recognized the positive
impact MINUSTAH police have had on strengthening
PNH capacities, matching mandated tasks with available
resources and time frames and taking into account
external constraints, all of which were highlighted as
indispensable elements for success.

It is critical for Haiti's long-term stability that
capacity-building of the PNH remain a priority for
the international community until the PNH can
provide security for all Haitians. Efforts should follow
a comprehensive rule-of-law strategy and lessons
reflected in the Strategic Guidance Framework for
International Police Peacekeeping. They should also be
based on community engagement and build on security
sector reform principles and human rights norms.

In the meantime, MINUSTAH needs the sustained
support of police-contributing countries to attain
qualified male and female individual police officers
and formed police units, including as much as possible
francophone and, of course, when possible, Haitian
Creole skills.

Once again, I thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this briefing and affording me an opportunity
to address the Security Council today.
(spoke in French)

I thank the Council for its attention and once again
express my gratitude for the efforts carried out those
contributing to Haiti.

