Mr. Zerihoun: The Security Council is meeting at
a time when the situation in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea is attracting increased world
attention and concern. The report (A/69/639) of the
Secretary-General to the General Assembly entitled
"Situation of human rights in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea" was issued earlier this month.
The General Assembly adopted resolution 69/188,
entitled "Situation of human rights in the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea", on 18 December, and on
19 December the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)
of the United States issued a report alleging that the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea was responsible
for the recent cyberattack targeting Sony Pictures
Entertainment.

The Secretary-General is aware of the FBI report.
He is also aware that the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea has denied any involvement. The United
Nations is not privy to the information on which the
FBI's conclusions are based. However, the rise in the
incidence and severity of cyberattacks is of increasing
concern.

The commission of inquiry established by the
Human Rights Council gave voice to the many victims
of grave human rights violations and provided a road
map for the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to
adhere to in order to conform with universal human-
rights standards. The commission concluded that "the
gravity, scale and nature of these violations reveal a
State that does not have any parallel in the contemporary
world" (S/2014/276, annex, para. 80). The commission
also reframed and changed the tone of the discussion on
the Democratic People's Republic ofKorea. It is notjust
the nuclear issue that deserves international attention
and action. The discussion in the Security Council
today allows for a more comprehensive assessment and
action when addressing security and stability concerns
on the Korean peninsula.

In keeping with its obligations under international
law, the Democratic People's Republic of Korea has
a responsibility to protect its population from the
most serious international crimes. The international
community also has a collective responsibility to protect
the population of the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea and to consider the broader implications of the
reported grave human rights situation for the stability
of the region.

For the first time in 15 years, the Foreign Minister
of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea attended
the General Assembly's debate in September this year
and met with the Secretary-General, confirming the
commitment of his country to sustaining and continuing
dialogue. The Democratic People's Republic of Korea
has also undertaken active diplomatic activities around
the world, including in Europe, East Africa and
Northeast Asia, and has engaged more substantively
with the United Nations human-rights system, including
the universal periodic review mechanism. Those signals
of engagement offer an important opportunity for the
United Nations and the wider international community
to redouble efforts towards building trust, dialogue and
cooperation on all tracks. It is also an opportunity for
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to work with
the international community to improve the human-
rights situation and the living conditions of the people
of the country.

The Democratic People's Republic of Korea has
issued official statements making clear its objection to
the recent General Assembly resolution on the human
rights situation in the country and, on 9 December,
the spokesperson of the Foreign Ministry presented
his Government's strong reaction to the meeting of
the Security Council today. While the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea had raised the possibility
of conducting a fourth nuclear test in its statements
immediately before and after the Third Committee
vote, its recent statements have refrained from such
references.

The Secretary-General notes that the international
community has remained firm and united in affirming
that the Democratic People's Republic of Korea cannot
have the status of a nuclear-weapon State under the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
There is strong international consensus on the need for
the verifiable denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.
In that context, the Six-Party Talks remain a viable
mechanism to achieve irreversible denuclearization and
maintain peace and security on the Korean peninsula.
The 2005 Joint Statement remains a solid framework
for addressing those issues through dialogue and
negotiation.

While the non-proliferation, political, human rights,
economic and security challenges are interrelated and
mutually reinforcing, the United Nations urges Member
States to increase humanitarian assistance for those in
need in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.
The United Nations-led humanitarian response to
the country is of high quality and life-saving, with a
measurable impact on the lives of the most vulnerable.
The response, however, is hampered by a funding
deficit, which has been exacerbated by sanctions.

Next year will mark the seventieth anniversary
of the end of the Second World War, the founding
of the United Nations, as well as the division of the
Korean peninsula. The Korean question has remained
unresolved for such a long time, and the situation on
the peninsula remains fragile and volatile. Inter-Korean
relations have remained deadlocked, and family
members separated for far too long.

Restarting credible dialogue and meaningful
engagement would be an important step towards
overcoming the current standoff on the Korean
peninsula and should go hand-in-hand with efforts to
ensure accountability. The United Nations will continue
its engagement on both fronts and counts on the active
support of the international community, especially
the countries in the region. Sustained international
efforts will be important in supporting those efforts.
All concerned parties should work to make 2015 a
pivotal year to improve the human-rights situation in
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea and to move
toward a denuclearized and peaceful Korean peninsula.

