Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like, on behalf of Qatar, Chairman of
the Ninth Islamic Summit, to extend my warmest
thanks to you, Mr. President, for the interest you have
shown and for responding so quickly to the call to hold
this urgent meeting to consider the unprecedented
aggression against the Palestinians in the occupied
territories.

The Council should have been meeting again to
assess what had been accomplished within the
framework of the recently adopted resolutions 1402
(2002) and 1403 (2002). But on the contrary, it is
meeting today to seek redress in the light of
unanimously adopted Security Council resolutions that
we want to see Israel respect. It is extremely
regrettable that the resolutions of this legitimate body
continue to be held hostage. It is inconceivable that the
important and decisive resolutions that have been
adopted by the Security Council - a body responsible
for the maintenance of international peace and
security - are not being implemented. But that has
been the usual outcome when the Council is dealing
with the Palestinian question: to date, Israel has
continued to defy and flout all resolutions.

The practices of the occupying forces - in
particular those in Nablus and Jenin - are the epitome
of State terrorism. This barbarity has broken out at a
time when we thought that the situation was about to
improve. The escalation has continued, and all
members of the Council are familiar with the nature of
the crimes. I would only mention the deaths, yesterday
and today, of about 100 Palestinian martyrs in the
refugee camps. Palestinian cities are littered with the
wounded and the dead. The occupying forces have not
even permitted Red Cross and Red Crescent
ambulances to reach victims, which is a grave violation
of all norms of international humanitarian law,
including the Fourth Geneva Convention.

What is most strange is that some persist in trying
to establish a link between the most recent Israeli
escalation and what they call "suicide operations". I
would ask how valid such a link would be. Since the
adoption of the most recent resolution, 1403 (2002),
the escalation has been continued by one side, and it is
no longer valid to condemn both parties together. The
occupying forces, who continue to defy the most recent
Security Council resolutions, must be condemned.

On behalf of my country's delegation, I reiterate
that the Council is responsible for deterring Israel from
its aggression towards the Palestinian people, which
has now become unbridled. This is an ethical, moral
and legal responsibility, to halt the massacres carried
out by the Israeli occupying force against defenceless
Palestinian civilians. The Council must undertake strict
measures in order to apply its relevant resolutions
immediately. In so doing, it would preserve its
credibility and fulfil the expectations of the
international community with regard to its
responsibility to maintain international peace and
security.

