Mr. Carmon (Israel): Mr. President, allow me to
congratulate you on your able stewardship of the
Council this month and to thank you for convening this
important thematic debate. I also wish to thank the
Secretary-General for his statement and to extend our
compliments to Under-Secretary-General Holmes for
the ongoing humanitarian work being carried out on
the ground by him and by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.

At the outset, however, it is important to fill in
some of the missing pieces that, to our disappointment,
were absent from the Under-Secretary-General's
briefing this morning. He described the situation in the
Gaza Strip as if there are only Palestinian hardships,
but no Palestinian terrorism - the very reason for the
closures and restrictions in the first place. It is
impossible to refer to any situation giving only one
side, and this is true for all conflicts in the world.

In our region, for example, just yesterday alone,
there were three major security violations by
Palestinian terrorists, one of which resulted in the cold-
blooded murder of an Israeli citizen in the West Bank.
When Israel raises concerns regarding its security, they
are not theoretical. The threats to Israeli life from
Palestinian terrorism are dangerous and lethal, and they
demand that Israel take measures in self-defence - as
any responsible Government would do.

That said, Israel works with the United Nations
here at Headquarters and on the ground to ensure
07-60635
humanitarian access to civilians in need and will
continue to do so.

My delegation takes note of the sixth report of
the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict (S/2007/643). However, we wish to
place on record our strong reservations and concerns
regarding several elements in the report that, in our
view, mistakenly portray certain rules of international
law and offer a misguided picture of the conflict in our
region. In the interest of time, I will be brief and thus
refer delegations to the full statement that is being
circulated. The statement can also be found on our
Mission's website.

A snapshot of conflicts around the world reminds
us of the growing threats to civilian life and security
triggered by forces of extremism and instability. The
report of the Secretary-General rightfully notes that
terrorist groups

"have resorted to strategies that flagrantly violate
international humanitarian law, such as deliberate
attacks against civilians, including suicide
bombings, as well as hostage-taking and
intentional placement of combatants and other
military objectives amid civilian infrastructure"
(S/2007/643, para. 7).

Regrettably, however, the report fails to describe
that phenomenon for what it truly is: terrorism.

That blatant disregard by terrorists for the
sanctity of human life is a brutal maliciousness we
have seen even among their own populations. Abuse,
manipulation and the endangerment of civilians are at
the heart of the terrorists' modus operandi and tactics.
In Lebanon, Hizbullah stored its rockets inside homes
and launched attacks from positions nestled within the
fabric of civilian life and in proximity to places of
worship and hospitals. In the Gaza Strip, Palestinian
terrorists firing Qassam rockets employ similar
methods.

Additionally, in the Gaza Strip, we have
witnessed violence against Israel accompanied by
intra-Palestinian violence, with a deliberate disregard
for the rights of civilians, including incidents of
abduction, torture and execution, and attacks against
hospitals and media institutions.

Regarding the report of the Secretary-General, I
wish to comment specifically on three main issues of
concern.

First, the principle of proportionality under
international humanitarian law, as referred to in the
report, has no clear definition. The principle raises a
number of questions regarding its scope and
application and, as correctly noted in the Final Report
to the Prosecutor by the Committee Established to
Review the NATO Bombing Campaign Against the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, "the answers to these
questions are not simple".

The same Report notes further:

"It may be necessary to resolve them on a case by
case basis, and the answers may differ depending
on the background and values of the decision
maker. It is unlikely that a human rights lawyer
and an experienced combat commander would
assign the same relative values to military
advantage and to injury to noncombatants".

Clearly, the language used in the report of the
Secretary-General in addressing the issue of
proportionality in armed conflict does not reflect a
position widely held by the international community.
Rather, the opposite is true: the principle of
proportionality refers to an overall assessment of
incidental loss of life or injury to civilians in relation
to the goals of the military campaign.

Secondly, as called for in the report of the
Secretary-General, the safety and access of
humanitarian personnel must be ensured. Israel
strongly supports the work of humanitarian agencies
that provide essential services on the ground and
stresses that their vital efforts must not be hampered.

However, we must also not ignore the fact that
terrorists often abuse access privileges, which greatly
endangers humanitarian workers and obstructs the
movement of aid. Here, it is crucial to highlight that
the closing of crossing points is invariably a result of
rocket and mortar fire by Palestinian terrorists,
supported by the illegitimate Hamas leadership in the
Gaza Strip, against the very crossing points that are
used to supply the Palestinians themselves with food
and other essential supplies.

My delegation wishes to underscore that, under
international humanitarian law, the right to free
movement of humanitarian personnel is subject to
military necessities and security considerations, among
them the safety of the humanitarian personnel
themselves and the need to prevent the abuse of

humanitarian channels. In that regard, we find the
report's presentation regarding free access incomplete
and legally questionable.

Thirdly and lastly, the issue of refugees in any
situation of armed conflict is but one issue among
many. That is equally true for the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. Israel and the Palestinians have already agreed
to discuss that outstanding issue as part of the overall
settlement of the conflict in its entirety. My delegation
strongly feels that it is incorrect to isolate one issue in
armed conflict and that doing so could entail
prejudging an outcome that should be left for the
parties to determine themselves.

The international community's vigilance in
protecting civilians, particularly in cases where States
are negligent, must not wane. Choosing to deal with
those situations now could save the lives of countless
civilians.

Israel recognizes that it is the duty of all States,
first and foremost, to protect their own civilians from
all harm. Equally important is the obligation of all
States to ensure that attacks are not launched from their
own sovereign territory. But the failure to hold terrorist
groups accountable, as well as those States which
provide safe haven and refuge for them, will only
encourage the extremists to increase their abuse and
manipulation.

