Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me, first of all, to thank you, Mr. President, for
your presence here and to welcome that of the
Secretary-General, Under-Secretary-General Lynn
Pascoe and the Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Mr. Antonio Maria
Costa.
Costa Rica was pleased at the convening of this
debate. It reflects the growing awareness and the
concern of the international community with regard to
the threat posed by international drug trafficking to the
security of many States and regions of the world.

For many years, the drug industry was a lucrative
business that was run by criminal groups. However, in
recent decades, new actors have joined the criminals,
and what was once merely an illicit activity has
become a threat to the security of States and regions.
The new alliances in international drug trafficking
circles now include warring parties, terrorists,
insurgents, paramilitary groups and corrupt State
agents. The aims of these new alliances include the
reduction or even the elimination of the presence of the
State, with the consequences that we are all well
acquainted with.

This bleak picture has started to take root in
Western Africa at a time when the region is
strengthening the basic pillars of governance, the rule
of law, peace and stability. These efforts are frequently
undermined in States with porous borders, weak
institutions, widespread poverty, high unemployment -
in particular among young people - and widespread
corruption. All of these factors make the subregion
very vulnerable and allow organized international
crime networks to operate over a large section of its
territory and to expand the drug trafficking that takes
places across West and Central Africa and is aimed at
the markets of Europe.

The illicit drug trafficking networks take
advantage of the weaknesses of and the challenges
facing the countries of the subregion in terms of
economic development and employment. The poverty
and political weakness that prevent States in the region
from exercising their authority throughout their
territory provide the breeding ground for drug
trafficking, which is frequently associated with
insurgents or mercenaries. Drug traffickers can then
also become involved in production, as has happened
in West Africa, as Mr. Costa informed us in November
(see S/PV.6212).
However, the threats to national and regional
security are far from an exclusively African
phenomenon. Many Latin American and Caribbean
States as well as Asian States have also suffered under
the onslaught of drug trafficking. Allow me to take this
opportunity, while the Security Council is debating the
threat posed by drug trafficking to the security of
States and regions, to briefly mention the experience of
some Latin American States, including Costa Rica.

I should like to begin by recalling that the world's
main cocaine producing countries are found south of
the Central American isthmus. According to reliable
sources, there lies the origin of a trade that moves more
than 1,000 tons of that drug every year. To the North
lie the countries of Central America and the Caribbean,
which are situated in the so-called drug trafficking
corridors through which move drugs bound for the
United States market.

As in Africa, drug trafficking in Central America
and the Caribbean flourishes by virtue of State
weakness, poverty and marginalization. Drug
trafficking routes in the Americas cut across the three
poorest countries of the continent and others with very
limited resources to combat it. Central America, the
countries that lie along the Central American drug
trafficking corridor and Western Africa are recovering
from wars that came to an end less than 20 years ago.
They are also frequently assailed by large-scale
climactic events. In those places, too, institutions are
weak and poverty provides a breeding ground for
corruption among poorly paid officials and public
employees.

The drug trade exploits its advantaged position in
order to recruit, better pay, train and arm its own
armies, to equip them with sophisticated equipment,
and to simplify their logistical and procurement chains.
As if that were not enough, Central American and
Caribbean transit States - as well as countries in
Africa - also provide new markets for the drug trade.
Our people thereby become victims who ultimately
support the expansion of criminal activities. As a
result, the burden to be borne by States increases by
virtue of the vast resources that have to be devoted to
combating international drug trafficking, which
therefore cannot be used for efforts to promote peace,
stability and human and institutional development.

I should like to conclude my sombre statement on
the effects of international drug trafficking on countries
along the routes on which it operates by pointing out
that the trend towards consolidation, which exists even
with regard to this heinous activity, has had
consequences in Africa and other regions of the world.
Competition between cartels and their constant
movement from one place to another as a result of

09-6381]
international efforts serve to heighten the porous
character of the borders of weak States where they set
up their operations, bring new violence, corrupt
institutions and alter the lives of populations straddling
various States.

This Security Council debate should be seen as a
call to strengthen early warning systems and to
promote closer follow-up by the Secretariat and the
Council in the most vulnerable countries. We call for
the strengthening of all efforts that can serve to spread
the rule of law. We also call for galvanizing the work
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, the
United Nations Development Programme and the
United Nations system as a whole with a View to
preventing and addressing situations that, left ignored,
could threaten entire regions and require costly
intervention by the international community in the
future.

