Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I would like to thank
Ambassador Sacha Llorentty Soliz, Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), for his briefing. I would also like to take this
opportunity to pay tribute to the work ofhis predecessor
at the helm of the Committee, the Ambassador of
Spain, who contributed a great deal to the progress
that has been made in the past two years. We wish
Ambassador Llorentty Soliz every success in chairing
this important body.

Last year marked a significant stage in fostering
the regime for the non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction (WMDs). We join others in reaffirming our
support for the comprehensive review process, which
culminated in the unanimous adoption of resolution
2325 (2016). The conclusions and recommendations of
the 2016 comprehensive review, properly implemented,
should significantly reinforce and even re-energize
resolution 1540 (2004). The report on the review (see S/2016/1038), while clearly outlining the different
progress of the implementation both for types of
WMDs and the various obligations in resolution 1540
(2004), helps to define specific areas for each party
concerned where national and regional efforts should
be intensified.

The potential use of weapons of mass destruction is
a clear and ever present danger to humankind. The risk
of the most dangerous materials in the world falling
into the wrong hands, whether intentionally or as a
result of neglect or oversight, remains high. Resolutions
1540 (2004) and 2325 (2016) complement the existing
international non-proliferation regimes for nuclear,
chemical and biological weapons and the means of
their delivery by preventing the illegal trafficking of
relevant materials and prohibiting their acquisition by
non-State actors. However, despite all the measures
that Member States have taken to reduce the risk of
proliferation, the world is witnessing growing and
ever-more sophisticated threats in the area, owing not
only to gaps in national legislation but also to the rapid
development of science, technology and e-commerce,
accompanied by a lack of awareness of such threats in
academia, industry and civil society.

Strengthening cooperation in preventing the
proliferation of WMDs and their components, as well
as building synergies among all stakeholders, including
the relevant international, regional, subregional and
non-governmental organizations, is an urgent task.
In that regard, the 1540 Committee should also help
to promote such cooperation, in accordance with the
recommendations of the comprehensive review and the
provisions of resolution 2325 (2016). We believe that
the recently adopted programme of work will guide the
Committee and its Working Groups on how to continue
to build on the comprehensive review process and not
lose what has already been achieved during it.

In the past decade, chemical and biological materials
have frequently been cited as potential weapons for
terrorists, non-State actors and rogue States, and it
would seem that this assumption is true. In particular,
cases of the use of chemical weapons, from chlorine to
VX toxin, have been confirmed. Ukraine's position in
that regard is very clear. Any use of weapons of mass
destruction, under any circumstances, must be met with
a strong response from the international community in
which all the perpetrators are held accountable.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Ukraine's
intention to be engaged constructively, both within the
1540 Committee and with the broader United Nations
membership, in order to ensure that the outcomes of the

comprehensive review will bear fruit and help to further
strengthen the global non-proliferation architecture for
weapons of mass destruction.

