Mr. De Mistura: When I last briefed the Security
Council on 9 April, it was at an emergency meeting (see S/PV.8225). On that occasion, I warned of the threats
to regional and international peace and security arising
from developments in or related to Syria. I know that
today it is not an emergency meeting. However, the
circumstances of an emergency very much remain. I
do not need to remind members that tensions are high
and regional and international confrontations have
occurred several times. Allow me to highlight some
recent events since 9 April.

On 13 April, the United States, France and the
United Kingdom conducted missile strikes in response
to the allegations of the use of chemical weapons in
eastern Ghouta. Those countries say that the strikes
targeted three research and production facilities near
Damascus and Homs.

On 29 April, strikes were reported on Syrian
Government military facilities in Hamah and Aleppo.
Some media outlets attributed those strikes to Israel,
alleging that those killed included Iranian personnel.
Neither Israel nor Iran responded to those claims.

On 8 May, strikes were reported just south of
Damascus. Syrian State media attributed those strikes
to Israel. Israel did not confirm that claim. Israel then
said that it had detected "irregular Iranian activity" in
the occupied Golan, which it put on high alert.

Between 9 and 10 May, Israel carried out dozens
of strikes against presumed Iranian and Syrian
Government military targets across southern Syria.
The Israeli authorities claim that they were responding
to Iranian forces firing rockets from Syrian territory
at Israeli military targets in the occupied Syrian
Golan. Iran condemned the Israeli strikes and denied
those claims.

We are not is a position to independently verify
every aspect of those incidents. However, even an
incomplete picture shows the troubling trajectory
of the increasingly frequent and ever more intense
international confrontations over Syria, unprecedented
since 1973.

As the Security Council knows, the Secretary-
General has followed those developments with great
concern and called for restraint by all parties in order
to avoid any acts that could escalate the situation
and worsen the suffering of the Syrian people. The
Secretary-General stressed that the United Nations
has a

"duty to remind Member States that there is
an obligation, particularly when dealing with
matters of peace and security, to act consistently
with the Charter of the United Nations, and with
international law in general." (S/PV8233, p. 2)

On the issue of chemical weapons, let me again echo
the Secretary-General's call for the Security Council to

"agree on a dedicated mechanism for ensuring
effective accountability for the use of chemical
weapons in Syria" (ibid.).

As the Council well knows, as of now, we await the
results of the ongoing investigation by the Fact-finding
Mission of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons following its visit to Douma, with
a report to be issued to States parties to the Chemical
Weapons Convention.

However, we have also seen worrying developments
elsewhere in Syria. Evacuations from eastern Ghouta
were similarly repeated in the eastern Qalamoun area,
southern Damascus and northern rural Homs.

First, on the military escalation, the pattern has
been one of incoming air strikes and artillery and
outgoing mortars and rockets towards Damascus. Then
there was a negotiation, followed by an agreement
for the evacuation of those civilians and fighters
unwilling to remain under Syrian Government
control or Russian Federation protection guarantees.
We have also seen similar evacuation agreements
being discussed in ldlib province but in a completely
different format - the reverse format. This time we
are talking about civilians and fighters in Government-
controlled areas, namely, Kafraya and Fo'ah, while
considering evacuations - beginning with medical
evacuations - following the three-year siege and
intermittent attacks from armed groups surrounding
that area.

Let me share with the Council a recurrent concern
thatIknow that all members have. If civilians and fighters
are simply funnelled into northern Syria - mostly into
Idlib - then that might only postpone another conflict
affecting many additional people, which I will discuss
later. Therefore, it is important to keep close watch
on future developments in Idlib province. Meanwhile,
civilians continue to pay a terrible price. To be precise,
110,000 people have been evacuated to north-western
Syria and Operation Euphrates Shield areas in the past
two months. Many of them are reportedly traumatized
and in urgent need of assistance and protection.
Humanitarian partners are overwhelmed and stretched
quite thin by the scale of those evacuations, but continue
to do their utmost to respond to the growing needs, with
the Council's assistance.

Returning to the topic of Idlib, if a Ghouta
scenario were to play out there, the situation could be
six times worse, affecting 2.3 million people, half of
whom are already internally displaced and would have
nowhere else to go. But that is not purely a question
of the Syrians" suffering. We fear that any substantial
escalation in Idlib, Dar'a or in the north-east might
also result in risks not only to Syrian civilians, but
also for international peace and security. As we know,
many of those areas contain external and international
forces. Conflict there might entail confrontations with
those forces, thereby leading us down a slippery slope
towards regional or potential international conflict.
Therefore, discussions at the international level on how
to prevent that and on de-escalation are needed, and,
although they are taking place, they also need to be
very intensive.

I was therefore very encouraged to see concrete
discussions on de-escalation when I attended the ninth
high-level Astana meeting yesterday, which covered
the issue of Idlib in particular, as the three guarantors
have a say and the means to avoid it. That round of
discussions in Astana saw constructive discussions
on how that might be achieved. While fully stressing
the need to respect Syria's sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity, we saw at first-hand the
parties engage actively on how to avoid a worst-case
scenario in Idlib. Moreover, the working group, of
which the United Nations is a member and a proactive
supporter - as hundreds of thousands of people in
Syria expect of us - held its second meeting on the
release of detainees, abductees and bodies, and on
the identification of missing persons. The members
of the working group held constructive discussions
on practical and concrete steps to address that key
humanitarian issue. The guarantors informed us that
they have secured the parties' support - which, if
confirmed, is good news - for the activities taking
place under the auspices of the working group, which is
a positive development. As it is a matter of preliminary
discussions, I hope that we will see progress with
regard to that complex issue at the working group's next
meeting, which we understand will be held in Ankara.

De-escalation is indispensable, as the Syrians
themselves are telling us, but it is only one of the
ingredients necessary to move forward the political
process. We also need to overcome concrete challenges
to meaningfully follow through with the Geneva
process so as to implement resolution 2254 (2015). As
instructed by the Secretary-General, I have consulted
with a broad spectrum of relevant stakeholders and
proactively identified options for a meaningful
relaunch of the United Nations-facilitated Geneva
process. Over a period of two weeks, I conducted an
exhaustive tour of consultations with members of the
League of Arab States; representatives of Saudi Arabia,
Egypt, Jordan and Iraq; the European Union (EU)
High Representative; representatives of several key
European countries, Turkey, the Russian Federation
and the Islamic Republic of Iran; and all members of the
Council, during what I believe was a very productive
and useful retreat in Sweden; United States authorities
during my visit to meet with them in Washington, DC,
several days ago; and also the Syrian Government
and the opposition, with whom I had constructive
discussions on the sidelines of the Astana meeting over
the past two days. My deputy, Mr. Ramzy, was also in
the region this past weekend in continuous political
contact with regional stakeholders, and my chief of
political affairs, Mr. Robert Dann, is visting China
as we speak to exchange views with officials of that
important member of the Security Council.

What did I learn from that long tour? Not
surprisingly, I returned to Geneva with a mixed picture.
Clearly, significant differences remain, but there is
also much common ground and interest on the need,
first, to de-escalate, secondly, to form a constitutional
committee under the auspices of the United Nations,
thirdly, to facilitate the establishment of a safe, calm and
neutral environment - leading to our shared goals in
the political process - and, fourthly, to respect Syria's
sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence.
However, those commonalities risk getting glossed
over, especially in the absence of serious international
dialogue. I will say more on that later. During my tour,
my message to all was the need - now more than
ever 4 for robust, strong, proactive and urgent dialogue
and consensus at the international level to create the
minimum conditions necessary for a realistic and
credible political process. As we know, much water has
flowed under the bridge and much has happened since
resolution 2254 (2015) was adopted. We are therefore
becoming increasingly realistic and know that we need
a credible political process that takes into account the
current situation and does not forget resolution 2254
(2015).

As the Secretariat, we are not sitting idle in that
regard. We are assessing a number of creative options
to update, revive and advance the Geneva-based
political process. Let me state for the record that the
United Nations remains ever-mobilized and -ready to
work on the formation of a constitutional committee
in accordance with the final statement of the Syrian
National Dialogue Congress in Sochi. I therefore
welcome the intention of the Astana guarantors to
actively and regularly engage with the United Nations
in Geneva so as to see through a concrete follow-up
to the statement since its adoption three and a half
months ago.

I was also pleased to see a significant number of
Member States reaffirm the primacy of the United
Nations-led Geneva process, in general, and the need
for a constitutional committee working under United
Nations auspices, when I was at the EU-United Nations
Brussels conference from 24 to 25 April. Those at the
conference nearly unanimously reiterated the message
that the only solution to the crisis will be political and
that only such a political solution will pave the way for
reconstruction efforts. Also in Brussels, we saw the
entire United Nations system highlight the increasing
needs of millions of Syrians, including internally
displaced persons (IDPs) and neighbouring countries
hosting refugees.

Let me also note the important contribution of
Syrian civil society in Brussels, in particular during a
side event organized by the EU and my own Office.
Those present did not shy away from debating with
one another constructively and intensively on complex
issues, such as transitional justice and sanctions. They
all demanded the release of all detainees, abductees and
missing persons. They all affirmed that any political
solution must protect the right of refugees and IDPs.
Despite their differences, Syrians - Syrian civil
society - displayed a genuine commitment to dialogue
and a spirit of negotiation that I hope can be replicated
in the formal negotiations.

In Brussels I also met with a group of Syrian
women activists who stressed that not enough has been
done to secure the direct participation of Syrian women
in the political process. I committed to translating our
collective commitment to that inclusion into concrete
measures, and I will count on the Council's support to
keep that promise. For instance, in future intra-Syrian
talks, I will insist that the relevant number of seats be
reserved exclusively for Syrian women. When I am
criticized, I hope that the Council will support me. I
know it will not be popular, but it needs to be done.

Let me briefly touch on an issue that was raised
by the civil society in Brussels and by many Syrians
elsewhere who have been writing to us, that is, the
possible implications of the newly adopted Law No.
10. We are quite aware of the concerns surrounding
that law. We, as well as other United Nations partners,
are seeking clarifications on the law's goals and
repercussions, especially for refugees and IDPs who do
not have access to legal documentation.

Let me conclude with two bottom lines.

First, de-escalation is critical between the Syrian
and international stakeholders, both regional and global.
We hope that the relevant players can re-establish some
overarching rules of the road in that regard. We stand
ready to facilitate such a discussion, with focused
support from the Council and key countries for the
good offices of the Secretary-General and myself.

Secondly, we must revive the political process in
terms of the constitutional committee, as well as in
terms of some initial steps towards the establishment
of a safe, calm and neutral environment. We stand
ready to facilitate discussions on both. Let me stress
that a critical component of either aspect of the political
process is active, continuous and positive United
Nations engagement with the Syrian parties. I repeat
once again that we stand ready, today as always, to
engage with the Syrian Government in Damascus. We
will also continue our contacts with the opposition and
Syrian civil society.

To unlock and lock those two aspects, careful
diplomacy is required more than ever - careful, but
proactive diplomacy, including at a high level. Hence,
we look with interest to the forthcoming visits to
Moscow and meetings of Chancellor Merkel and, later
on, President Macron with President Putin, which
undoubtedly will not avoid the issue of a political
process in Syria. The United Nations believes that
there is an urgent need for high-level diplomacy to
support de-escalation, avoid any miscalculation and
ensure a genuine communication system about a
sustainable end to the conflict. With the support of the
Secretary-General, we will increase our own efforts
to contribute to that endeavour, including by offering
further ideas and -if required, which we hope it will
be - bridging proposals.

