Mr. Doutriaux (France) (interpretation from French): I wish first of all to thank you, Mr. President,
for this excellent initiative. Much is said among the
Members of the United Nations on the lack of
transparency in the work of the Security Council. I think
that today you have taken an excellent initiative towards
transparency, and we particularly appreciate the
opportunity to hear an oral report from Sir Kieran
Prendergast on a crisis situation, the situation in
Afghanistan, in the formal meeting Chamber of the
Security Council with the presence of the Member States
who wished to be present. This marks an important step
towards greater transparency in the work of the Security
Council. Thank you again, Sir.

I also wish to ask you to convey our wishes for a
rapid recovery to Ambassador Brahimi. We very much
regret his absence here today.

I also wish to thank the Under-Secretary-General, Sir
Kieran Prendergast, for the presentation he made
regarding the most recent events in the situation in
Afghanistan. We are pleased to have the presence of the
Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan, and we
thank him for the information he gave us on the situation
in his country.

The internal situation in Afghanistan has achieved no
positive progress; on the contrary, it has undergone a
clear deterioration over the last few weeks following the
new offensive waged in the north.
France is particularly concerned by these
developments, which are once again blocking a settlement
of the conflict by peaceful means, are flouting the

 

Tashkent Declaration of 19 July and are exacerbating the
terrible situation of the civilian population.

We once again condemn the resumption of hostilities
and deeply deplore the failure of the various attempts at
reconciliation among the parties. We note that the refusal
of the Taliban to engage in constructive dialogue with the
United Front is a major obstacle to the implementation of
a peaceful solution.

We are concerned by the additional suffering caused
by the resumption of fighting for the civilian population,
whose humanitarian situation is deteriorating in an alarming
manner. We condemn the continuation of measures that
violate human rights enshrined in the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights, in particular those of women and young
girls. We particularly condemn the operations carried out
against certain ethnic or religious groups in Afghanistan,
and we are deeply troubled by the deportations of civilians
organized during the last few weeks in the Shomali plains.

France supports the efforts being made by the United
Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan and by the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General, Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, for
the re-establishment of peace and the sovereignty and
integrity of Afghanistan.

We reaffirm our dedication to the fundamental
principles of a settlement to the Afghan conflict laid down
by the Security Council in resolution 1214 (1998). We also
reaffirm that the United Nations must play a central role in
the establishment of a process for a settlement of the
Afghan conflict. We support all of the attempts designed to
promote a peaceful solution.

We must demand once again from the various Afghan
factions to cease sheltering of and training terrorist
organizations and to halt the production of and trade in
illegal drugs.

We urgently demand that the various Afghan factions,
and in particular the Taliban, immediately cease their
repeated violations of the principles laid down in the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and by international
humanitarian law.

We urgently demand an immediate cessation to all
foreign interference in the Afghan conflict, and in particular
the sending of arms and volunteers to the factions.
The French delegation calls for the continuation by
the United Nations of all initiatives conducive to restoring
peace and stability in Afghanistan.

Sir Kieran wondered about the future of the
initiatives of the "six plus two" group. We second his
appeal and his question, and my country, for its part, is
open to any ideas along these lines.

