Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We appreciate the presence of the

Secretary-General, who expressed interesting ideas on
approaches to conflict prevention and mediation. We
also welcome the briefing by Mrs. Mary Robinson, on
behalf of The Elders, and we extend to her our deep
respect for her commitment to helping to resolve
conflicts and promote equality in societies. We welcome
the presence of Mr. Ban Ki-moon and Mr. Santos
Calderon, former President of the brotherly country
of Colombia.

Multilateralism has been coming under heavy
attack with the intention of questioning its efficiency
and necessity. The sustainability of multilateral forums
will depend on what we do today to preserve them.
In that regard, the Dominican Republic reaffirms
its commitment and confidence in multilateral
organizations as key settings for the maintenance
of international peace and security, with conflict
prevention and mediation mechanisms as cornerstones
for success.

Conflict prevention is a fundamental goal for
the development of peoples. Through prevention, we
preserve human dignity, ensure stable and sustainable
societies and build peace. In addition, prevention costs
much less than containing or managing conflicts.

Based on the above, prevention would seem to
be the best solution to conflict. However, that is not
the reality. Despite prevention efforts, currently all
regions seem to be on the verge of conflict, threatening
international peace and security. That leads us to ask
ourselves how in the Council we can be more efficient
in conflict prevention and mediation.

The importance of the role of the United Nations
in conflict prevention is unquestionable. Since its
founding, its objective and purpose have been to save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war, as
set out in the Preamble to the Charter of the United
Nations. That same Charter extends that preventive role
to the Security Council, an organ entrusted to promote
the peaceful settlement of disputes.

As States members of the Council, we must
therefore fulfil our responsibility to work to innovate
and continue to develop effective mechanisms for
conflict prevention and mediation. That requires of us
unity and fraternity and that our positions have a single
goal: human dignity.

In order to fulfil the aforementioned mandate
of the Charter of the United Nations, we as Member
States are called on to focus more on preventing than
on containing or managing conflict. For the former,

the United Nations has tools such as special envoys,
political and peacekeeping missions, regional offices,
mediation experts, country teams, electoral assistance
and sanctions monitoring groups.

The Dominican Republic believes that it is relevant
for the Council to ensure and strengthen relations
with such actors through the Secretary-General. Early
warning by actors on the ground is essential for the
deployment of specific and appropriate prevention and
mediation tools. We must study successful mediation
processes and replicate them, such as the case of
Burkina Faso in 2014 and Colombia and its recent peace
process, among others. We must strengthen preventive
diplomacy, create resilience programmes for local
communities, cooperate in strengthening the capacities
of local authorities and support the development of
public social policies to leverage existing tools and
enhance them through better application and innovation.

Another challenge on which we must work is the
involvement of women and young people in mediation
and conflict prevention. In that regard, we congratulate
the work being done by a cluster of networks of
women mediators, such as the Network of African
Women in Conflict Prevention and Mediation and
the Mediterranean Women Mediators Network. We
believe that our region could learn from them and look
at the possibility of establishing a network of women
mediators in Latin America and the Caribbean.

Finally, we reiterate the need to create networks
of young mediators. It is essential that the Security
Council's mediation tools ensure the inclusion ofyoung
people in order to achieve lasting peace agreements and
build more just, inclusive and peaceful societies, taking
up their role as mediators within local communities and
as a point of contact with the international community.

