Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I welcome this
debate and am very grateful to Ambassador Mufioz for
his briefing.

Better peacebuilding is at the heart of this
Council's work. The thematic debate that Uganda, as
President of the Council, held in July (see S/PV.6165)
highlighted the need for rapid implementation of
measures to improve the way we address peacebuilding
in the immediate aftermath of conflict. The debate that
we convened when we held the presidency of the
Council in August (see S/PV.6178) underlined the need
to build much stronger linkages between peacekeeping
and peacebuilding. Both debates also highlighted the
critical role of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC).

The year ahead offers an opportunity for us to
address the range of critical gaps that currently hamper
our peacebuilding efforts, but let me first commend the
work of the Peacebuilding Commission over the past
year. I should like to thank Ambassador Munoz for his
dedicated efforts as Chair of the Organizational
Committee; the Permanent Representatives of
Belgium, Brazil, Canada and Switzerland as chairs of
the country-specific configurations; and El Salvador as
Chair of the Working Group on Lessons Learned for
their very valuable contributions. I should also like to
thank the Peacebuilding Support Office for its support.

The annual report (S/2009/444) describes many
of the PBC's achievements, as well as its challenges. If
we are to see genuine and sustainable peace take root
in countries emerging from conflict, we must build the
linkages between mediation, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. Where they are deployed, peacekeeping
missions have a critical role to play in early
peacebuilding by supporting basic safety and security
and political processes. They also provide
indispensable support to others who deliver the means
of economic recovery and basic services, and who help
to restore the core functions of Government. This
support is essential if political parties, former
combatants and the wider population are to invest in
peace.

But all too often, we are not seeing enough
progress in these keys areas in countries on the
Council's agenda. Failures to implement, for example,
power-sharing and economic components of a peace
agreement, to tackle youth unemployment or to
conduct effective security sector reform pose serious
threats to peace. This in turn leads to increased
dependency on United Nations or regional
peacekeepers. The Secretary-General's peacebuilding
report and the New Horizon non-paper issued by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Field Support offer a number of
recommendations to help address these gaps. We need
now to see rapid progress in implementing them.

The PBC is a key part of this. It can provide a
platform for bringing together political, security,
humanitarian and development components of the
international response to ensure that they are mobilized
behind a single strategy in support of national efforts.
There are too many examples of disparate and
fragmented action by the international community in
security sector reform, the rule of law and in other
areas. The PBC should help forge mutual commitments
between a Government and its partners for the
implementation of agreed priorities and should
regularly monitor their delivery.

The PBC has a particular responsibility to reach
out to the development community and to secure its
early and sustained attention in these complex and
high-risk environments. That includes ensuring much
better communication with the World Bank, the
International Monetary Fund and regional development
banks.

We need to examine when is the optimal time for
a country to be referred to the PBC. We should be
looking at earlier referrals while peacekeepers are still
deployed, and the PBC should explore more flexible
approaches to its engagement. It should not get bogged
down in elaborating detailed strategies, but make use
of existing plans and rapidly identify practical steps to
address peacebuilding priorities. We need to shift its
focus from New York to country-level action and
ensure that it has a more distinctive role and voice.

A measure of confidence in the PBC will be the
number of countries referred to it and their profile and
complexity. We need to understand the incentives and
disincentives for a country coming onto the PBC's
agenda, and the Council needs to be more proactive in
assessing which countries, if interested, might benefit
from PBC assistance. We also need to improve the way
in which advice generated by the PBC informs
decisions of this Council.
The PBC review next year offers a critical
opportunity to take stock of achievements to date and
to increase the PBC's added value. To generate real

progress, it is important that the Council take its
parental responsibilities seriously and, together with
the General Assembly, make full use of the review to
make the PBC more effective in delivering its ultimate
goal - preventing countries from falling back into
conflict.

That will be the test of the PBC's worth. That will
be the test of this Council's development and use of the
PBC in partnership with the General Assembly. That
will be the measure of our efforts in the eyes of the
millions of men, women and children whose lives will
otherwise continue to be ravaged by the appalling
consequences of conflict.

