Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank you, Sir, for all your efforts and for presiding
over this meeting, which has a very special meaning
for Spain.

In January, Colombia asked the Security Council
to support the peace process, which had not yet been
concluded, while the ceasefire had not yet been achieved.
Contrary to the natural tendency of the Council, a
special mission was authorized. That was certainly
an unusual occurrence, explained by the fact that the
Council was fully convinced on that occasion that the
people of Colombia were going to successfully achieve
peace. It was a wager for Colombia and Colombians.

The universally known author Miguel de Cervantes
wrote, "The goal that we seek tires us all the more when
we are closer to the hope of obtaining it". Colombians
have not given into that fatigue, and on 26 August made
history with the signing of the final peace Agreement.
Through its effort, determination and courage,
Colombia seems committed to rejecting once and for
all the argument of Alvaro Mutis, who wrote that the
human species is hopeless.

Today we have adopted a second
resolution - resolution 2307 (2016) - with 15 votes
in favour and 15 sponsors on the mission in Colombia,
which has just clarified several aspects of its mandate
but maintains the focus on defined tasks within
specified time frames as requested by the parties.
Spain is very proud to participate in the United Nations
mission in Colombia by providing 22 observers, 25 per
cent of whom are women, which particularly pleased
us, especially since that is in line with the request made
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General.

To conclude, within the specific context of the
laying down of arms and the ceasefire, towards which
the mission is working, there are other aspects - such
as demining, reintegration, reparations and restitution
for victims - that are particularly important in order
to establish a lasting peace. With regard to support
in those areas, which the international community is
providing, Colombia can always count on Spain.

