Mr. Wolfe (Jamaica): May I at the outset, on
behalf of my Caribbean Community colleagues and my
own delegation, extend warmest congratulations to
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency for this
month.
When I assure the Council of the honour, the
pride and satisfaction which my delegation feels in
addressing the Security Council in the name of the 14
member States of the Caribbean Community on the
question of Haiti, and express my gratitude for the
invitation extended to do so, I do much more than pay
homage to a convention of this august body. I feel that
I am discharging a family obligation, since Haiti is a
member of the Caribbean family. We sit in the same
regional councils, working together toward the same
regional goals and objectives, and therefore we
naturally share a common view of the importance of
this consideration by the Council of the situation
concerning Haiti and a common expectation regarding
its outcome.

The Secretary-General deserves commendation
for the wide-ranging, frank and substantive
assessments contained in the report he has presented, in
document S/2009/129, on the progress of the effort to
implement resolution 1840 (2008) during the period
from 27 August 2008 to 27 February 2009. In that
report we see clearly the enormous complexity of the
situation in Haiti and the many challenges facing the
effort to consolidate that country's stability and lay a
foundation for security and sustainable long-term
development. Those processes were further
complicated by the series of tropical storms and
hurricanes that ravaged the country during the
reporting period, and later by the effects of the global
financial and economic crisis.

While there is certainly no room to minimize or
downplay the seriousness of the factors that still hobble
the stabilization effort in Haiti, in like manner we
should be careful to discern, and give their due worth
to, the creativity, perseverance and sheer grit through
which we see hopeful changes emerging on the Haitian
panorama. I refer to the area of establishing political
dialogue and to the extension and strengthening of the
authority and reach of the State and of the rule of law,
for example.

For sure, these are achievements of the Haitian
authorities and people, who deserve our recognition.
But a great share ofthe credit also goes to the men and
women of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH) for their dedicated, patient and
constructive involvement in providing assistance and
support to the people of Haiti over a wide range of
areas critical to the re-establishment of conditions of
stability, such as the provision of security assistance to
the electoral process, enhancing institutional capacity,
promoting and strengthening security, reducing
violence, enhancing police capacity and the enjoyment
of human rights, among others. The Caribbean
Community expresses its sincere appreciation to
MINUSTAH for these valuable contributions. May I
add that the Caribbean States are proud of the level of
assistance we have been able to provide with the
dispatch of police units and police officers from two
member States, Grenada and Jamaica.

But however encouraging these improvements
may be, the Secretary-General is careful to note their
fragile nature. While the task of making them more
robust is the responsibility of the Haitian authorities
and people, the international community has a duty to
support them in this effort. In this regard, the
Caribbean Community supports the convening of the
high-level donor conference to lend support to the
implementation of the National Strategy for Growth
and Poverty Reduction. We look forward to
strengthened unity and cooperation among the Haitian
people and to the creation of conditions of greater
security and stability in the country. In our View, these
would offer the best promise of a meaningful and
productive partnership between the Haitian authorities
and the donor community in order to ensure that the
country is helped onto a path of sustained economic
recovery.

Finally, the Caribbean Community wishes to
thank the Secretary-General for his report and for his
recent visit to Haiti. We strongly endorse his appeal for
the international community to continue to focus
attention on the provision of much needed assistance to
Haiti, an appeal that, we note, was strongly endorsed
by his Special Representative today. We also wish to
express sincere appreciation to that Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Hedi Annabi,
for his leadership of MINUSTAH and for the
comprehensive report that he provided to the Council.

