Mr. Shareef (United Republic of Tanzania): I
should like, on behalf of the countries of the Great
Lakes region, to express our gratitude to you, Mr.
President, and to all the members of the Security
Council, for having convened this special meeting to
discuss the proposed international conference for the
Great Lakes region. This is a clear demonstration of the
solidarity and interest of the United Nations and the
African Union in the development of the Great Lakes
region as a zone of peace and stability and, therefore,
of the urgent need to resolve pending security issues
and to address the socio-economic problems facing the
region.

We recall with appreciation the mission of the
members of the Security Council earlier this year to the
countries of the Great Lakes region. It was an
encouraging expression of concern over the situation
there and of solidarity with the Governments and
people of the region. The deployment of French
peacekeeping troops and the subsequent expansion and
presence of the United Nations Organization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
contributing significantly in the stabilization and
restoration of peace in the Ituri region of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The human rights
situation has also improved remarkably. We thank the
entire peacekeeping mission for the work that it is
undertaking.

We are particularly appreciative that, after almost
a decade of intensive consultations among various
stakeholders, a consensus has finally been reached on
convening an international conference on the Great
Lakes region. In this regard, we would like to express
our gratitude to the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi
Annan, and his Special Representative for the Great
Lakes Region, Mr. Ibrahima Fall, for their tireless
efforts in building both regional and international
consensus for this important conference.

We also owe special gratitude and appreciation to
the African Union for its political encouragement and
involvement in preparations for the conference. The
Chairman of the African Union is providing needed
support to the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, who is working closely with the Special
Envoy of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission. The partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union will continue to be
crucial for the success of the conference.

At the first meeting of the National Coordinators
of the international conference for the Great Lakes
region, held in Nairobi, Kenya, from 23 to 24 June
2003, the six core countries unanimously welcomed the
proposed conference. The region also endorsed four
themes: peace and security; economic development and
regional integration; democracy and good governance;
and social and humanitarian issues. In our view, those
themes adequately cover the main challenges facing the
Great Lakes region. The National Coordinators also
agreed on the structure and timetable for the
preparatory process.

The proposal to hold an international conference
on the Great Lakes region has come at an appropriate
time, when all signs indicate that conflicts in that
region are nearing an end. The holding of the
conference will thus consolidate the overall
achievements by the countries of the region and, in
particular, the progress made in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Burundi peace processes.

In this context, we welcome the agreements
reached in the Democratic Republic of the Congo for
the installation of an all-inclusive transitional
Government, which will prepare that country for a
democratic political dispensation in two years' time. In
the same vein, we also welcome the Arusha Peace and
Reconciliation Agreement for Burundi, signed on 28
August 2000, which constitutes the cornerstone of the
Burundi peace process. We congratulate the
Transitional Government of Burundi and the Conseil
national pour la defense de la democratie-Force pour la
defense de la democratie for the historic global
ceasefire agreement signed in Dar es Salaam, United
Republic of Tanzania, on 16 November 2003, which
aims to end 10 years of conflict in Burundi. We urge
the two parties to cooperate closely in its
implementation. Meanwhile, we appeal to the Parti
pour la liberation du peuple hutu/Forces nationales
pour la liberation faction to stop fighting and join the
negotiations for a ceasefire and a comprehensive peace
accord.

The immediate task in both the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Burundi is the consolidation
of the peace accords through a comprehensive
programme for post-conflict reconciliation,
reconstruction and development.

The proposed conference for the Great Lakes
region is expected to agree on a set of principles on
good-neighbourly relations, stability, democracy and
the launch of programmes of action for socio-economic
revival and development for the people of the region.
We believe that one of the major causes of the political
and social instability in the region has been, to a great
extent, the state of underdevelopment and poverty in
the region, which should be addressed decisively by
that conference.

On issues of peace and security, the conference
will be judged to have succeeded if it produces
concrete measures designed to ensure a comprehensive
safeguard against a future resurgence of violence,
genocide and instability in the region, as well as to
contain cross-border criminality, including the illicit
trade in drugs and small arms and illegal immigration.
A pact against the recurrence of genocide, a non-
aggression treaty and a programme with clear time
limits aimed at disbanding militias and prohibiting the
supply of illegal small arms to the region, with an
agreed mechanism for enforcement and verification,
would ensure not only peace and security in the region,
but also democracy, justice and good governance
within the borders of each country. We believe that
those are the conditions necessary for sustainable peace
and development in the Great Lakes region.

In the specific area of economic development, it
is perplexing that the Great Lakes region, which is
endowed with abundant natural resources, is also
among the least developed areas of Africa. Our
expectation, therefore, is that after restoring peace and
security, the international community should mobilize
and provide substantial economic assistance to enable
the countries of the Great Lakes region to harness their
enormous economic resources, in partnership with
bilateral and multilateral support from the international
community, for the recovery and development of their
economies and the well-being of their people.

We trust that the conference will result in the
establishment of a kind of Marshall Plan for the
recovery and reconstruction of the Great Lakes region.
We therefore appeal to our development partners to
provide adequate resources, specifically targeted to
enable the countries of the Great Lakes region to
achieve their development goals and develop
programmes for regional cooperation and integration.
The New Partnership for Africa's Development offers
an added opportunity for the countries of the Great
Lakes region to realize their respective national and
regional economic development goals.

On the humanitarian front, the Great Lakes region
has, over the past decade, witnessed massive
movements of refugees, displaced persons and victims
of gross human rights violations. We expect the
conference to provide an opportunity to refocus
international attention on facilitating the
implementation of durable solutions for refugees,
internally displaced persons and ex-combatants, as well
as on encouraging an environment conducive to
tolerance and respect for human rights.

I should point out that, in preparing for the
conference, it has been recognized that a key to the
success of the preparatory process of the conference is
the involvement of major stakeholders in the envisaged
conference outcomes. National committees need to be
supported in overseeing and coordinating
intergovernmental consultations and the participation
of non-governmental organizations and civil society
groups, such as those involving youth or women.

The main constraint experienced by all our
national committees is the lack of budgetary resources
to organize meetings of major grass-roots stakeholders
to enable them to provide necessary inputs for
achieving and sustaining the peace, stability and
development objectives of the countries of the Great
Lakes region. We also appeal to the international
community to provide financial and material support
towards the preparation of the conference in its
different stages.

This issue of resources was raised at the Nairobi

National Coordinators Meeting, but, in the end, it was
not clear where the resources for the preparatory
process would come from. Each country was left to
fend for itself. Consequently, the status of preparations
for the conference at the national level is not
satisfactory. It is important, therefore, that measures be
taken, on an urgent basis, by the United Nations, as
well as bilateral initiatives, to provide support
expeditiously to facilitate the preparatory process and
enable it to proceed. According to the time frame
approved by the national coordinators, the first national
preparatory committee meeting was supposed to be
held in Nairobi in October 2003.

The United Republic of Tanzania is particularly
keen on the success of this conference. We have been
given the responsibility of hosting the first summit,
scheduled for June 2004. It is important for all of us
who are involved to ensure that preparations for the
conference are made in a timely and efficient manner at
every stage.

Finally, I want to underscore the fact that, for the
conference for the Great Lakes region to succeed, it is
important for the countries of the region to assume
ownership of the process, as outlined by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. At the
national level, the process has already started as an all-
inclusive endeavour. We commend the ongoing work of
Mr. Ibrahima Fall and his team, in partnership with the
African Union. We shall continue to work with him and
extend all the needed support from our respective
national committees.

In conclusion, I should like once again to thank
the Secretary-General and the Security Council for
having convened this meeting and to thank the
countries of the Great Lakes region for having
appointed the United Republic of Tanzania to address
the Council on their behalf.

