Ms. Yanez Loza (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation welcomes the convening of today's debate under the presidency of Viet Nam and associates itself with the statement made earlier today by the representative of Azerbaijan on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries. As we have expressed in previous debates, the question of Palestine has historically been an issue of concern and importance to Ecuador. We thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his informative briefing. Last December marked three years since the adoption by the Security Council of resolution 2334 (2016). Since then, the situation on the ground has only deteriorated. We deeply regret that, after yet another year, the conflict has not been resolved. No action was taken during the reporting period to end settlement activity in the occupied Palestinian territory as required by resolution 2334 (2016). On the contrary, demolitions and confiscations of Palestinian-owned structures continued throughout the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem, resulting in the demolition or confiscation of 150 structures and the displacement of 260 people, including 133 children and approximately 60 women. We reiterate our concern about the implementation of those measures. We are also deeply concerned about the number of deaths and injuries from violence and terrorist attacks against civilians. As a result of air strikes and in the course of demonstrations, clashes, security operations and other incidents, 44 Palestinians were killed, including nine children and three women, while 2,940 others were injured. A total of 46 Israelis - 41 civilians, including women and children, and 5 members of the Israeli security forces - were injured in the attacks, skirmishes and other incidents. We reject all incitements to violence, which propels us further from a political, peaceful, definitive and fair solution for both parties. We reiterate the call of resolution 2334 (2016) on both parties to act in accordance with international law, including international humanitarian law, and to demonstrate calm and restraint, refraining from acts of provocation and incitement. We are extremely concerned about the humanitarian situation, human rights violations and non-compliance with international humanitarian law in the occupied Palestinian territory. We call on all parties to make collective efforts to start credible negotiations and to intensify regional and international diplomatic efforts to achieve a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle East without delay. Unfortunately, the Secretary-General's most recent report (S/2019/938) does not indicate any progress in that regard. We believe it is imperative that the Council act and adopt actions aimed at the full implementation of the fundamental principles of international law and the Charter of the United Nations, as has been repeatedly requested of it. We agree with the report that, "no amount of humanitarian or economic support on its own will resolve either the situation in Gaza or the broader conflict" (S/2019/938, para. 59). Political solutions based on justice, human rights and international law are needed. Preventive diplomacy is a critical tool for defusing tensions before they escalate and worsen. My delegation once again calls on the international community to make tangible progress in supporting the advancement of a political, peaceful, definitive and just solution for the parties based on the existence of two States - Palestine and Israel - living side by side in peace and security within recognized borders on the basis of the 1967 borders, a consensus reaffirmed in Council resolution 2334 (2016).Finally, after listening to the briefing by Ms. Ursula Mueller, Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, we believe that we ought to pay particular attention to how many children are affected on a daily basis - in terms of their enjoyment of rights, access to education and mental health - by this unresolved situation.
