Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
should like at the outset to thank the Secretary-General
for his report and to thank Mr. Jessen-Petersen for his
briefing. I should also like to thank Mr. Covie for
participating in this meeting and for his statement.

Mr. Jessen-Petersen has done a great deal of
active work since he assumed his post last year, and we
express our appreciation to him for that. We believe
that in his future work he will continue to earnestly
carry out the mandate entrusted to him by the Security
Council.

This is a crucial period for Kosovo. The current
developments in the situation will have an important
bearing on its future and on the stability of the entire
Balkan region. We have always believed that a sound
and comprehensive settlement of the question of
Kosovo will require comprehensive implementation of
resolution 1244 (1999).

During the most recent period, the situation in
Kosovo has remained generally stable. We welcome
the active efforts of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and of
the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government to
implement the standards in relevant fields. However,
we also note that progress in some key areas remains
insufficient, including promoting the return of refugees
and ensuring the safety and freedom of movement of
minority communities.

We also note that progress has been slow in
addressing the issues of employment and economic
development and in improving the lives of members of
minority groups. We hope that Kosovo's leaders will
cooperate actively with UNMIK to undertake further
measures in those areas to effectively promote trust
and reconciliation among all ethnic communities, thus
laying a solid foundation for peaceful coexistence
among all of Kosovo's communities. In addition, we
hope that the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government and Belgrade will resume direct dialogue
as soon as possible. That is essential in order to steer
developments in the situation in Kosovo in the right
direction.

This year is a crucial one for Kosovo. We believe
that during this next stage work should focus on the
implementation of the relevant standards in all areas.
We hope for a sincere and pragmatic spirit on all sides,
which will help promote implementation.

Any acts of violence such as those that occurred
last March would have very serious and negative
consequences and are therefore unacceptable. We hope
that Kosovo can achieve substantive results in the
economic and security areas and thereby effectively
improve the lives of all the peoples of Kosovo.

