Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Let me begin by thanking
the Secretary-General, Mr. Antonio Guterres; the Chair
ofthe Peacebuilding Commission, Mr. Dan Neculaescu;

and the Commissioner for Peace and Security of the
African Union, Mr. Smail Chergui, for their very
informative briefings. I would also like to congratulate
the Peruvian presidency for convening today's briefing,
which addresses one of the most crucial elements of our
work here at the Security Council.

For over 70 years since the founding of the United
Nations, building sustainable peace has been the
holy grail of the international community. We have
worked very hard to find it and fulfil the dreams of
so many, but, so far, to no avail. There have always
been new challenges and obstacles, such as conflicts,
asymmetrical attacks and violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law. In order to tackle
them, we should deploy a broad spectrum of activities
within the competences of all three pillars: peace and
security, development and human rights. They are all
interlinked and mutually reinforcing. Long-term peace
and security cannot be ensured without addressing
development and human rights. If connected, they are
stronger and more effective. That is why I would like to
focus the attention of the Council on those issues.

First, on the peace and security pillar, eacebuilding
and sustainable peace are a fundamental condition for
development. To that end, the United Nations should
comprehensively address conflicts through the use of
all available instruments - from prevention, through
peace settlement and peacekeeping to comprehensive
post-conflict restoration. We should all underline the
importance of peacekeeping in the wider and complex
process of sustaining peace. It should be the priority of
international community to make all the available tools
coherent and effectively interlinked.

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace are strongly
linked to the means of the peaceful settlement of
conflicts enshrined in Chapter VI of the Charter of the
United Nations. Any peacebuilding action will succeed
only if potential conflicts are countered at their roots.
The international community cannot forget that
prevention is a key of peacebuilding and its mention
in the Charter should be taken seriously, as a powerful
tool in our hands.

Secondly, let me turn to the pillar of development.
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and its
Sustainable Development Goals, wherein we pledged
to leave no one behind, create conditions for inclusive
and sustainable development and provide the best way
to prevent crises and conflicts in today's world. In
that regard, we appreciate the latest report (S/2018/43)
of the Secretary-General on peacebuilding and
sustaining peace.

Cooperation among all stakeholders, including
Governments, civil society, academia and the business
community, is of the utmost importance. That
means that we have to be prepared for new forms of
partnership and turn ideas into action, the dividends
of which should extend to all actors involved. It is
therefore crucial to align the core business of the private
sector with the strategic goals of the international
community. Only such an approach will give us a
chance for a peacebuilding process to bring about the
expected results.

Thirdly, with regard to human rights, there is no
successful peace process without full respect for human
rights. Respect for human rights also means social
cohesion. Every member of a society has the right to
be equal and secure. Its absence in many parts of the
world creates a source of instability. Youth also have
their place within the human rights pillar. Young people
in many parts of the world experience great frustration
and desperation, which are factors of destabilization.
Fostering the participation of youth is crucial for the
effective implementation of the peacebuilding and
sustaining peace agenda. Poland therefore fully supports
resolution 2250 (2015), on youth, peace and security.
Equally important is the empowerment of women.
Women's meaningful participation in all aspects of
peace and security is critical to the effectiveness of
the agreements reached. Poland remains committed
to the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000),
on women and peace and security, in political and
institutional dimensions.

For Poland i the country that initiated the
negotiations on the Convention on the Rights of the
Child - a question of crucial importance is that of
the rights of children in peace processes, including
their protection from all forms of violence, negligent
treatment and exploitation, including sexual abuse.
We strongly support the need for rehabilitation and
reintegration measures for former child combatants and
their meaningful participation in peacebuilding efforts.
I would here like to commend the important work of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict and her Office.

In conclusion, let me reiterate the statement made
yesterday (see S/PV.8241) by Mr. Jacek Czaputowicz,
the Polish Minister for Foreign Affairs, that Poland
is ready to engage actively in the peacebuilding and
sustaining peace efforts of the United Nations and of
the Secretary-General and the international community
at large.

