Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): We would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening today's
meeting and wish you every success in steering the
work of the Security Council this month.

We also thank Mr. Thomas Markram, Deputy to
the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, for
his briefing today.

We are meeting to discuss the issue of chemical
weapons in Syria, on which all members of the Council
firmly agree within the context of the Syrian crisis.
Based on this consensus, the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint
Investigative Mechanism (JIM) was established to hold
accountable the perpetrators of crimes committed with
chemical weapons in Syria. The Mechanism was able to
determine those responsible for several crimes, including
the incident that took place in Khan Shaykhun, whose
first anniversary we mark today. Since then, we in the
State of Kuwait have demanded an independent and
impartial international investigation into the incident.
The JIM. determined the perpetrators of that and other
painful incidents. Nonetheless, the Council was unable
to hold any party accountable. Therefore, the justice we
hoped for dissipated as a result of divisions among the
member States, which prevented the extension of the
JIM's mandate.

The State of Kuwait fully supports the work of
the United Nations and of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) through its
Fact-finding Mission investigating allegations of the
use of chemical weapons in Syria. We commend the
Mission's performance and professionalism and call
on the Syrian authorities to cooperate with the OPCW
in order to resolve the discrepancies concerning the
details of their chemical programme. The provisions
of resolution 2118 (2013) are conclusive and decisive
regarding the accountability of those responsible for
the use of chemical weapons in Syria.

We cannot accept the current situation, namely, the
continued use of chemical weapons in Syria more than
four years after the adoption of that resolution. This
means that we have failed the Syrian people, and could
not end their suffering from the use of these weapons
against them in various Syrian areas. On more than one
occasion we have expressed our full backing for any
accountability alternatives and mechanisms that would
enjoy the consensus of all members of the Council
in a manner that would ensure its independence,
neutrality and professionalism, while stressing that
its responsibility is exclusively to determine who is
responsible for the use of chemical weapons in Syria.
The Security Council would then call to account the
perpetrators responsible for committing those crimes,
according to the principle of no impunity provided for
in resolution 2118 (2013).

We believe that those elements exist in the United
States draft resolution being discussed by the members
of the Council. We call on all Member States to build
upon this draft resolution as a good basis for any
negotiations on such a mechanism in the future. Kuwait
also supports the French Partnership Initiative and the
principles set out therein aimed at holding accountable
those responsible for the use of chemical weapons and
ensuring that there is no impunity.

We reiterate our full readiness to participate in
any effort to achieve consensus in the positions of
Security Council Member States so as to ensure that the
perpetrators of such internationally prohibited crimes
are held accountable and that the non-proliferation
regime is preserved. This is based on our principled
and firm commitment condemning any use of chemical
weapons as a gross violation of international law, while
stressing the importance of bringing to international
justice the perpetrators of such crimes, whatever they
may represent.

In conclusion, we welcome the efforts of the
General Assembly and support the work of the impartial
and independent International Mechanism in assisting
the investigation and prosecution of those responsible
for the most serious crimes under international law
committed in Syria since 2011, including crimes related
to the use of chemical weapons. We look forward to the
results of its first report in this regard, which will be
discussed on 17 April in the General Assembly.

