Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank you, Sir, for presiding over this meeting. I also
thank the Assistant Secretary-General for his briefing.

I align myself with the statement to be made by the
observer of the European Union.

Spain joined the Security Council on 1 January
2015. That very day, its representative, the Spanish
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation, was in
Egypt. Two weeks later, and in preparation for today's
debate, Minister Margallo visited Israel, Palestine
and Jordan. I believe that constitutes the best proof of
the fact that Spain will devote special attention to the
situation in the Middle East.

We are speaking today of a region in which, after
six decades, violence still has unforeseen ramifications,
with consequences for global security. The ultimate
expression of that is the emergence of terrorism under
the banner of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.
The Israeli-Palestinian conflict remains st the heart of
all the regional crises. After more than half a century,
there is still no glimmer of a comprehensive, just and
lasting solution that would channel the legitimate
aspirations of the Palestinian people to establish their
own State and guarantee the right of Israel to live in
peace and security with its neighbours in the region.

Given that overview, I would now state that Spain
has shown interest in listening to the parties and offering
its good offices to create a framework within which to
return to political negotiations between Palestinians
and Israelis. There is no alternative to that. Everyone
knows the extremely delicate and fragile nature of
the current situation. When what is most needed is an
understanding between the parties, there seems to be
a perverse trend towards progressive detachment from
and break with the internationally accepted principles
and parameters as the framework for a final solution.

In that regard, Minister Garcia Margallo has
conveyed clear and firm messages to both his Israeli
and Palestinian interlocutors on the importance of
remedying the situation, acting responsibly to defuse
tension and adopting a constructive approach to
restoring confidence, which has been entirely destroyed.
Spain has demonstrated its belief that any unilateral act
will distance us from the promised peace we all want.

In Israel, the Spanish Minister for Foreign Affairs
conveyed to his partners our conviction that the
settlement policy in the West Bank and Jerusalem is
illegal under international law and remains the main
obstacle to the two-State solution, which has been
accepted by both parties since the Madrid Peace
Conference of 1991. Furthermore, an eventual litigation
of the conflict would not help to build the confidence
needed to revitalize the peace process. Accordingly,
the Spanish Minister has conveyed to the Palestinian
leaders the urgency of curtailing any further step
regarding the International Criminal Court, including
any request to the Prosecutor to start investigations.

Minister Margallo has conveyed to all his
interlocutors Spain's belief that the Security Council
can and should combine its forces and work to overcome
this dangerous impasse. Spain has not given up on the
option of a draft resolution based on the parameters
recognized by the international community and that
establishes a clear and precise timetable for the parties'
return to the negotiating table or the holding of an
international conference, if that is the format adopted.
The goal is not to substitute a draft resolution for the
negotiations, but to use such a resolution to unblock the
current situation and bring Israel and Palestine back to
the negotiating table.

To achieve that, the draft resolution must be
negotiated in such a way as to achieve the consensus
of all Council members and must be presented at the
most politically opportune time. That is the only way
the draft resolution will be a constructive element for
the peace process. Spain wants a draft resolution that
is more effective than gimmicky and that will enjoy
the broadest agreement, and is fully prepared to work
for it with the members of the Council, all relevant
stakeholders and, of course, the European Union, as
well as the League of Arab States, which is holding
a meeting today to assess possible initiatives, and the
Quartet, which will meet on 26 January.

The Spanish Minister for Foreign Affairs has
verified the degree of destruction caused by the recent
conflict in Gaza. Although it has managed to launch
the reconstruction mechanism to ensure that necessary
materials reach Gaza, the process has been slow
and is frustrating the expectations and needs of the
population. We need at least to double the daily entry of
material and to use the potential of the border crossings,
beyond the mere introduction of building material,
by seeking to ease the blockade, allowing the transit
of Palestinian labour, exporting Palestinian products,
and estabishing maritime communication routes that
give Gaza access to the wider world. Moreover, it is
indispensable that all funds pledged by various donors
be delivered punctually. It is essential to consolidate
the ceasefire agreed in Cairo. Resolution 1860 (2009)
must be implemented in all its aspects.
The international community must support the
reconciliation efforts between Fatah and Hamas and
the formation of a Government of National Consensus
under the authority of President Abbas. The success
of the Government of National Consensus will
unavoidably require the prompt return of the Palestinian
Authority to Gaza - a condition necessary to both the
construction of a Palestinian State and to advancing
the reconstruction of the Gaza Strip and improving the
daily lives of its inhabitants. The growing despair of
the people of Gaza could give wings to the more radical
options, including such groups as the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), condemning it to further
disaster. The perpetuation of this chaotic situation also
threatens the security of the popuation of southern
Israel.

Time is running out. The Security Council must
be prepared to act responsibly and effectively. We
appeal to the leaders of Israel and Palestine to show the
courage to build the peace that their people need and
crave. We applaud their decision to walk together in the
march against terrorism in Paris. That same decision
should impel them to negotiate a just and lasting peace.

Spain has made significant political gestures
consistent with its position of support for the creation
of a Palestinian State within the framework of a
comprehensive solution to the peace process in the
Middle East. Spain believes that the recognition of a
Palestinian State, far from being an end in itself, must
be a political act designed to achieve the coexistence
of two States, Israel and Palestine, living in peace,
prosperity and security. That is the meaning of the
motion, supported by all parliamentary groups,
approved by the Spanish Parliament in December.

The international community must end the conflict
in Syria, which has claimed more than 200,000 victims
since 2011 and generated a massive outflow of displaced
persons and refugees. The plan of action of the United
Nations Special Envoy for Syria, Mr. De Mistura, takes
new dynamics into account in addressing the Syrian
conflict. Ensuring that all parties allow the freezing
of hostilities in Aleppo would represent a promising
step towards alleviating the humanitarian tragedy.
The United Nations is called on to play a key role in
implementing it. It will be vital to monitor compliance
with the principles accepted by the parties in order to
prevent the recurrence, as has happened in the past,
unwanted situations that ended up generating further
suffering.

The Syrian conflict will come to an end once and for
all only with a political negotiation involving all parties.
This will entail a wide range of actors negotiating to
avoid the collapse and a subsequent institutional vacuum
in Syria. There can be no doubt that the principles of
the Geneva communique of 30 June 2012 (S/2012/522, annex) should guide a possible negotiation framework.
In this sense, Spain will continue to promote dialogue
between the Syrian opposition forces and other factions
ofthe moderate opposition, and offer its good offices to
the Special Envoy of the United Nations, based on the
experience ofthe so-called C6rdoba group. Launched in
January 2014, this process has promoted rapprochement
between the moderate opposition groups belonging
to Syrian minority communities - Kurdish, Yezidi,
Assyrian and Syriac Christians and Druze - and in
the coming weeks, Alawites. Spain thinks the process
Cordoba is a valuable experience ahead of a wider
political process, and seeks to play a part therein.

The humanitarian crisis is having a strong impact
not only in Syria and Iraq, but in the neighbouring
countries of Lebanon, Egypt, Jordan and Turkey. During
its two years as a member of the Security Council, Spain
wishes to embded itself deeply in the Syrian dossier.
The Council has adopted several resolutions aimed at
mitigating the very grave humanitarian crisis. We have
identified a number of humanitarian and protection
challenges, all of which remain active and, in many
cases, unanswered.
It is essential to safeguard Lebanon from being
contiminated by the Syrian conflict. Lebanon is already
host to a number of refugees, straining the absorption
capacity of a country of its size and sensitive and
complex social balance. We must help to alleviate this
problem and further support the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon. We must ensure compliance with
resolution 1701 (2006) and keep working to strengthen
the capacity of the Lebanese Armed Forces to maintain
the territorial integrity, rule of law, independence and
sovereignty of Lebanon . We must also pay special
attention to the United Nations Disengagement Observer
Force in the Golan Heights, which is currently one of
the most vulnerable missions and therefore requires
more support.

The Security Council has a crucial role to play in
combating terrorism and its political legitimization.
Jihadist terrorism in all its forms is one of the greatest
threats to international peace and security. No one
is free from the threat. It is the right and duty of the
international community to defend itself. We must
act together and with determination. We are all
necessary. Especially important in that respect are the
predominantly Muslim countries, which are the main
victims of the barbarians designs ofjihadist terror.

Resolutions 2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014) have
drawn clear lines of action. It behooves us to ensure
their implementation and development. The strategy to
combat ISIL, which includes more than 60 countries
and in which Spain participates with a contingent of
300 military advisers, is bearing fruit on the ground
and has reduced the terrorists' capacity for action.

In the case of Iraq, we will give full support to
the inclusive Government of Mr. Al-Abadi in its fight
against terrorism and in maintaining the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of the
country. The people and Government of Iraq and the
international community can rely on the full readiness
and experience of Spain in the service ofthis just cause.

The complexity of the region complicates
international coordination and highlights the need to
create, through diplomacy, mechanisms to address
structural conflicts in the Middle East, with the
participation of the key countries of the region and
Arab regional organizations such as the League
of Arab States and the Gulf Cooperation Council.
The entire international community, particularly
neighbouring countries with the capacity to influence,
must join in this common endeavour. The recent tragic
terrorist attacks by jihadist fanatics around the world
remind us that it is time to build bridges to enable the
international community to defeat terrorism in the
realm of ideas aw well. The growing terrorist threat
makes the achievement of a just and lasting peace
between Palestine and Israel even more urgent. Spain
can be relied upon to play its part on the road to peace.

