The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2003/653, which contains the report of the
Security Council mission to Central Africa, and
document S/2003/688, which contains the report of the
Security Council mission to West Africa.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes with
satisfaction the recommendations made in the
reports of its mission to Central Africa from 7 to
16 June 2003 (5/2003/653) and its mission to
West Africa from 26 June to 5 July 2003
(8/2003/688).

"The Security Council endorses the
recommendations of these two missions that fall
within its area of responsibility and wishes to see
them implemented. It has already taken the
relevant recommendations into account in
preparing its resolution renewing and
strengthening the mandate of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.

"Where responsibility for implementation
falls to others, the Council looks forward to
working in partnership with them, including
United Nations agencies and programmes;
Governments in Central Africa and West Africa;
regional and subregional organizations, notably
the Economic Community of West African States;
donor countries; non-governmental organizations;
the

and civil society. The Council invites them to
keep it informed about their efforts at
implementation, so that the Council can support
them and take any further action necessary.

"The Security Council emphasises the
importance of a subregional approach to issues
such as small arms and light weapons,
mercenaries, child soldiers and humanitarian
access. It stresses that follow-up activity by the
United Nations will require close cooperation and
coordination throughout the United Nations
system. Action in these areas should also involve
the appropriate organizations, especially in West
Africa.

"The Security Council invites the Secretary-
General to follow up those recommendations that
lie within his responsibility, and would be
grateful for a report on progress by 30 November
2003.

"The Security Council recognizes that
resources may be needed to implement its
recommendations. Therefore it will continue to
encourage donor countries in a position to do so
to support such efforts, and to assist regional and
subregional organizations in this respect.

"The Security Council intends to review
progress in implementing the recommendations in
December 2003."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2003/12.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.40 p.m.
