Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I wish to express my
appreciation for the Bolivian Presidency for organizing
today's debate on mitigating the threats posed by
landmines and other explosive hazards.

As it has been more than a decade since the Security
Council pronounced itself on the issue, we welcome the
discussion, as well as the draft resolution put forth by
Bolivia on a comprehensive approach to mine action. It
is indeed fitting that today's meeting is taking place at
a time when the twentiethth anniversary of the United
Nations Mine Action Service (UNMAS), the leading
United Nations entity that coordinates and implements
all aspects linked to the mitigation ofthe threats arising
from mines and explosive remnants of war, is being
celebrated. We thank Assistant Secretary-General for
Rule of Law and Security Institutions in the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Alexander Zuev, and

Ms. Natalie Ochoa Nifio for their respective briefings.

International humanitarian law puts limits on parties
to an armed conflict when their means and methods
of warfare that could cause unnecessary suffering.
Only acts that are proportional to the lawful objective
of a military operation and necessary to achieve that
objective are allowed. International humanitarian
law also requires parties to an armed conflict to take
necessary precautions when using landmines. That is
aimed at minimizing their indiscriminate effects in
armed conflicts. As such, parties must record their
placement of landmines as well as they possibly can,
as well as remove or otherwise render them harmless
to civilians or facilitate their removal of the end of
active hostilities.

That notwithstanding, the continued use of
anti-personnel mines and improvised explosive devices
(IEDs), as well as the number of civilian casualties
from the use of such weapons with indiscriminate
impacts and explosive remnants of war, are indeed
sources of concern. As a country that has suffered from
the impact of landmines and other explosive devices
for several decades, Ethiopia attaches great importance
to mitigating the impact of landmines accordingly.
Ethiopia has ratified the relevant international legal
instruments and has been actively engaged in mine
action and clearance.

The need for a comprehensive and coordinated
approach aimed at addressing the threat and impact
of mines and unexploded ordnance has long been
recognized by the Security Council, since its
presidential statement S/PRST/2003/22, adopted in
2003, which could help integrate stockpile destruction,
mine clearance, victim assistance, awareness creation,
as well as the need to work towards the eventual
elimination of anti-personnel landmines. The
Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling,
Production and Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines and
on their Destruction certainly provides an important
international framework for addressing the problem of
landmines. In addition, we believe that the resolution
just adopted sends a strong signal regarding the need
to mitigate the threats posed by landmines and other
explosive hazards and promote peacebuilding and
stabilization. It will also reinforce the implementation
of existing to international legal instruments and
enhance cooperation between and among Member
States, including through the sharing of knowledge and
experience in mine action.

Peacekeepers continue to play a critical role in
mine action, particularly in demining-related activities.
As a major troop-contributing country, the use of IEDs
in recent years against peacekeepers by armed groups
in asymmetrical warfare is a source of great concern
to us. Strengthening the responding capacities of
peacekeepers to the threat posed by mines, IEDs and
explosive remnants of war would require the Security
Council to renew its commitment to mine action and
enhance the capacity of peacekeepers to address
the threats arising from mines, IEDs and explosive
remnants of war through the provision of adequate
and sustained support, including when authorizing the
deployment of missions and renewing their mandates.

In conclusion, I would like to end my statement
by affirming our commitment to work towards a
comprehensive approach that could enable us to prevent
or limit the damage and suffering caused by mines,
IEDs and explosive remnants of war.

