Allow me to express my appreciation to you, Madam, and your delegation for convening today's open debate on this important and timely topic. This year has demonstrated all too clearly that many of the modern threats we face are multifaceted and interconnected. Contemporary drivers of conflict and insecurity, such as environmental challenges and pandemics, pose an existential threat to all humankind. Such challenges demand the collective and sustained attention of the international community. But to build sustainable peace requires more than addressing traditional security issues. It calls for tackling both long- standing and longer-term challenges at the national, regional and global levels. Peace and security are inextricably linked to development. At the national level, States must develop the foundations for global peace and stability through national policies and actions that promote sustainable development. We urgently need to focus on reducing poverty and inequality by formulating inclusive national policies, adopting a multi-stakeholder approach in our decision-making processes and focusing on addressing the needs of the most vulnerable groups in our societies, including women and children. Beyond what States can achieve through national policies and action, it has become increasingly clear that countries cannot tackle transnational challenges alone. Many countries continue to struggle with conflict and violence, and the emergence of contemporary threats like the coronavirus disease pandemic and climate change have exacerbated the struggles that those countries face. In that regard, regional organizations are important actors in building and sustaining peace and security, as outlined in Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations. Strengthening regional frameworks to support greater cooperation, economic integration and conflict prevention will reinforce national efforts, build resilience and enable countries to be better prepared to respond to common challenges. In Southeast Asia, for example, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) has promoted peace, stability and prosperity in the region over the past five decades. ASEAN and the United Nations have worked together to combat threats such as climate change and terrorism. The second Plan of Action to Implement the Joint Declaration on Comprehensive Partnership between ASEAN and the United Nations for 2021-2025, adopted last month, will further enhance the dynamic partnership between the two organizations. Similarly, collective action and cooperation are needed at the global level to confront increasingly complex and intersecting challenges. It is in the interest of every State to uphold a universal, rules-based multilateral system. A rules-based system is essential not only for the survival of small States, such as Singapore, but it is also fundamental to the creation of a more peaceful and stable global environment that benefits all States. Such institutions as the International Court of Justice play a key role in contributing to peacebuilding and promoting the rule of law at the international level. This has been borne out by the Court's facilitation of the peaceful settlement of disputes for over 70 years. As we commemorate the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations, it is timely to reflect how we, as States Members of the United Nations, can strengthen the Organization's role in peacebuilding and sustaining peace. In this context, I would like to thank Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and New Zealand for co- facilitating the 2020 review of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture this year. It is imperative that we take an action-oriented, forward-looking approach, so as to ensure a peaceful and sustainable future for the generations to come. Singapore remains committed to the future of the United Nations and the values and ideals enshrined in its Charter.
