Mr. Portas (Portugal): Thank you, Sir, for
organizing this very important, appropriate and timely
debate. I also thank the Secretary-General for his
important statement.

The popular uprisings that led to the so-called
Arab Spring represent the most powerful
transformation in world politics since the fall of the
Berlin wall. Although unpredicted, those changes prove
an old rule of politics - failure to reform leads to
revolution. Political leaderships that lose the sense of
history are bound to be on the wrong side of history.
For too long, the world condoned autocratic regimes,
looked away from the repression of their own citizens,
and turned a deaf ear to the calls for freedom and for
the respect of basic human rights.

The upheavals in Tunisia and Egypt shook the
foundations of that paradigm, and the notorious
massacre in Benghazi stirred the international
community into action in defence of the values and
objectives of the United Nations. Those were popular-

led processes. Corning 10 years after 9/11, they were
not instigated from the outside, or by Al-Qaida, which
is politically very significant.

What is happening across the Arab world offers a
unique opportunity both for the countries of the region
and for the world at large. Those countries have the
chance to elect democratic Governments, foster the
rule of law, protect and promote human rights, value
the role of women, respect minorities and achieve
widespread economic and social progress.

The international community must also seize this
opportunity to advance the principles of the United
Nations that we all share, and thus to strengthen the
conditions for a more peaceful, prosperous and stable
international order. In order to do so, we must be clear
in our aims and principles, while striving to avoid old
mistakes. Let me mention some of the principles that
frame Portugal's perspective.

First, continued ownership of the process by the
peoples concerned is essential. We are witnessing
home-grown, popular-led processes that are the result
of the courage and the will for change of those
societies. We should be humbled by their example and
we should listen, understand and offer our help where
and when support is required from us.

Secondly, each country is an individual case and
must respond to different challenges. We must
recognize existing differences. There is no one-size-
fits-all model.

Thirdly, we must resist the temptation to try to
export political models. Human rights are universal;
political models are specific. It is up to voters in each
country to choose their own future, and we must accept
without reservation the results of credible, fair and
transparent electoral processes.

Fourthly, we must recognize the participation of
Islamic parties in Governments as natural to the
political process. In democratic societies, parties will
be judged by the people according to their performance
and capacity to deliver on the expectations of their
citizens.

Fifthly, religious freedom is essential to human
dignity. We must not judge others on the basis of our
own religious, social or cultural beliefs, and we expect
the same from others. We must distinguish faith from
fanaticism.
Sixthly, building a democratic society takes time
and patience. It is a path paved with tensions and often
with contradictions. We Portuguese learned that
through our own experience some decades ago.

Finally, the broad institutional, cultural, ethnic
and spiritual diversity of several of the societies
currently experiencing such historical and profound
change may give rise to specific tensions and security
concerns. Therefore, the social cohesion and territorial
integrity of those countries must be constantly at the
forefront of our concerns.

Regrettably and flagrantly, one country has
become a tragedy: Syria. As in Tunisia, Egypt, Libya
or Yemen, the Syrian people peacefully demanded the
legitimate fulfilment of their basic rights. Nevertheless,
as we speak, the ruthless campaign of repression
against the civilian population of Syria is continuing.
For a year now, women, men and children have been
massively and indiscriminately killed by their own
State security forces. Human rights, including the basic
right to humanitarian assistance, are being
systematically violated on a large scale.

The international community has clearly voiced
its strong condemnation of those actions through the
General Assembly, the Human Rights Council and the
Group of Friends of Syria, which enjoys large and
widespread participation. Al-Assad's regime remains
deaf to all those calls. Reforms were promised; none
was credibly implemented.

We regret that the Security Council has not yet
been able to take a forceful, unified position to end the
violence and make way for a Syrian-led political
process reflecting the Arab League proposals. How
many more thousands of dead will it take for the
Council to meet its responsibilities? How long will we
sit silent while the Syrian regime pushes the country
into bloody sectarian conflict and civil war?

The unprecedented appointment of Mr. Kofi
Annan, a former Secretary-General and a Nobel
laureate, as Joint Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General of the United Nations and of the Secretary-
General of the League of Arab States represents the
will of the international community to put an end to the
suffering of the Syrian people. His mission represents
the last opportunity to prevent Syria from spiralling
into civil war.

I therefore urge the Council and appeal to all its
members to unite in public and full support of
Mr. Annan and the objectives he has outlined, in
accordance with the General Assembly resolution
(resolution 66/253) for an end to all violence, full
access to humanitarian aid and the launching of a
Syrian-led inclusive political process.

The profound changes taking place around the
Arab world render the solution of the Israeli-
Palestinian question even more urgent. Palestinians
have the right to their independent State, living in
peace and security alongside Israel. Palestinians have
prepared themselves to fully and efficiently run their
own State, and that has been acknowledged by the
international community at large. Fulfilling the
legitimate ambitions of both sides can only be attained
through serious and credible negotiations between the
two parties that take into account the rightful concerns
of each side.

We all know that the solution lies in the
framework of the parameters; what is lacking is
political will. We need concrete and tangible actions
that bring Israelis and Palestinians back to the
negotiation table to engage in the substance and to
accept a precise calendar, as proposed by the Quartet
on the Middle East and the Arab Peace Initiative.
Europeans have a particular responsibility in this
context, and we must play an active role to break the
present deadlock. Tensions are mounting and time is
quickly running out. If a new surge in violence is to be
avoided, both parties and the international community
must act promptly.

Rampant settlement activity, demolitions of
Palestinian homes and displacement of innocent people
continue. They are illegal. They undermine the
Palestinian institutions and leaders. They increase
frustration and create an explosive mix. We appeal to
Israel to stop those activities, as they fatally threaten
the viability of any mutually agreed political solution.
Israel has legitimate security concerns, but they can
only be fully addressed in an efficient way through a
negotiated settlement.

Portugal is committed to working together with
our Arab neighbours and friends, to whom we are
linked by centuries of mutual acquaintance, shared
history and common purpose. We will do it bilaterally
and within the framework of the United Nations and
the European Union. The work ahead is immense but I
believe that, collectively, we will prevail in on path to
freedom, justice and democracy.

