The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The Security Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the ninth
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINURCA),
document S/2000/24.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has considered the report
of the Secretary-General dated 14 January 2000
(S/2000/24) submitted in accordance with resolution
1271 (1999) of 22 October 1999.

"The Security Council commends the United
Nations Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINURCA) and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the contribution they have made
to the restoration of peace and security in the Central
African Republic and for their important and tangible
support for the holding of free and fair legislative and
presidential elections, the restructuring of the security
forces, the training of the police force and the
launching of Vital reforms in the political, social and
economic fields in the Central African Republic. The
Council expresses its thanks to all the countries which
took part in and contributed to the success of
MINURCA, particularly the troop-contributing
countries.

"The Security Council recognizes the significant
progress made by the Government of the Central
African Republic in implementing the Bangui

Agreements (S/1997/561, appendices III-VI) and the
National Reconciliation Pact (S/1998/219), which are
the foundations of peace and stability in the country.

"The Security Council strongly encourages the
Government of the Central African Republic to do
all it can to build on the progress made while the
Inter-African Mission to Monitor the Implementation
of the Bangui Agreements (MISAB) and MINURCA
have been present in the country and to work with
determination to strengthen democratic institutions,
broaden the scope of reconciliation and national
unity and promote economic reform and recovery.
The Council urges the Government of the Central
African Republic to continue to conform to the
requirements of the economic reform and financial
consolidation programmes agreed with the
international financial institutions. The Council calls
upon the members of the international community
and on bilateral and multilateral donors in particular
to give their active support to the efforts being made
to this end by the Government of the Central
African Republic. The Council wishes also to stress
the importance of providing international assistance
to the refugees and displaced persons in the Central
African Republic and the other countries of the
region in order to contribute to regional stability.

"The Security Council welcomes the
promulgation by the Central African authorities of
three laws on the restructuring of the armed forces
and the decrees issued by the Government so that
these laws can be implemented. The Council
encourages the Central African authorities actively
to prepare and to submit, with the help of the United
Nations, specific plans for the holding of a meeting
in New York to mobilize the financial and other
resources necessary for the effective implementation
of the programme for the restructuring of the Central
African armed forces and the demobilization and
reintegration programme. The Council calls upon the
members of the international community to support
these programmes.

"The Security Council welcomes in particular
the decision by the Government of the Central
African Republic to disband the Special Force for
the Defence of the Republican Institutions
(FORSDIR), and notes with satisfaction that
FORSDIR will be replaced by a unit fully integrated
in the national security forces, under the command
of the Chief of Staff of the Central African armed

 

forces, and that its mission will be strictly limited to
protecting State authorities at the highest level.
"The Security Council also welcomes the
decision by the Secretary-General, which has been
accepted by the Government of the Central African
Republic, to establish, for an initial period of one year
beginning on 15 February 2000, the United Nations
Peace-Building Support Office in the Central African
Republic (BONUCA), headed by a representative of
the Secretary-General, and encourages the Central
African authorities and BONUCA to work closely
together. The Council notes with satisfaction that the
Office's principal mission will be to support the
Government's efforts to consolidate peace and national
reconciliation, strengthen democratic institutions and
facilitate the mobilization at the international level of
political
support and resources for national reconstruction and
economic recovery in the Central African Republic;
and that the Office is also tasked with monitoring
developments in and promoting public awareness of
human rights issues.

"The Security Council requests the Secretary-
General to continue to keep it regularly informed of
the activities of the Office, the situation in the
Central African Republic and, in particular, the
progress achieved in political, social and economic
reforms, and to submit a report to the Council by 30
June 2000 and every six months thereafter."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2000/5.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.30 p.m.
