Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): Let me thank you,
Your Excellency, for having organized this open debate
on children and armed conflict and for being here to
chair it today, which I think underscores the
importance of this issue to us all. I would like to add
our thanks to the French delegation, and in particular to
Ambassador Ripert, for the excellent French leadership
of the Security Council Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict.

It was very good also to hear from the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, from the
representative of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and from the Executive Director of
UNICEF. We pay tribute to the work that they have
done in raising the profile of this issue and in
rehabilitating some of the children; we have heard a
number of very uplifting examples today. I would like,
however, to concentrate particularly on the valuable
and high-quality work of the Special Representative; I
think we all owe her and her team a great debt for the
way she has gone about addressing this issue, and we
look forward to working with her in future.

I would like to use this occasion also to recognize
the role of non-governmental organizations (NGOs)
and civil society groups on the ground. They often
operate at great personal risk to their members, and
without their support this mechanism could not operate
half as effectively as it does. So, I would like to thank
Ms. Kathleen Hunt, who represents the NGO
community, for all the work that NGOs do.
It was very good to hear from the Secretary-
General this morning. I think that, again, underscores
the importance of this issue. One element of the
Secretary-General's statement stuck in my mind: his

plea that we keep this issue placed above politics. That
cannot be said too often or too strenuously, particularly
against the background of the Security Council
Working Group not having always dealt with these
issues as expeditiously or as comprehensively as it
might.

I welcome Ambassador Ripert's annual report.
We were pleased to see the range of situations covered
by the Working Group over the past years. There have
been a number of positive developments - and we
have already heard about those from previous
speakers - but, obviously, there are also many serious
challenges remaining. I would like to highlight just a
few of those.

In the occupied Palestinian territories and in
Israel, the number of children killed or injured
increased in the first quarter of 2008. Children are
victims of attacks on schools, and denial of
humanitarian access by anti-Government elements in
Afghanistan and the use of explosive devices have also
led to an increase in the number of children killed or
injured. Children who had been released in Nepal were
then forcibly returned to cantonment areas under the
control of the Communist Party of Nepal. And in Chad
children in conflict areas continue to be victims of
killings, maimings, recruitment and sexual violence,
and humanitarian access remains difficult. The
Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) continue to
recruit children, and for the fifth time in a row have
been included in an annex to the Secretary-General's
report (S/2007/757). We would also welcome from the
Special Representative, at some point, further details
on progress made in the development and
implementation of the action plan of parties within
Burma, and we urge the Myanmar Government to
adhere to its commitment to the Special Representative
to cooperate in establishing a monitoring and reporting
mechanism.

Those examples illustrate the fact that the
problems we are dealing with are widespread and
affect many of the issues that the Security Council
deals with day to day.

We have heard from previous speakers about the
six grave violations: the continuing recruitment and use
of children in armed conflict; the killing or maiming of
children; rape and other sexual violence; abduction;
denial of humanitarian access to children; and attacks
against schools and hospitals by parties to armed
conflict. Words are easy, and we should all spend some
time imagining just what happens when such violations
are committed, and the effects that they must have on
the children involved.

The Security Council was able to show great
leadership recently through resolution 1820 (2008), on
women and peace and security. I think we all recognize
that in conflict women and children suffer
disproportionately. The United Kingdom stands ready
to contribute to a review of the violations which trigger
the listing of a party in the annexes of the Secretary-
General's reports. It is also important that such crimes
not go unpunished. We support the role of the
International Criminal Court, on its tenth anniversary,
in investigating and prosecuting these and other
violations and abuses against children in armed conflict
that fall within its jurisdiction. We welcome the fact
that several individuals who are alleged to have
committed such crimes have been brought to justice.

I would also like to pick up on what previous
speakers said about the Security Council's work on
children and armed conflict having an impact on the
ground. The implementation of resolution 1612 (2005)
has generated progress, which has resulted in the
release of children and their reintegration back into
their families and communities. We believe that
inclusive community-based programming is central to
the success of children's reintegration. It is also clear
that we need to promote a broad-based approach to this
problem: we need to deal with development,
humanitarian, security and human rights issues
together.

My Government is encouraged by the work
carried out by the monitoring and reporting
mechanism. We welcome the resulting information
reported to the Security Council in specific situations.
Children's participation is fundamental to making
monitoring and reporting more effective, and we hope,
in this respect, that the monitoring and reporting
mechanism can be made more accessible to children.
We believe we can achieve this by involving children
in its design and implementation at the country level.

We would like to use this occasion to urge all
members of the Security Council to continue to
cooperate fully within the Working Group and to
ensure that the Group continues to adopt concrete
conclusions and to propose effective recommendations
for consideration and, where appropriate,

implementation by the Security Council, including
through the mandates of United Nations peacekeeping
operations and with respect to political issues.

The United Kingdom strongly believes that the
Security Council and its Working Group should make
full use of the range of options available for addressing
systematic violations; these are set out in resolution
1612 (2005) and in the Working Group's tool kit.
Monitoring of the implementation of the Working
Group's recommendations is also vital.

Finally, the international community must be
prepared to take action against those individuals and
groups who commit egregious violations and refuse to
undertake the remedial action we demand of them. The
Working Group of the Council is an important tool at
our disposal, one that could be extremely effective. Let
us aim to use it that way, with the goal of making a real
difference to the lives not just of individual children
but of large groups of them in all the countries
affected.

