Mrs. Theofili (Greece): At the outset, I would also like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this very relevant and timely high-level debate. Greece aligns itself with the statement made on behalf of the European Union (see S/PV.8699) and wishes to contribute the following additional remarks. Greece was one of the initial signatories of the Charter of the United Nations and a founding member of the United Nations almost 75 years ago. For us, international law constitutes the cornerstone of our policies in our wider region and beyond, as well as the fundamental basis of our relations with all our partners. Our historical experience has convinced us of the high value of multilateralism, as embodied in our participation in the European Union. It has also made us a staunch supporter of the peremptory rule of the United Nations Charter that prohibits the use or the threat of use of force and acts of aggression in international relations - a rule that underpins our collective security system embedded in the Charter. It is the collective responsibility of all States Members of the United Nations to settle their disputes by peaceful means, as set forth in Chapter VI of the Charter, which provides several methods for their prevention and settlement based on the primacy of international law in international relations. At the same time, we believe that preventive diplomacy and early warning can also avert the emergence and escalation of conflicts, and, in that respect, we recognize the crucial role of the Security Council in addressing international disputes at an early stage and without delay. In that context, allow me to point out the fundamental significance of respect for the rule of law and the public order of the oceans as reflected in the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea. With its universal and unified character, the Convention contributes to the strengthening of peace and security, cooperation and good-neighbourly relations among all nations and is a factor of stability and security in a challenging international context. We therefore stress the need to abide by its provisions, which have long been recognized by jurisprudence as reflecting customary international law, and therefore refrain from actions that are in violation of Article 2 of the United Nations Charter, which prohibits the threat or use of force. Greece deems it important that we all comply with the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter, fully implement Security Council resolutions and safeguard the fundamental indisputable norms governing international relations, such as_ respect for the principles of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of nations, non-aggression and _ good- neighbourly relations - that is our common duty and obligation. It is equally important to resolve disputes through peaceful means, but always on the basis of international law - that is our common responsibility. Transforming those doctrines into practice constitutes the quintessence of our approach to international relations and the future we want. In that regard, Greece's bid for election as a non-permanent member of the Security Council for the period 2025 to 2026 is guided by its strong aspiration to uphold the United Nations Charter and our clear dedication to work tirelessly to maintain international peace and security.
