The President: I thank the representative of Rwanda
for his kind words addressed to me. I shall now make a
statement in my capacity as representative of Oman.

After six years of devastating civil war, the news from
Liberia is good and encouraging. The signing of the Abuja
Agreement two months ago opened a new window of
opportunity for a lasting solution to the Liberian conflict,
for it provided for and resulted in, inter alia, the re-
establishment of a comprehensive cease-fire, the installation
of a new Council of State, and an agreed timetable for the
implementation of that Agreement, from cease-fire to
election.

It is gratifying to note that thus far, the cease-fire is
generally holding, the new Council of State has shown
encouraging signs of cohesion and the Liberian parties
appear more determined than ever to take real steps towards
the restoration of peace and stability in their country.

Much of the credit for these positive developments
goes to the Liberian people themselves, for they have
worked long and hard in pursuit of peace and stability for
their country. A great deal of it also goes to the States
members of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), which, through the ECOWAS
Monitoring Group (ECOMOG), have borne the brunt of
maintaining peace and security in Liberia. The
harmonization and coordination of their policies regarding
the Liberian conflict have finally paid dividends.

We would like to take this opportunity to commend
ECOWAS. However, much remains to be done if the
Liberian peace process is to remain on course. The
warring factions have yet to grapple with the cease-fire
violations, the slow pace of disengagement of forces and
the integration of the former combatants into civilian life,
which is, to use the Secretary-General's language,

"critical to the success of the peace process"
(5/1995/88], para. 44).

While the success of the peace process will depend
primarily on the good will of the Liberian parties, the
international community clearly has an important role to
play. International support and assistance are essential in
ensuring that the peace process in Liberia becomes
irreversible. In this context, we welcome the convening of
last month's pledging conference for Liberia. We
sincerely hope that the funds pledged there will help put
the country on the path of recovery.

Turning to the resolution we have just adopted, my
delegation welcomes the adjustment made to the mandate
of the United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia
(UNOMIL), as well as the Mission's new concept of
operation, given that a lot of water has passed under the
bridge since the formulation of the Mission's original
mandate in resolution 866 (1993). It is only right and
proper that the new mandate reflects new realities on the
ground, especially the latest positive developments.

Finally, we commend the Secretary-General, his
Special Representative and UNOMIL for their tireless
efforts in assisting the Liberian people to bring about
peace and stability in their country.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

