Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): It is good to be
back at this table, and what a pleasure it is to see you,
Mr. President, in the Chair. I say the latter with a
modicum of pride, which I share with all of your
friends, due to the excellent manner in which you are
stewarding the Council's proceedings this month.

Let me also express my warm gratitude to you
and others for the warm tributes paid to the five of us
who have just left the Council, including
Bangladesh - the D-5, or Departed Five, also dubbed
recently by the Secretary-General as the E-S, or the
Experienced Five.

Sir Jeremy Greenstock has been overseeing the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1373
(2001) most ably. He deserves high praise. Special
mention must be made of his endeavours to keep the
world beyond the Council apprised.

For us, there is no room for complacency. The
elimination of terrorist threats is a long, drawn out
process. We must remain ever vigilant. To deny the
terrorists the means, and also the reason, we must focus
our attention not just on the breeding grounds but also
on the grounds for which they are bred, address not just
the effect but also the cause; this is simple logic. Right
now, though, the categorical imperative before us is the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001), effectively
and in its entirety, individually, at the national level,
and collectively, at the regional and global levels. In
this respect, we endorse Ambassador Greenstock's
efforts to keep the Counter-Terrorism Committee's
mandate intellectually tight, for this neatness is what is
rendering its task effective.

We have kept the Committee on Counter-
Terrorism informed of actions taken within Bangladesh
on this count. I shall not recount them, but will
mention only a few points. Banks in Bangladesh have
reported negatively on accounts of and transactions by
any terrorist organizations. All of our borders and
bordering areas have been put on high alert for
monitoring movements and activities of terrorist
organizations or outfits. Internal vigilance has been
stepped up. To date, no such activities or movements,
including any having international connections, have
been detected. Special security measures have been
undertaken for the protection of the premises and
personnel of diplomatic missions and international
organizations.

At the global level, Bangladesh is a State party to
three of the United Nations conventions relating to
terrorism, as well as, at the regional level, to the South
Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC)
Regional Convention on Suppression of Terrorism. Our
Government is in the process of examining the
remaining international instruments with a View to
ratification or accession. As a State party to the
SAARC Convention on Suppression of Terrorism,
Bangladesh has already established a national focal
point for exchange of information on terrorist activities
within the South Asian countries.

We take note of Sir Jeremy's comments made just
before we broke for lunch today on the positive
contribution of peer pressure within our region.

We have adopted the aforementioned measures
despite our many and varied constraints, which are well
known. We will need technical support and assistance
in strengthening counter-terrorism measures and
meeting the objectives of resolution 1373 (2001). Such
assistance can take the form of support for the
modernization of border control and immigration
procedures, banking mechanisms, and the
computerization and training of personnel in the
relevant services. We have just heard of Japan's
decision to contribute to some of these aspects. We
thank the Japanese delegation for the content of that
announcement, as well as for hosting the Tokyo
International Conference on Reconstruction Assistance
to Afghanistan.

Bangladesh also believes that the exchange of
information and coordination of efforts at the regional
level will effectively contribute towards combating
terrorism. But, most of all, Bangladesh sets great store
by the nature of the polity as a means of staving off
terrorism. Our country of 130 million is a vibrant
democracy engaged in the tasks of poverty alleviation
and gender mainstreaming, with faith in the values and
institutions of human rights; we see these as the real
instruments with which terrorism can be combated.

Human Rights Watch, in its report released on 16
January, warned that the anti-terrorism campaign is
inspiring opportunistic attacks on civil liberties around
the world. There is no denying the fact that defeating
the fundamental amorality of terrorism requires a firm
grounding in the norms and mores of international
human rights.

The United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, Mrs. Mary Robinson, has also
expressed concerns that the international duty to act
against terrorism is being used to suppress the
legitimate expression of grievances. Her warnings must
be based on objective realities. This is fact. These
concerns should be taken seriously.

We have seen in recent days how a long-standing
low-intensity conflict could threaten to destabilize
regional peace and even international security. We need
also to address such conflicts. Analysts once
considered Afghanistan a time bomb. We paid little
heed. Let us learn from experience.

Finally, let me recall what Secretary-General Kofi
Annan said recently:

"The United Nations can provide the forum for
building a universal coalition that can ensure
global legitimacy for a long-term response to
terrorism."
This coalition remains, not just in a military sense,
though also that; but also as an alliance of values, of
ideas, of resistance against unreason and against
violence. Let us continue to preserve that.

