Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are glad to welcome you, Madam
Minister, to the presidency of the Security Council. We
are grateful to the delegation of Rwanda for convening
this meeting on this very important topic, namely, the
prevention of conflicts in Africa by addressing the
root causes. Undoubtedly, that issue is crucial to the
maintenance of international peace and security.

In recent years the United Nations as a whole, the
Security Council, the leadership of the Secretariat and
many regional and subregional organizations have
carried out significant work in identifying the causes
of conflicts and preventing them, including those
on the African continent. In that regard, it is clear
that the focus should be placed primarily on broadly
overcoming the many political, social, economic and
humanitarian problems that are compounded by a host
of new transnational challenges and threats. They
include international terrorism, religious extremism,
organized crime, drug trafficking, the illegal arms
trade and the illegal exploitation of natural resources.
Of course, that list is far from complete.

Quick and simple solutions to the main challenges
in the area of conflict prevention do not exist.
A balanced strategy that takes into account the
relationship between security, social and economic
development and human rights must be developed. At
same time, we believe that the primary responsibility
for the prevention of conflicts in Africa lies with the
inhabitants ofthe continent themselves. Any assistance
from international partners in that area should not be
imposed. The same holds true for the duplication of
efforts and, especially, competition by non-regional
forces, which are counterproductive.

The successful prevention of conflicts, in particular
in Africa, depends on the skilful use of a number of
specific tools, including early warning and response,
preventive diplomacy, mediation, good offices,
reconciliation and confidence-building measures.
Significant return is reaped by investing in conflict
prevention and by strengthening the capacity of the
United Nations, both in logistical and intellectual terms.

Russia considers it very important to continue to
use of the provisions of Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations while encouraging regional and
subregional organizations to take initiatives in the areas
of preventive diplomacy and the peaceful settlement
of disputes. That chapter encourages Member States
to prioritize measures aimed at preventing conflicts,
ranging from the use of local instruments through the
use of the Security Council.

The United Nations and regional organizations are
called upon to complement each other by using their
objective comparative advantages. For the United
Nations, its strength is, first of all, the universal nature
of its work and membership, as well as its universally
recognized legitimacy. Regional and subregional
organizations, in turn, can often have the best knowledge
of the situation within their areas of responsibility
and, in many cases, have more customized preventive
diplomacy mechanisms that take into account the local
specifics. There has also certainly been no change to the
Charter of the United Nations, which gives the Security
Council the leading role in maintaining international
peace and security.

In orderto prevent conflicts in Africa, the inhabitants
of the continent need to play a key role themselves. It
is important to adopt comprehensive and consistent
measures to prevent the development of illegal armed
groups and strengthen good neighbourly relations; to
expand cooperation in order to ensure border security;
to prevent the spread of conflicts, arms or mercenaries
across borders; to ensure effective State Governments;
to combat poverty and mass unemployment, especially
among youth; and to combat corruption. That list could
be continued.

We welcome the increasing activity of the African
Union and subregional organizations in Africa to
prevent conflict on the continent. A central role in those
efforts is played by the Peace and Security Council
of the African Union, the Continental Early Warning
System and the Panel of the Wise. We attach great
importance to the African Standby Force. The African
Peer Review Mechanism and the African Charter on
Democracy, Elections and Governance should be
effective instruments to eradicate the root causes of
conflict.

Subregional organizations, including the
International Conference on the Great Lakes Region,
the Economic Community of West African States,
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development,
the Southern African Development Community and
the Economic Community of Central African States,
also make significant contributions to the prevention
and resolution of conflicts. We support strengthening
the partnership between the Security Council and
the Peace and Security Council of the African Union
to resolve crises. We further support the continuing
development of cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union in other formats as well.
Another important factor is the cooperation between the
Organization and African subregional organizations.

As a permanent member of the Security Council,
Russia is making a significant contribution to the
development of strategies for the international
community and practical measures to strengthen
peace and security in Africa, including the prevention
of conflicts. We are providing consistent political
support to the appropriate forces of the African
community. We are prepared to continue to contribute
to the strengthening of the African continent's ability
to combat crises, including through the training of
African peacekeepers and law enforcement officials in
Russian institutions.

We are convinced that any obstacles to preventing
conflict can best be overcome through partnership.
There should be no preaching or ideological stereotypes
imposed from the outside.

