Mr. Fowler (Canada): Let me begin, Mr. President,
by associating myself with your warm welcome to
Ambassador Levitte. I certainly look forward very much to
working closely with him over the months ahead. It is a
pleasure to hear him remember his predecessor with such
kind words. I know we share those sentiments.
Mr. Levitte's reputation precedes him to this body. I know
he will bring an enormous accumulation of wisdom and
experience to our deliberations.

Let me also join Ambassador Greenstock in extending
warm congratulations, through Mr. Annabi, to the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET) and, in particular, to Sergio Vieira de Mello,
for what we Canadians consider to be the very significant
successes that they have achieved. Through him, we thank
the UNTAET staff for the high level of professionalism
with which they have prosecuted the difficult mandate that
we assigned them.

We welcome the signature of a joint communique
between UNTAET and the Indonesian authorities at the end
of February - one which agreed to the free passage of
goods and people between East Timor and Indonesia, and
which allowed the unimpeded access between East Timor
and the Oecussi enclave in West Timor.

Canada remains concerned over the continuing
incidence of border skirmishes involving militias
operating out of West Timor and the personnel of
UNTAET. UNTAET troops came under fire three times
on 1 and 2 March in the border areas in south-west East
Timor - and of course Mr. Annabi referred this morning
to other incidents of exchanges of fire, which are clearly
unsettling. Civilians have been targeted, as he mentioned.
Such acts clearly undermine President Wahid's welcome
policy of reconciliation. We are encouraged by reports
that the Indonesian Government will indeed redouble its
efforts, as is clearly necessary, to bring such acts of
violence to an end.

We are also encouraged by the Indonesian decision
to sign a memorandum of understanding with UNTAET
on cooperation in legal, judicial and human rights matters,
including the investigation of human rights abuses. This
accords, of course, with the Secretary-General's call for
cooperation between Indonesia and UNTAET in carrying
out further investigations of such abuses.
The recent report of the Indonesian Human Rights
Commission on violations in East Timor was a
courageous first step in bringing to account those
responsible for atrocities in East Timor. This issue is
central to progress towards reconciliation between
Indonesia and East Timor, and to the process of peace-
building. In this context, Indonesia's announced intention
to prosecute those responsible for atrocities in East Timor
is welcome, as is UNTAET's decision to investigate
allegations and establish an East Timorese court system
to try offenders.

We are encouraged to see that refugees continue to
register to return to East Timor. Some 1,500 returned
during the week of 6 March alone. The return process is
accelerating despite the ongoing campaign of militia
harassment and misinformation in the camps in West
Timor and the frailty of essential services and
infrastructure in returnee communities. As the 31 March
deadline set by Indonesia for refugees to decide whether
to return to East Timor or relocate within Indonesia
approaches, we would be very interested if Mr. Annabi
could indicate what degree of confidence we have that the
bulk of those willing to return will have done so by that
date and whether, in his view, there is some flexibility

 

with respect to that deadline - that is, do we believe that
after the deadline at the end of this month, refugees will
still be free to return.

