Mr. Gokool (Mauritius): We join other
delegations in extending a warm welcome at today's
meeting to the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Steiner. We are pleased to have him
among us today to hear his assessment of the post-
election situation in Kosovo and the challenges facing
the province now that the provisional self-government
is in place. We take this opportunity to congratulate
him for the manner in which he has been able to step
right into the shoes of his predecessor. We have no
doubt that under his guidance the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
will continue to carry out its task efficiently and
effectively to build a Kosovo as envisaged in resolution
1244 (1999), which remains the basis for building
Kosovo's future. Mauritius fully supports the efforts of
Mr. Steiner and his team.

We also extend a very warm welcome to the
Deputy Prime Minister of the Yugoslav constituent
Republic of Serbia, Mr. Covic'. We thank him for his
statement. His presence in the Council meetings
reassures the international community of the
willingness of the Yugoslav authorities to continue
their collaboration with the United Nations in building
a multi-ethnic, peaceful, democratic and prosperous
Kosovo.

We are happy to note the agreement reached on
the participation of the Kosovo Serb Return Coalition
in the new Government. We call on all elected bodies
to abide by their commitments to work together in the
provisional institutions of self-government.

The security situation of minority communities in
the province remains a high priority of the international
community. Ethnically motivated attacks and the
intimidation of minority communities, which continue
to occur, are matters of great concern to my delegation.
Such acts may disrupt the peace process. We commend
the efforts of UNMIK and KFOR in the protection of
these people and in helping the integration process.

We note with satisfaction the various initiatives
undertaken to facilitate the integration process. The
concerns of the minority communities must be properly
addressed by the representatives in the provisional self-
government. The full engagement of the ethnic
minorities in the administrative service is an important
way forward to confidence-building measures. It is the
view of my delegation, as it is of others, that creating
parallel structures and opposing the authority of
UNMIK will be most unproductive and not to the
benefit of the Serb community in Mitrovica. We view
the situation in that area with great concern. We
deplore the recent attacks on UNMIK and KFOR
personnel in that region. We believe that there is an
urgent need for UNMIK, with the collaboration of
KFOR and the Kosovo Police Service, to establish its
full authority over the Mitrovica region as soon as
possible to prevent extremist activities that can
undermine stability in the region.

We call once again on all those who can help to
improve the deteriorating situation in the Mitrovica
region to help UNMIK curb violence and to establish
the rule of law in that area. We call on the minority
communities in Kosovo, in particular the Serbs in the
Mitrovica region, to integrate themselves into the
structures established by UNMIK and to eliminate
parallel structures. Perhaps the Belgrade authorities can
use their influence over the Serb community in the
Mitrovica region to persuade them to cooperate fully
with UNMIK and the new Government in building a
Kosovo in which all communities enjoy a free and
peaceful life.

The fate of the detainees and missing persons has
also been a very sensitive issue that has remained high
on the agenda of both parties. Last month, we
applauded the transfer of 146 Kosovo Albanian
detainees from Serbian prisons to UNMIK. Some of
them have been released, while the cases of others are
still under consideration. The decision, taken after
long-protracted discussions between Belgrade
authorities and UNMIK, was a huge step towards
building confidence on both sides. We encourage Mr.
Steiner and Mr. Covie to continue their good work.

We also note with satisfaction the various steps
taken by the High-Ranking Working Group to
determine the fate of the missing persons. It is only
through constructive dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina that much can be achieved. We therefore
encourage the provisional self-government to engage in
such dialogue with Belgrade for the benefit of the
people of Kosovo.

Finally, we fully agree with the observations of
the Secretary-General, as mentioned in his report, on
the need for a roadmap for UNMIK and for the
provisional self-government before the international
community disengages itself from Kosovo. We thank
Mr. Steiner for setting the benchmarks that would
measure progress in Kosovo's institutional
development.

