Ms. L¢j (Denmark): At the outset, I would like to
thank the Chef de Cabinet for his comprehensive
briefing. I would also like to state that Denmark fully
supports the statement to be delivered shortly by the
Permanent Representative of Austria on behalf of the
European Union.

Denmark attaches great importance to
strengthening the United Nations administration, where
accountability and transparency are and should be
cornerstones and demonstrated by employees with high
ethical standards. That is essential to a well-
functioning Organization.

In that context, it is with concern that we have
read the report from the Office of Internal Oversight
Services (OIOS) regarding procurement in the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO). It is
important that the staff act under the highest standards
of efficiency, competence and integrity. At the same
time, we as Member States must ensure sufficient staff
capacity within the United Nations to deal with the full
range of procurement contracts in all their aspects in
order not to jeopardize the efficiency of the
peacekeeping operations.

Senior management must pay attention to areas of
high risk and vulnerability in procurement and place
special emphasis on those areas. Accountability is
essential in that regard. Also, they must ensure that the
ethical guidelines for procurement staff are made well
known in the Organization.

We recognize the progress made in the
harmonization and streamlining of procurement
practices in DPKO and encourage further efforts in that
regard. We note that the volume of procurement has
increased significantly in recent years, and therefore it
is even more important now to ensure high standards in
procurement.

While noting the management problems
identified by OIOS, we also understand from a
statement made by the Chef de Cabinet that there is
strong disagreement between OIOS and DPKO on the
methodology of the report. We welcome the fact that
Member States will be informed about the nature of
that disagreement.

Denmark also welcomes the assurances that the
Secretary-General will deal with the issue promptly
and that further investigations have been undertaken.
We also hope and trust that the Fifth Committee will
address the issue specifically and in the broader
context. Judging by the statement by the Chef de
Cabinet, that should also include consideration of
proposals for changes in the financial rules and
regulations for procurement in order to ensure that the
regulatory framework can also be implemented on the
ground.

In short, the findings of the OIOS necessitate, on
the one hand, as stated by the Chef de Cabinet, swift
action and serious response, and on the other hand, that
the Secretariat, in cooperation with Member States,
take the necessary action to prevent the occurrence of
fraud and mismanagement. Those efforts should lead to
enhanced efficiency in administrative processes,
modern management practices and the consolidation of
delivery of services to avoid duplication and waste of
resources.

