Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to associate my delegation with the
statement delivered by the representative of Egypt on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

Eleven years have passed since the Secretary-
General submitted to the Security Council his first
report (S/1999/957) on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. We continue to have high hopes that
the Council's ongoing deliberations on this issue will
lead to a comprehensive approach and far-reaching
objective vision on the best means to protect civilians.
My delegation believes that first and foremost in that
effort should be the elimination of the root causes of
armed conflict. Avoiding the causes of conflict and
supporting lasting and comprehensive political
settlements are the best guarantees for ensuring the
protection of civilians. Protection is always more
effective than the cure.

The recommendations of the Secretary-General in
his various reports on this issue have focused on the
need to reactivate and improve the capacities of United
Nations peacekeeping operations with regard to the
protection of civilians. However, realities on the
ground and practical experience in many countries
have clearly confirmed that, in the absence of any
peace to be kept, peacekeeping missions will not
achieve the desired goal, regardless of the level of their
capacity to protect.

The enjoyment of peace by all is what primarily
protects civilians. That includes the speedy
implementation of development, economic recovery
and reconstruction programmes, as well as programmes
for disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, the
provision of services and quick-impact projects to
ensure stability and the speedy resettlement of
returnees. Peace also guarantees that civilians can
leave refugee camps and return to their homes to
resume ordinary lives.

Against that backdrop, peacebuilding must be the
primary priority and concern of the United Nations,
which should not be distracted from it by dealing with
other symptoms of conflict. Moreover, I wish to
reiterate that we must take advantage of regional
organizations with proven ability and capacity to build
and maintain peace, given their direct link to the causes
of conflicts and their comprehensive understanding of
them. In that regard, I would also like to point to the
decisions taken at the meeting organized by the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in Dakar
in April 2007 on the role of regional organizations in
the protection of civilians and on peacebuilding
overall.

The principle of protecting civilians in armed
conflict is a noble one to which we all aspire. However,
we are concerned by attempts by some countries to
utilize that goal to serve particular political aims, such
as the ongoing campaign on the so-called responsibility
to protect. In that regard, I would like to reiterate that,
although referred to in the 2005 Summit Outcome, the
responsibility to protect is still the subject of divergent
interpretations on the part of Member States. In that
connection, we must bear in mind the established
principles of the Charter of the United Nations vis-a-vis
the sovereignty and legitimacy of Member States and
their full responsibility for the protection of their
citizens.

I would also like to note that the right to protect
civilians in armed conflict is but one aspect of an
integrated and interconnected system of rights and
duties, as reaffirmed by the 2005 Summit Outcome.
The main thrust of the Summit was to follow-up the
implementation of the Millennium Development Goals,
foremost among which are development, combating
poverty and preventing conflicts by dealing with their
root causes. The protection of civilians must therefore
take place in the context of a comprehensive and
integrated approach that is primarily focused on
dealing with the root causes to conflict from the
earliest stages, with the Security Council playing an
active role in leading and supporting efforts at political
mediation, reconciliation and compromise. That should
be complemented by a parallel role for the United
Nations Secretariat and its agencies vis-a-vis
humanitarian considerations and promoting economic
growth, recovery and sustainable development. In
particular, donors should honour their development
pledges.

Ultimately, the protection of civilians is the
responsibility of individual States themselves.
Therefore, we should improve the capacities of the
concerned States so that they can assume their
responsibilities ably, rather than weaken those
capacities through sanctions, despite the fact that those
who support sanctions try to portray them as either
smart or targeted or by using other evasive
descriptions. None of those descriptions alter the
reality that sanctions cause undeniable harm to the
ordinary people of the country targeted.

In its section II, the report of the Secretary-
General mentions attacks on humanitarian workers in
Darfur, including incidents of kidnapping, robbery and
the looting of assets and mobile units. While we share
the Security Council's concern over this phenomenon,
we would also like to draw members' attention to the
fact that the perpetrators of such attacks are most likely
members of armed rebel movements and gangs of
thieves and bandits affiliated with the rebels, or of a
number of groups that are offshoots of the armed rebel
movements, which carry out these robberies and
attacks in order to fund and provision their members
and to destabilize the situation throughout Darfur in
order to send a deceptive message to the international
community, as is currently the case.

We believe that the personnel of humanitarian
agencies and organizations have a primary
responsibility to coordinate with local authorities
before going to any areas to which they want to deliver
aid so that the Government can offer them the
necessary protection. We have recently noticed that
many humanitarian workers do not abide by safety
procedures or coordinate with the authorities, making
them vulnerable to such attacks. Allow me to provide
two striking examples of this. Humanitarian workers in
Darfur have agreed with us to abide by three rules, one
of which is to put insufficient fuel in their vehicles so
that car thieves cannot drive them to distant locations.
However, humanitarian workers have not followed this
advice. That is the first example. Another point that we
agreed upon was that they would lock their vehicles
when they parked them, but they continue not to do so,
which has encouraged many rebels to take advantage
of their lax behaviour. These workers are often the
personnel of United Nations agencies. Therefore, we
want to reaffirm the need to abide by safety measures
and to coordinate with the authorities, which would
greatly reduce the robberies and attacks against
vehicles and minimize the kidnapping of humanitarian
workers.

In closing, we confirm the need to adopt a
comprehensive approach that would deal primarily,
without selectivity or discrimination, with the root
causes of conflicts in addressing the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. We also affirm the need for
the Security Council to demonstrate in practical terms
the extent of its support for the protection of civilians
in armed conflict by supporting comprehensive
political settlements of conflicts. The Security Council
must support all mediation efforts in order to resolve
conflicts and address their root causes and motives.

