Mr. Edrees (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express my sincere gratitude
to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Equatorial
Guinea and his brotherly country for having convened
today's meeting on silencing the guns in Africa
by 2020, which complements Equatorial Guinea's
commendable presidency of the Security Council for
the month of February by focusing on priority topics
for the African continent and their implications for
international peace and security. I would like also to
convey to you, Mr. Minister, the greetings of your
brother Mr. Sameh Shokry, who would have liked
to participate in this debate but was unable to attend
owing to prior commitments.

I also extend my sincere gratitude for the valuable
briefings this morning by the Under-Secretary-General
for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo; the African Union High Representative for
Silencing the Guns in Africa, Mr. Ramtane Lamamra,
whom I congratulate on his recent well-deserved
appointment to a high-level post; and the Founder
and Executive Director of the African Centre for the
Constructive Resolution of Disputes, Mr. Vasu Gounden.

The launch, in 2013, ofthe African Union's initiative
of Silencing the Guns by 2020 came about in the context
of the commemoration of the fiftieth anniversary of
the Organization of African Unity and the subsequent
adoption of the Lusaka Master Road Map as a means
of implementing the initiative and achieving the
overarching goal of silencing the guns. That reflects the
principle of African solutions to African problems and
complements joint African action aimed at freeing our
continent of armed conflicts and focusing on economic
and social development efforts in achieving the goals
of Agenda 2063 of the African Union. In that context,
I would like to pay tribute to the tangible progress
made in resolving conflicts and achieving security
and stability on the continent. Most recently, I would
highlight the peace agreement between Ethiopia and
Eritrea and the revitalization of the peace agreement
in South Sudan, as well as the signing of a framework
agreement for peace in the Central African Republic
and the peaceful elections held in Madagascar and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

But we must not stop there. Our continent still
faces major challenges that are not only related to the
continuation of traditional conflicts in certain regions,
but also to the emergence of non-conventional and
cross-border threats and challenges - mainly from
terrorism, organized crime and trafficking in human
beings. No country is safe from those new threats.
Experience has shown that effectively combating those
phenomena requires joint action at the international
and regional levels in order to address their root causes.

The Council might agree with me that, in recent
times, we have witnessed growing coordination between
the United Nations and the African Union in line with
Chapter VIII of the Charter ofthe United Nations in the
areas of peace, security and sustainable development.
Agreements between the two organizations in that
regard have encouraged us to build on the comparative
advantages of each of them to push forward efforts for
peace and security on the continent and to assist with
the implementation of the African Union Agenda 2063
and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
through joint action plans.

I would like to stress in that regard that, during
its presidency of the African Union this year, Egypt
will work to promote coordination between the two
organizations, both at the level of the Secretariat and
the African Union Commission, as well as between
the African Union Peace and Security Council and the
United Nations Security Council. We intend to organize
regular consultations between the two organizations to
deepen the ongoing partnership by undertaking joint
missions, exchanging information and strengthening
constructive dialogue on the perspectives and
assessments of each on issues of peace and security on
the African continent.

Moreover, the issue of long-term and predictable
funding for peacekeeping operations under the auspices
of the African Union still requires an effective and
innovative solution from the Security Council. That
should be done on the basis of the principle of shared
roles between the two organizations, while taking into
account the comparative advantages of each and the
primary responsibility of the Security Council for the
maintenance of international peace and security.
The issue of reconstruction and development
in post-conflict countries is an essential link in the
chain of dealing with conflict phases. Egypt believes
in the importance of this issue given the close relation
between that link and the efforts to prevent countries
emerging from conflict from falling back into its
grasp, given that the goal of silencing the guns is not
only to achieve a political settlement but also to create
an environment conducive to building and sustaining
peace. In that connection, Egypt was honoured that,
at the African Union Summit held in February Addis
Ababa, its President was chosen to lead the work on
reconstruction and development in the post-conflict
phase in Africa.

In coordination with the African Union Commission,
Egypt will inaugurate in Cairo during 2019 an
African Union centre dedicated to reconstruction and
development. The centre will be an African platform
to put reconstruction and peacebuilding policies and
programmesinplace,takinginto accountthe specificities
and priorities of the African countries concerned. In
that regard, we welcome further coordination between
the African Union, the United Nations and all other
partners to activate and implement the African Union's
framework policy for reconstruction and development.

I would also stress the close link between our efforts
under the Silencing the Guns initiative and a particular
focus on the root causes of conflicts and instability
in different parts of the continent. That means giving
special consideration to socioeconomic development,
empowering young people and women, strengthening
the participation of civil society and building the
foundations of good governance.

In conclusion, allow me to renew our deepest
appreciation for your initiative, Mr. President, to
choose this vital topic as the theme of our debate today,
which led to the consensual adoption of resolution 2457
(2019). We hope that this resolution will contribute
to strengthening the partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union, with a view to
achieving our common goal of silencing the guns and
strengthening the foundations of security and stability
throughout the African continent.

