Mr. Baja (Philippines): Mr. President, I wish to
thank you for having convened this open debate on the
protection of civilians, and I thank Under-Secretary-
General Jan Egeland as well for his informative
briefing on the subject, particularly on specific cases
on the ground.

Even as we discuss how to reform the United
Nations into an Organization that effectively responds
to the needs of the peoples of the world and to the
challenges of the day, gruesome situations of violence
and indignities against civilians continue to exist and
are even multiplying in many areas. We have identified
the different actors who need to respond to the
situation. We already know what needs to be done, and
we have determined the roles of stakeholders.
Furthermore, we have the advantage of hindsight with
respect to many interventions in situations of armed
conflict, as noted by the Under-Secretary-General.
Nonetheless, challenges remain in three areas: first, the
challenge of creating a synergy with respect to the
roles of, and the efforts made by, all actors; secondly,
the challenge of improving the quality and reach of
interventions; and thirdly, the challenge of ensuring the
sustainability of lessons learned on the ground.
We are gratified at the fact that the international
community is reviewing its role in the protection of
civilians in today's fast-changing environment,
especially in the context of the so-called responsibility
to protect, as mentioned by the representatives of
Benin and the United Kingdom. We agree that a culture
of protection for civilians needs to be deeply ingrained.
However, we need to have a common view and a
collective understanding of how this concept would
appropriately and effectively address the needs of
civilians in a conflict situation. Interventions to protect
civilians should address the particularities of various
situations, taking into account the capacities of
Governments, the environments obtaining in the region
and the political will to resolve the problem.

Protecting civilians is not an easy job for any
Government, international organization or civil group.
Accession to the relevant conventions on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict will enable stakeholders
to cooperate and to help each other fulfil the
obligations contained in those treaties. Stakeholders
must take advantage of each other's competencies and
expertise, which will make the protection regime more
effective and realizable. If they can engage in more
exchanges of best practices, and if they can expand the
availability of technical assistance and know-how and
create national and international programmes that
reinforce protection initiatives and efforts, then a better
culture of protection could be achieved.

The responsibility to protect could be
complemented, or even pre-empted, if a responsibility
to prevent conflict were also adequately addressed. The
Security Council must be alert to impending threats to
the security and lives of innocent people. Mechanisms
for early warning, preventive deployments and
diplomatic initiatives should be strengthened. The root
causes of conflict need to be examined; a
comprehensive and holistic approach is necessary in
that respect. The Council should enhance its
coordination with other organs of the United Nations,
particularly the General Assembly and the human
rights mechanisms of other organs, such as the
Economic and Social Council, in order to utilize their
respective mandates and strengths. Bringing on board
more States and stakeholders in the context of shaping
and carrying out decisions on the protection of
civilians will ensure better chances of success in the
implementation of plans and strategies.

At this crucial stage of discussions on United
Nations reform, improvement of the security and
quality of life of the peoples of the world may well be
a litmus test of the validity of our efforts for reform in
the Organization.

