Mr. Maes (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Like others before me, I, too, would like to thank the
Permanent Representative of Australia, Ambassador
Gary Quinlan, for his briefing. I would also like to
congratulate him and his entire team for the excellent
work they have achieved in the past two years as Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006). I would also like to express the appreciation
of my delegation to the independent Panel of Experts
established pursuant to resolution 1929 (2010) for their
valuable contribution to the work of the Sanctions
Committee.

Although the last round of talks between Iran and
the E3+3 Group did not lead to the achievement, on
24 November, of the desired result, we would like to
believe that a breakthrough on the path to resolving
the Iranian nuclear issue remains possible. The new
extension, this time for seven months, of the Joint Plan
of Action offers an opportunity to bring to an end the
considerable reconciliation efforts being undertaken
by both sides for more than a year. The resumption of
negotiations yesterday in Geneva between Iran and the
E3+3 is, in this respect, an encouraging development.

However, while negotiations resume, and in
the absence of an agreement on a comprehensive
settlement of the Iranian nuclear issue, the relevant
Security Council resolutions continue to apply in their
entirety. The obligations of Member States under these
resolutions also remain fully in force.

Ultimately, it is up to the Iranian authorities to
make the necessary choices to open a new chapter in
their relations with the international community. In that
regard, the crucial issue is trust. Iran must fully honour
its obligations and provide the necessary assurances
so that the international community will have trust
in the exclusively peaceful nature of Iran's nuclear
programme. If doubts remain in this regard, then the
distrust of the international community will persist as
well.

However, in his latest report, of 7 November,
the Director General of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) continues to deplore the lack
of cooperation on the part of Iran concerning the
clarification ofpending questions linked to the possible
military dimensions of its nuclear programme. Such
a lack of transparency is not likely to reassure others
about the purpose of Iran's intentions. Restoring
confidence also requires better cooperation between
Iran and the IAEA on these issues.

Before concluding, I would like to reiterate the
full support of Luxembourg for the diplomatic efforts
being made by the E3+3 Group to achieve with Iran
a complete, negotiated and long-term resolution of
the nuclear issue. We also express the hope that the
progress made so far will be able to be completed in
the near future.

In conclusion, I would like to commend the efforts
of Catherine Ashton, who in recent years has led
the efforts of the E3+3 Group with great energy and
a tireless commitment. We wish her every success
in her new functions as Special Adviser of the High
Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy, responsible for facilitating
the talks with Iran on the nuclear issue.

