Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and, through
him, the entire team in the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan for the work they do. I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
reminding us of the Kofi Annan story about the young
girl. It is good to be reminded of the human dimension.
It is therefore doubly pleasurable to be able to welcome
Mr. Bakhtiar and hear his perspective, as well as that of
the Afghan ambassador.

Like other speakers, I would like to begin by
condemning the recent terrorist attacks, including
those in Nangarhar, and offering our condolences
to all the families of those killed and wounded. We
need to continue all our efforts to support the Afghan
forces as they seek to combat those who would destroy
communities and the lives of innocent, ordinary
Afghan civilians.

Today's debate is an important one. It is the last of
the quarterly debates before the parliamentary elections
on 20 October. I would like to focus on those elections
in my statement today. Mr. Yamamoto highlighted
the challenges of organizing these elections on time.
We are also very grateful for the work of his team in
supporting the Afghan authorities. All political leaders
in Afghanistan should work to improve the process, not
to undermine it. We call on them to cooperate to this
end. At the moment, a number of critical issues on the
elections remain unresolved.

First, with respect to the voter registration lists,
the election staff in Kabul has put a lot of effort into
compiling and verifying the lists of those who have
registered to vote. These lists should be published at
the local level as early as possible, with the proper
complaints mechanism in place to give the Afghan
people time to check their details and register
any complaints.

Secondly, with regard to communications,
an effective communications strategy from the
election-management bodies explaining the progress
that has been made and what further efforts are
under way is important for the confidence of the
Afghan electorate.

Thirdly, with respect to the security of voters,
elections officials and election materials, my
Government calls on all actors to respect the safety and
lives of civilians who take part in the elections, and
calls on those actors to refrain from violent disruption.

We commend the bravery of the Afghan National
Defence and Security Forces for their work, and
we know that it is a difficult time for them. We call
on those illegally blockading provincial offices of
the Independent Election Commission to disperse
peacefully. Elections are only five weeks away, and it is
critical that preparations be allowed to go ahead.

Turning to wider matters, I had the honour to be
British Ambassador to Afghanistan in 2015 and 2016,
so I would like to tell Mr. Bakhtiar and Ambassador
Saikal that I remain an optimist about their beautiful
but troubled country. Given what Afghanistan has
suffered, given her state of development - she is one of
the poorest countries in the world - and given that the
main threat to Afghan security comes from insurgents
who are supported from outside Afghanistan, I think
we are all prepared for this to take a long time. The
international community has been prepared for that and
has prepared longer-term strategies.

The Geneva Ministerial Conference on Afghanistan,
which a number of speakers have mentioned, will, we
believe, be an important moment for the Government
of Afghanistan to reflect on progress made so far, but
also to recommit to the necessary reforms, which are
required to drive the sustainable and inclusive growth
the Afghan people deserve over the remainder of
the transformation decade. My Government is fully
committed to the Conference and to playing its part in
preparations that are now under way.

That said, it is important that, in all the security,
economic, human rights and development challenges
that the Afghan people face, all sectors of Afghan
society and citizenry come together to do the following
things: to strengthen good governance, to uphold the
rule of law and human rights, including the right to
health, the education of women and girls, and above
all, to be tolerant. I arrived in Kabul a week after the
very sad killing of Farkhunda Malikzada, and I have
never forgotten the intolerance and brutality that led
to that sad outcome. Afghan communities need to
invest in the future. They need to tackle corruption
at all levels, engage in the economic liberalization
necessary to attract foreign direct investment, and
make tangible progress with their regional partners on
regional cooperation.

We heard from the Afghan ambassador and from
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
about the peace process with Pakistan. We wish that
process well. It goes without saying that peace is the
only viable way forward for Afghanistan. We very
much support the National Unity Government in its
efforts in this regard. We hope that all other States
will do their utmost to support the Government. The
temporary ceasefire brought about by President Ghani
was a very important moment, and it is regrettable
that the Taliban have not responded to his subsequent
offers. The Taliban need to demonstrate that their really
do have the heart of Afghanistan as their main concern
and that their concern is for the people of Afghanistan.
They need to respond positively to the important offers
made by President Ghani in February.

