Before I come to the humanitarian situation in Syria, I would like to say a couple of words about what I heard before I took the floor. First of all, I would like to tell my colleague from the United States that there is no international consensus on isolating the Syrian regime, as she chose to call it. The international consensus on Syria is codified in resolution 2254 (2015), which states that it is the Syrians who should decide their fate and what regime they will have in future. Whatever they decide, it will be their decision, not anybody else's. Secondly, I note that many participants referred to a nationwide ceasefire. Before they propose such a thing, they may wish to give it a little thought. In order to have a nationwide ceasefire, there must be nationwide warfare. Where is the nationwide warfare in Syria that warrants the proposal of a nationwide ceasefire? Who do they think would become signatories to such a ceasefire? That would be very interesting to know. I now turn to the main part of my statement. We thank Under-Secretary- General Mark Lowcock for his briefing. We have heard a lot today on the potentially disastrous impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) in north-east Syria - and in Idlib for that matter - and on steps taken in that regard by the World Health Organization (WHO) and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA). Despite the recent briefings by representative of WHO and OCHA, as well as the latest report of the Secretary-General, of 23 April (S/2020/327), we still have questions to which we have not yet gotten any clear answers, such as explanations on the discrepancies in humanitarian data and figures provided by United Nations entities, Headquarters and United Nations forces on the ground. Instead, we hear only emotional statements on the deteriorating humanitarian situation in Idlib or north-east Syria. I ask a logical question - why is only that part of the country subject to the close scrutiny of our colleagues? Those areas are under the control of foreign Powers or the de facto authorities, but responsibility for the humanitarian situation is attributed to Damascus. Why is the humanitarian community so reluctant to address the epidemiological situation in the country as a whole? Does the United Nations have any comprehensive strategy to address the pandemic in Syria? When it comes to Damascus, all we hear about is the destroyed health-care system's inability to cope with the potential pandemic crisis. The Government of Syria is doing its utmost to fight the spread of COVID-19, despite cruel unilateral sanctions. As I already mentioned in this morning's meeting, our colleagues have a very rosy - and very hypocritical - picture of how their sanctions affect ordinary Syrians and how their exemptions allegedly solve the people's problems. We reiterate our call, and echo calls made by United Nations officials, to lift unilateral sanctions against Syria. We deplore the de facto collective punishment measures taken against the Syrians living in Government-controlled areas. We want to be briefed on the steps taken by the occupying Powers in the Syrian territories known to be out of the control of the legitimate Government in order to conform to international humanitarian law. We have heard not a single word so far in that regard. In addition, we would like to ask what exactly WHO and OCHA do to help fight COVID-19 in the territories under the control of the Syrian Government. We note that there are 43 confirmed cases of COVID-19 in the country, according to WHO. We cannot agree to the cure that our colleagues suggest - a full reinstatement of the cross-border mechanism. We note that the cross-border mechanism was created as a temporary tool to be used on an extraordinary basis. We would like to make it clear for everyone that the closure of one of the border crossings for United Nations assistance does not mean its total closure. As we all know, non-governmental organizations (NGOs) continue their shipments, which are larger than those of the United Nations. We hear that NGOs are doing a lot of work in the north-east. We have a question: what exactly is the United Nations doing there? We hear that the assistance of the United Nations and NGOs is not duplicative. That means there is coordination between the two. We would like to learn more about it. We also reject the contention that Damascus is not properly cooperating. Some interpret the Secretary-General's report (S/2020/327) as they see fit, stating that there was no progress in cross-line access. That is not true. Everyone can interpret the statistics as it suits them, and statistics are very easy to manipulate. The report of the Secretary-General clearly states that 1,094 missions were conducted by the United Nations and its partners from within Syria, and that they reached 14 governorates. Three convoys of medical aid were sent to the north-east - all from Damascus, two by WHO and one by UNICEF. We are told that those convoys covered only 30 per cent of medical needs. I would like to remind the Council that the Syrian authorities authorized an airlift from Erbil. It is not the fault of Damascus that it did not occur. In fact, we are astonished, to put it mildly, by WHO delays, since February, in providing the urgent supplies that we hear are now expiring. I note that before the New Year those supplies were lying idle in Iraq and then suddenly became indispensable. We reject the explanations provided to us thus far, and we have strong reasons to believe that those delays did not happen because of objective circumstances. We strongly urge our colleagues not to waste their time on looking for a way to advocate - explicitly or implicitly - for getting Al-Yarubiyah back by claiming that it is the only solution. We ask them to focus instead on engaging humanitarian agencies in constructive dialogue with Syrian authorities. They do not have to knock on the door; the door is open. If there is a will, there is a way. I urge them to not lose time and squander this opportunity. This is the only solution. By the way, closed Al-Yarubiyah did not prevent the local administration from receiving four machines for COVID-19 tests from abroad. It seems that the equipment arrived there through the same channels as the strange humanitarian aid that consisted of anti-riot gear for Islamic State in Iraq and the Shams prisons and internally displaced persons camps. We mentioned that during the morning meeting. And by the way, why do they insist on Al-Yarubiyah and refuse to consider the Abu-Kemal crossing that the Syrian authorities were prepared to use? In the context of the difficult humanitarian situation in the north-east, we have a question - what have the occupying Powers done there over the past six years except cut ties between Kurdish areas and other Syrian territories? Only several hospitals function there and nothing has been done to resettle refugees from the camps. A lot of problems are caused by mines. The situation in Al-Hol camp is dire. It is unclear what measures have been taken to fight the threat of COVID-19 in Rukban. We note that it was Syrian and Russian efforts that made it possible for 19,000 people in Rukban to return to their homes from March to July 2019. As I mentioned this morning, the fighters who escaped from the camp two weeks ago clearly said that the aid sent to the camp was not distributed among its inhabitants but was, instead, seized by Maghawir Al-Thawra fighters. We are very concerned that, upon the Syrian Health Ministry's request to launch a medical laboratory in Al-Hasakah for processing COVID-19 samples in one of the State hospitals, WHO redirected the Ministry to a clinic belonging to Medecins Sans Frontieres. WHO must have realized that this would lead to problems with Damascus. In general, we would like to be briefed about what WHO is actually doing east of the Euphrates River. We would be grateful if our United Nations colleagues could shed some light on our above-mentioned concerns. How are the financial resources at OCHA's disposal actually allocated? What portion goes to Government-controlled areas? We will continue to pose those pertinent questions and expect clear and transparent answers.
