Mr. Duclos (France) (spoke in French): First, I
would like to thank Mr. Hedi Annabi for his briefing.
Last week, the Security Council firmly condemned the
reprehensible murder that was just mentioned by
Mr. Annabi. I would like to return to that today because
that crime is part of a current that runs against the
common efforts that we have been making for exactly
four years, since we adopted resolution 1244 (1999) on
10 June 1999, with a view to a modern, democratic and
multi-ethnic Kosovo. We cannot permit any indulgence
towards those attempting to sabotage the efforts by the
international community to promote, in a safe
environment, a multi-ethnic and tolerant society in
Kosovo. Everything must be done to put an end to the
ethnic violence in Kosovo, of which the Serbian
community is the principal victim. The presumed
perpetrators must be quickly apprehended and brought
to justice. We support the measures taken by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in that
context, and we will closely follow that inquiry.

The Provisional Institutions of Self-Government
have a particular responsibility to re-establish a climate
conducive to the realization of the objectives of the
international community for the benefit of the entire
Kosovo population. I wish to state here very clearly
that the Assembly in particular must renounce those
initiatives that are contrary to resolution 1244 (1999)
or the Constitutional Framework. Those initiatives only
divide the Kosovo communities. No progress can be
achieved in Kosovo on the basis of unilateral action
that is contrary to resolution 1244 (1999) or that flouts
the authority of UNMIK and KFOR. We expect the
Institutions of Self-Government to work in good faith
with the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and UNMIK in order to implement the norms
sanctioned by the international community. I am
thinking in particular of the guarantee of minority
rights and of the establishment of a direct dialogue
between Pristina and Belgrade on practical issues of
common interest, for which the cooperation of the
authorities of Serbia and Montenegro is equally
indispensable. Based on that condition, the transfer of
non-reserved competencies will have positive and
lasting effects and it will be in that context that the
question of status can begin to be addressed.

We align ourselves fully with the statement that
will be made shortly by Greece on behalf of the
European Union. The 21 June 2003 Thessaloniki
Summit will be crucial to strengthening the European
perspective of the region and to offering Kosovo the
opportunity to be successfully reintegrated into its
regional environment. It is our hope that the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government will take
that opportunity.

