Mrs. Nguyen (Viet Nam): At the outset, I would like
to express my appreciation to the Polish presidency for
convening today's important open debate. My thanks
also go to the Secretary-General, the Director-General
of the International Committee of the Red Cross and
the representative of the Iraqi Al-Amal Association for
their informative briefings.

Viet Nam aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.

In recent years, conflicts have increased sharply in
number and have severely affected many regions of the
world, causing immense suffering and resulting in abuse
and deaths of civilians. The tragic estimates are that
close to 90 per cent of current casualties are civilians,
the majority of them women and children. We are very
concerned about the fact that, as the Secretary-General
says in his report (S/2018/462), civilians in armed
conflict are living in clearly deteriorating conditions.
They are targeted by the excessive and indiscriminate
use of force, their access to humanitarian relief is
hampered and they are deprived of basic necessities
that they need to survive. We therefore reiterate our
strong condemnation of all acts of violence or abuse
committed against civilians, as well as the use of lethal
weapons to strike civilian facilities, including schools,
hospitals and residential and public areas. Such acts
constitute clear violations of international law and are a
grave threat to international peace and security.

We share the view that it is the primary responsibility
of States to protect their own citizens and prevent
violence against civilians within their jurisdiction.
We call on all parties to conflicts to strictly comply
with their obligations to protect civilians, in line with
international human rights law and humanitarian law
and the relevant Security Council resolutions, notably
resolutions 1894 (2009) and 2286 (2016), while fully
respecting the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
political independence of States.

The United Nations should further enhance its
leading role, in close coordination with regional
organizations and other relevant actors, to help
strengthen a culture of compliance with international

law and promote good examples and best practices in

addressing armed conflict and protecting civilians,

facilitating the delivery of humanitarian assistance to

civilians in need, and assisting countries in their efforts

to resolve conflicts by peaceful means, improve their

national capacity to address the root causes of conflict

and advance sustainable development. In that regard,
we welcome and encourage further efforts on the part of
Member States and United Nations bodies to implement
resolution 2286 (2016). It is also of paramount
importance that the Security Council fulfil its
responsibility by collectively responding to the current
serious threats against civilians in armed conflicts and
implementing urgent and concrete measures to protect
civilian infrastructure and facilities essential to the
survival and health of the civilian population.

Viet Nam is concerned about the escalating
violence that has taken place in the Gaza Strip in the
past few days, resulting in many deaths and injuries
among Palestinians. We strongly oppose the use of
force against civilians and urge the parties concerned
to exercise restraint, stop escalating tensions, settle
conflicts peacefully and strive for a comprehensive,
equitable and sustainable solution in order to save the
lives of Palestinians and ensure that the legitimate
interests of the parties concerned and regional peace
and stability are taken into account.

In conclusion, the prevention of conflict and
peaceful resolution of disputes are the best ways
to protect civilians. It is now high time to translate
words into deeds in order to end the suffering of
innocent people.

