I thank the United Nations Special Envoy for Syria, Geir Pedersen, for his briefing. At this moment of global uncertainty and hardship, a renewed and straightforward focus on peace and calm in Syria in line with the appeal of Special Envoy Pedersen is an imperative necessity in order to enable the effective tackling of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and promote progress in the Syria's political process. While violence has been de-escalated to a significant extent, calm remains tentative in the north-west of the country, tangible tensions persist in the north-east, terrorism is on the rise in central Syria, and security remains fragile in the south. Tunisia reiterates its call on all parties to keep their abiding commitments, exercise self-restraint and work together to maintain an environment of sustained calm throughout Syria. We also recall the close nexus between the ceasefire and the parallel political process in Syria set forth in resolution 2254 (2015). We renew our support for the efforts to achieve both aims by Special Envoy Pedersen, acting within his mandated prerogatives under the resolution. The resurgence of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) is a matter of grave concern and a serious reminder that the threat of terrorism is far from over. In fact, ISIS made an enormous leap in the number of claimed attacks in Syria and in Iraq in April as compared to prior months. Tunisia again stresses the importance of collective and determined counter-terrorism efforts aimed at eradicating Council- designated terrorist groups in Syria and beyond. Such efforts are fundamental for a long-term political solution to the Syrian conflict. We emphasize that understandings on the ceasefire in Idlib remain temporary solutions of respite, until they jointly and genuinely address the presence of terrorists of Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham and other affiliated extremist groups and eradicate the safe haven these groups have established in the region. The recent agreement reached between the Syrian parties on the agenda of the Constitutional Committee has been an encouraging development and an important step on the road to lasting peace in Syria. Tunisia recognizes that COVID-19 has caused the Constitutional Committee's discussions and other peace processes across conflict zones to grind to a halt. We look forward to the convening of the third round of the Constitutional Committee in Geneva when the situation so allows. We urge the Syrian parties to exercise flexibility, seek commonalities and engage constructively and without preconditions in the negotiations of the Constitutional Committee. Tunisia expresses its support for the good offices of Special Envoy Pedersen in the Committee's work and in the political process broadly termed. Finally, Tunisia reiterates that there is no military solution to the conflict. The only viable way forward is a political settlement that enjoys Syrian ownership and leadership, as well as United Nations sponsorship, pursuant to resolution 2254 (2015) - a settlement that safeguards Syria's sovereignty, territorial integrity and unity and meets Syrians' legitimate aspirations for freedom and dignity. The political solution to the Syrian crisis is long-overdue. The Syrians' resilience is over-stretched. This conflict must end.
