The President: I have the pleasure to recognize
the new Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation, His Excellency Ambassador Andrei
Denisov. On behalf of the Security Council, I extend a
warm welcome to him and look forward to working
closely with him.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter from the representative of the Sudan in
which he requests to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote,
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Erwa
(Sudan) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General on the Sudan,
document S/2004/453.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/2004/6ll, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Chile, France, Germany,
Romania, Spain, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, and the United States of
America.

I should also like to draw the attention of the
members to documents S/2004/561 and S/2004/603,
containing letters dated 12 and 27 July 2004,
respectively, from the representative of Nigeria, and
document 8/2004/513, containing a letter dated 22 June
2004 from the representative of the Sudan.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I shall first give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements before the
voting.

I give the floor to the representative of China.


