Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): We
had a telling series of briefings this morning from a
very high-grade team, and I should like to thank them
for that. It is a great pleasure to see the High
Representative for the European Union with us again,
giving us an analysis of the situation on the ground on
the basis of his recent visit. I think we all have to agree
with that analysis; I certainly do.

But, in my introduction, I particularly want to
thank Amos Ngongi for the work that he has done in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo in an incredibly
difficult period over the past two years or more. We
have had the same experience in Sierra Leone, where
the Security Council and the executive of the United
Nations have been involved in turning a country around
from a dreadful and - in humanitarian terms - deeply
distressing conflict. The path has never been smooth or
easy. But he has overseen that transformation on the
ground with a team for the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) that, again, deserves tribute in a
way which the Security Council should acknowledge
and is, I think, acknowledging this morning. So I thank
you, Amos.

That effort by the United Nations is seamless and
depends very much on the work of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Headquarters team.
Before he leaves the room, I should like to thank the
Under-Secretary-General for what he has done in that
respect, and to say that that applies to his whole team
as well as to him personally. You may now go, Sir.

The analysis we have heard this morning has, I
think, rightly focused on the move in the political
context. The swearing-in of the four Vice-Presidents of
the new national coalition Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo exemplifies what
we have been trying to achieve with the
implementation of the Lusaka Accord, and the United
Kingdom would like to congratulate all those involved.

But primarily, I think, congratulations go to the
Congolese people. Those of us who have been on
missions to the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
to its neighbours have always - in each of the four
years that we have been there, and in all the cities
beyond Kinshasa and the towns and the villages that
we have visited - been struck by the appeal for peace
in the eyes of the Congolese people, an appeal to the
United Nations and to the international community. I
hope that, if this new Government's officials take up
their responsibilities with political will, with honour
and with honesty, they will repay the Congolese people
the time that they have had to wait for peace. I think
that that is something that should come out of this
meeting, because those 50 million or so Africans who
have suffered so much over the past few years will still
deserve our help in the coming period. Ituri and Bunia,
of course, are a particular part of that. The
Multinational Force has made a significant contribution
towards improving the security situation in Bunia. I am
proud to be a European Union (EU) member in praising
the EU for what it has done, and I pay particular tribute
to France for its leadership of that.

But we must not allow this intervention to
undertake a task that is then jeopardized by allowing a
security vacuum to open up after its departure. We need
the full deployment of an increased MONUC brigade
force, but we need it on time and with the capability to
ensure that the gap between the two forces is negligible
and that MONUC is visibly as strong as possible from
day one. We all understand the threats to both the
present and the future force. The Security Council
itself has to take the responsibility that that is the case,
even if it is the Secretariat that carries out the task. I
hope that in the coming days we shall ensure that that
happens.

The Union of Congolese Patriots (UPC) under
Mr. Lubanga has tested the Interim Emergency
Multinational Force. He and they will test MONUC,
especially if they believe it to be a vulnerable force.
We look forward to discussing further with the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations how MONUC
is to be configured to deter and deal with a UPC
challenge. That is connected with the wider question
raised by Mr. Guehenno and Mr. Ngongi, of what Jean-
Marie Guehenno called the need to end the pervasive
culture of war and impunity, which, as Mr. Ngongi
said, needs additional action. We have to make sure
that those who have committed crimes against the
Congolese people are brought to account.

If Ambassador Konuzin had not done so, I would
have asked the question - an open question because
the Congolese people and Government need our
support. Do they wish to start a reconciliation process
that involves justice for the victims and therefore
prosecution of the worst abuses? Or, if they want to
pass it to the international community, are we going to
be ready to support the International Criminal Court or
any other mechanism, to make sure that those
responsible, some of whose names we already know,
understand from this meeting - if they have not
understood it any earlier - that they will be examined,
investigated and brought to a court for their actions
during this conflict if they are shown to have abused
humanitarian law and human rights norms?

We look forward to adopting soon a draft
resolution that increases MONUC's ceiling. The
Chapter VII authorization is important. It should help
to deter violence, but only if it is credibly embodied on
the ground - hence the importance of careful military
planning.

Like Germany and others, we support the arms
embargo in the draft resolution and would like to see a
monitoring panel established to help the Council
oversee its implementation.

We have all put our finger on the humanitarian
situation. I agree with Mr. Ngongi that the conditions
are now more favourable for major relief operations,
but they need to be organized by the international
community with the support of the United Nations.
Beyond that, I very much agree with the High
Representative. We have been here before, but we have
never implemented the thought that a regional
conference is very necessary to construct the
framework for an economic regeneration of the region,
which should include structures for maintaining
political and security stability. It does need the
coherence of the regional leaderships. I am sorry that,
up to now, they have not all agreed that a conference
would be a good thing. We now think that it would be.
I hope that the United Nations will put its weight
behind that thought.

Finally, we have heard this morning that what is
needed in the Congo is the maintenance of active
interest. That certainly goes for the United Kingdom.
But I think that the Security Council as a whole intends
to maintain its active interest and should take some
credit for its persistence in insisting that the Lusaka
accord be implemented in full - it is now being
implemented through many resolutions and our four
missions to the region. I hope that the focus that we
have put on this region through our activity will indeed
be maintained into the future.

