Mr. Gombo (Chad) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank Mr. Zahir Tanin, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, for his briefing, and Mr. Ivica
Dacie, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic
of Serbia, and Ms. Vlora Citaku, Ambassador of the
Republic of Kosovo to the United States, for their
presence here today.

The Secretary-General's report (S/2015/833) on
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK), which we have before us,
illustrates the progress that has been made in the
dialogue being held between Belgrade and Pristina
under the auspices of the European Union, including
in the implementation of the 19 April 2013 First
Agreement on Principles Governing the Normalization
of Relations. Chad welcomes the progress made in
the European Union-facilitated dialogue, as well as
the other agreements reached between Belgrade and
Pristina on 25 August, particularly on the general
principles establishing the association/community of
Kosovo Serb-majoritymunicipalities.

The normalization of relations and establishment
of those municipalities represent an essential stage in
the full implementation of this historic agreement. We
congratulate Prime Ministers Aleksandar Vucic' and Isa
Mustafa on their outstanding leadership in advancing
the peace process, despite the numerous incidents
created by those attempting to disrupt it. Similarly,
Chad urges all leaders in Pristina and Belgrade to
support this momentum by, among other things, signing
on to the speedy implementation of all the points in
the agreement. We warmly welcome the long-awaited
approval by the Kosovo Assembly of the constitutional
amendment and other laws aimed at establishing the
specialist court. The progress made in that area is proof
of Kosovo's commitment to the fundamental principles
ofjustice and responsibility. We call on all the parties
involved to finalize the steps needed to fully implement
and establish the Court as soon as possible.

Chad condemns the use of violence and intimidation
by opposition parties in attempts to undermine the
Kosovo Assembly's normal operations, including the
incidents of 8 and 15 October involving the use of tear
gas. We also condemn the physical assaults by certain
militants on Prime Minister Mustafa and other members
of his Government. Such acts are unacceptable, and
we call on all political actors to refrain from rhetoric
and actions incompatible with democratic principles
and standards. We urge them to carry out their duties
responsibly and maturely, in full respect for the
democratic process.
Regarding the country's cultural and religious
heritage, we urge leaders to respect the point of view of
every ethnic element of Kosovo society. It is critical to
refrain from actions that violate the fundamental rights
of those communities. Concerning those who have
disappeared, the report cites a figure of 1,670 persons
listed as missing after the Kosovo conflict. We support
UNMIK in asking Pristina to appoint a Chair of the
Pristina Delegation for the Belgrade-Pristina Working
Group on Missing Persons, so that it can resume its
technical work on the issue.

With regard to the spacing of the Security Council
meetings on this subject, we believe they should be held
every six months.

In the context of the fight against terrorism, violent
extremism and radicalism, we welcome the strategy
that Kosovo has adopted.

In conclusion, we would like to congratulate
Mr. Tanin on his appointment and to assure him of our
full support.

