Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): I thank Nigeria for
organizing this event and bringing this very important
issue to the attention ofthe Council. I also want to thank
the Secretary-General for his insightful remarks earlier
today. Georgia aligns itself with the statement made by
the observer of the European Union, and in my national
capacity I should like to add the following.

Throughout the years we have witnessed fruitful
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations. At the same time, we remain mindful of
the serious challenges in designing a comprehensive
peace and security architecture that would rapidly
respond to security threats in different corners of
the world, including the region I come from. The
global and European security environment has
changed exponentially in recent years. The conflicts,
threats and instability in many regions across
the globe, together with old and newly emerging

security challenges - affecting, among others, Iraq,
Libya, the Sahel region, Syria and my immediate
neighbourhood - are significantly impacting

international peace and security and challenging our
fundamental values and principles.

We fully acknowledge the growing asymmetric
threats posed by transnational terrorism and its
new forms, such as foreign terrorist fighters, to the
viability and efficiency of regional and international
organizations. And we believe that the entire
international community at all levels must stand and act
unitedly to effectively counter them. In the meantime,
the more traditional threats posed by expansionist and
irredentist State actors remain at the core of regional
and international instability and insecurity.

Taking into account the universal nature of the
fundamental principles upon which the European
security architecture rests, we are confident that the
main problem is rather related to the unwillingness of
some States to comply with commitments undertaken
within the regional organizations than with the
imperfection of the system itself. The disregard for
obligations is a major challenge to our common security
and has resulted in the crisis that we are facing today
in the region.

Unfortunately for all of us, regional security in
Europe is being significantly challenged by Russia's
aggressivebehaviouragainstitsneighbours-especially
Georgia and Ukraine - in particular through the
ongoing illegal military occupation of integral parts
of our sovereign territories. This worrisome pattern
to alter international borders arbitrarily and by force
poses a deadly threat not only to the strategic vision of
a Europe whole, free and at peace, but also to the notion
of amicable relations between all peoples in our region.

It should be noted that the first signs oferosion ofthe
modern European security system emerged quite long
ago. A lack of willingness to fulfil the commitments
in good faith undertaken during the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Istanbul
Summit in 1999 must be considered as one of the clear
signs of the beginning of this erosion process.

Regrettably, OSCE participating States failed
to demonstrate enough resolve and unity adequately
to respond to this dangerous tendency at an early
stage. The imposition of an illegal moratorium on the
implementation of the obligations arising from the
Treaty on Conventional Forces in Europe in 2007 was
the next perilous step towards the deepening of the
security crisis. The full-scale aggression committed
against Georgia in 2008 and the consequent ethnic
cleansing, occupation of 20 per cent of my country's
territory and ongoing steps towards its annexation by
one of the founding Members of the United Nations
were a logical continuation of this process.

Allow me to express my profound disappointment
that, as a result of Russia's opposition, we have
lacked opportunities to restore a meaningful and
comprehensive OSCE mission in Georgia, which would
serve as an impartial monitor of the existing situation in
Georgia's occupied regions. This issue is of particular
concern given the absence of international monitoring
mechanisms on the ground, a rueful consequence of
the terminations not just of the OSCE mission but also
of the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia in
2009 by exercising the power of veto of a permanent
member.

Unfortunately, inadequate assessment by the
international community of the above-mentioned
erosion of the security architecture, and hence
the inadequate response to the tragic events that
unfolded in Georgia, led to another grave violation of
sovereignty and territorial integrity of a United Nations
Member State, this time Ukraine in 2014, resulting in
the annexation of new territories and the creation of
grey zones in the OSCE area. We believe that close
cooperation between the United Nations and the OSCE
and other regional organizations and full exploitation of
their potential in early warning and prevention as well
as crisis management and post-conflict rehabilitation,

is indispensable for the maintenance of international
peace and security.

I should also like to stress the particular importance
we attach to the partnerships between the United
Nations and the Organization for Democracy and
Economic Development - GUAM. There is no need to
remind those participating in this debate that all GUAM
member States - Georgia, Ukraine, Azerbaijan and
Moldova - have grave security challenges arising
from conflicts, including occupied and annexed
territories. Therefore, the United Nations engagement
is crucial to preserving stability in this region with a
population of more than 60 million. To this end, we
once again welcome the recent consensual adoption
by the General Assembly of the second resolution on
cooperation between the United Nations and GUAM
(resolution 69/271) and look forward to strengthening
the partnership between these organizations.

