Mr. Alduwaisan (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like at the outset to thank Mr. Michel Kafando,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Burundi,
and Ambassador Jiirg Lauber, Chair of the Burundi
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, for
their valuable briefings. Today I would like to address
three issues.

The first is the political situation. Since the
Security Council's last official meeting on Burundi
in June (see S/PV.8550), the political state of affairs
in the Republic of Burundi has been improving. The
Government has been working to calm the situation
since the constitutional referendum was held on 17 May
2018, with the participation of most political parties.
We hope these positive developments will continue
until the vital presidential elections take place in 2020.
We also hope that the elections will include all sectors
of society with the participation of all political parties,
and that they will be free, fair, transparent and credible.
We also want to see the participation of civil-society
stakeholders, including young people and women.

I welcome the Government of Burundi's efforts to
move thepoliticalprocess forward,includingby adopting
a road map for the upcoming elections and creating the
Independent National Electoral Commission, as well as
its decisions to fully finance the 2020 elections from
the national budget and to publish an electoral calendar
on 28 June. The President's announcement that he will
not seek re-election is an important demonstration that
the Government is serious about transferring power to a
new president and convening the presidential elections
a few months from now.

We commend the efforts of the African Union (AU)
and the East African Community (EAC) to achieve
a peaceful resolution of the political and security
situations in Burundi through an inclusive dialogue
based on the Arusha Agreement. We also hope that the
member States of the EAC will step up their efforts
and work with both the Government of Burundi and
regional and international organizations, represented
by the United Nations and the AU, to ensure the stability
in Burundi that we all wish for.

My second point is about the security situation
in Burundi, which in the past few months has been
relatively calm and is improving, despite various
continuing acts of violence and activities of armed
groups. We sincerely hope that it continues to improve
as it has since the beginning of the year. We also
hope that the Government will take advantage of this
improvement and the relative calm to intensify its
efforts with regard to bringing all the political actors to
the negotiating table in a national dialogue, given that
the presidential elections are fast approaching.

My third focus is on the humanitarian situation and
the return of refugees. There has been improvement
in the humanitarian situation in Burundi compared
with the two previous years, and we have seen a
decrease in food insecurity. However, the situation is
still critical, owing to continuing acts of violence and
forced disappearances, in violation of human rights
and international humanitarian law. We call for an end
to such practices and for all perpetrators to be held
accountable. With regard to the return of refugees,
we commend the signing of the bilateral agreement
between Burundi and Tanzania on repatriating 280,000
Burundian refugees. The Government of Burundi
must intensify its efforts to ensure the socioeconomic
reintegration ofreturnees while providing the necessary
guarantees for the return of the remaining refugees.

In conclusion, social development and political
reform are the chief factors that any Government must
contend with in order to develop and advance its society
with a view to creating a secure future. The recent wave
of reforms and changes in Central Africa and the Great
Lakes region includes the successful elections in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the signing of a
peace agreement in the Central African Republic on
6 February and the Government of Burundi's adoption
on 22 August 2018 of a lO-year national development
plan that extends to 2027 whose objectives are linked
to the Sustainable Development Goals. All those are
steps in the right direction towards achieving reform
and improving standards of living and the economic
situation for the people of Burundi, in particular, and
the peoples of the region, in general. We therefore hope
that the Government's efforts will lead to the successful
holding of the upcoming elections and that the
development plan will result in economic development
and improved security, political and humanitarian
conditions in Burundi.

