Mr. Sanabria (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I should
like first to thank the Nigerian presidency of the Security
Council for organizing this open debate and for its concept
note (S/2014/238, annex). This debate is on an issue of
great importance to the maintenance of international
peace and security. We should also like to commend
you, Sir, for having put forward a draft resolution that
Spain is honoured to co-sponsor. I should also like to
congratulate Luxembourg for its outstanding leadership
of the Council in March.

Spain aligns itself with the statement of the
European Union and wishes to add some observations
in its national capacity.

Spain welcomes the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2013/480), which we consider to be complete and
well-focused. We acknowledge the fundamental role of
the United Nations in security sector reform (SSR) and
its efforts of recent years to improve the coherence and
effectiveness of its actions in this area. Security sector
reform, and from a wider perspective the strengthening
ofthe rule of law in this context, is a key elements in two
different areas - ex ante for conflict prevention and ex
post for peacebuilding. The international community
should help and support countries finding in conflict
and post-conflict situations in the development of their
civilian capacities and in the strengthening of their
institutions.

It is critical to move from a reactive culture to
conflicts - which is often late and insufficient - to
one of prevention. The prevention requires political
will and resources to formulate and implement effective
strategies. When both elements are combined, the
results are success stories such as that of Sierra Leone,
with the recent closing of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Mission in Sierra Leone. Security sector
reform demands action on several fronts. Stable and
predictable legal frameworks must be established; the
creation of competent security and police forces that
are subject to and enforce the rule of law; the building
of an independent and comprehensive legal system
accessible to all; and the establishment of an adequate
penitentiary system. We must also ensure the protection
of society's most vulnerable groups such as women,
children and displaced persons.

National ownership is, in this area as in many
others, key to success. Good planning is necessary if
actions designed on the basis of needs and priorities
identified by the host country are to be coherent and in
line with its decisions and national initiatives. Security
infrastructures and institutions must be at the service of
the people. Reforms must be inclusive and based on the
principles of good governance, the rule of law, respect
for human rights and accountability, all of which are
vital in fostering long-term legitimacy, effectiveness
and sustainability.

We believe that security sector reform requires a
comprehensive and strategic approach. Flexibility in its
planning, identification of the activities that are most
appropriate at every moment, an evolving perspective,
a good knowledge of the situation in the field, and a
fluid, intense and ongoing dialogue with national actors
are crucial. In order to be effective, efforts aimed at
security sector reform require a long-term perspective
and actions sustained over time.

Security sector reform based on the principles I
have just mentioned is clearly an essential contribution
to ensuring respect for and the implementation of
international humanitarian law, including the protection
of civilians. On this point, I should like to highlight
the importance of the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission, of which Spain has been a member for
eight years, and ofthe Peacebuilding Fund, ofwhich we
are its eighth largest donor.

National authorities and international partners also
need instruments that allow them to carry out appropriate
follow-up and evaluation of their own actions. As my
delegation did at the debate on the strengthening of the
rule of law in February (see S/PV.7ll3), I should like
to highlight the recent initiative of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to
develop indicators that measure the evolution of the
functioning ofpolice, legal and penitentiary institutions
in countries in conflict and post-conflict situations in
the areas of efficiency, capacity, integrity, transparency,
accountability and the treatment of vulnerable groups.
It is a useful tool for measuring the results and progress
of our efforts in these sectors.

Spain has supported capacity-building in the
security and legal sectors in many countries. In
Sub-Saharan Africa, we have supported capacity-
building of the national police forces of Angola and
Cape Verde. Through our collaboration with the
African Union, we support the African Peace and
Security Architecture and the Common Security and
Defence Policy, as well as the African Centre for the
Study and Research on Terrorism.

In Latin America, we have implemented
programmes for training and for sharing experiences
and good practices in legal reform by collaborating with
the creation of specialized prosecutorial offices and
by organizing seminars, courses and workshops that
address issues such as access to justice - especially
by vulnerable groups - medical-legal investigation
techniques, and the fight against human trafficking.
Since 2007, Spain has promoted and supported the
Central American Security Strategy through the
Central American Integration System in order to join
and harmonize the fight against organized crime.

In Arab countries, Spain implements the Masar
programme, which is designed to support democratic
governance processes and aligns with the needs
and priorities identified by national actors, and has
supported initiatives of public institutions and civil
society in the area of security, justice, penitentiary
institutions and human rights.

In conjunction with other States members of the
European Union, Spain has participated in civilian
crisis management missions within the framework
of the Common Security and Defence Policy of the
European Union. We are present in training operations
in Mali and Somalia and in EUCAP Nestor, EUCAP
Sahel and the European Union Operation Althea, which
seek to strengthen the security security. In this regard,
a Spanish General currently occupies the position of
Principal Adviser of the United Nations in the Republic
of Guinea and is helping to define the country's security
model.

Our experience of cooperation with other countries
and extensive participation in peacekeeping operations
has taught us that strengthening the rule of law and
security sector reform is a critical pillar of conflict
prevention and the building and strengthening of peace.
Peace and security, human rights and development are
closely linked and are mutually reinforcing. Spain
will continue to actively participate in actions aimed
at providing support to the efforts of other countries
to establish trustworthy security capacities and
institutions that are subject to the law, with the aim of
helping to strengthen peace, security and development.

