Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): First, I would like to associate myself with
those words of welcome that you addressed to the Vice-
Minister of External Relations of Angola, and I would
also like to thank Under-Secretary-General Prendergast

 

for his briefing, as well as Ambassador Fowler for the
information that he gave us today. I am certain that
everything that we have seen and heard today will greatly
help the Council in its efforts to ensure the implementation
of our own decisions.

As coordinator of the troika of observer States for the
implementation of the Angola peace process - Portugal,
the United States and the Russian Federation - I have
been authorized to make the following statement.

"Members of the troika remain deeply concerned
by the tragic humanitarian situation of millions of
Angolans as a result of the ongoing conflict that has
ravaged the country.

"Members of the troika reaffirm that the primary
cause of the continuing conflict in Angola is the
failure of the Uniao Nacional para a Independencia
Total de Angola (UNITA) under the leadership of Mr.
Jonas Savimbi to comply with its obligations under
the Lusaka Protocol and relevant resolutions of the
Security Council, in particular its failure to
delimitarize and its resistance to extension of State
administration.

"Members of the troika note that immediate and
full compliance with all provisions of the Lusaka
Protocol remains the fundamental expectation of the
international community.

"Members of the troika share the assessment of
the Secretary-General that the overall situation in the
country could only benefit from an improved human
rights environment and from the persistent efforts to
eliminate human rights violations.

"Members of the troika condemn the human
rights violations perpetrated by UNITA upon innocent
civilians and remind UNITA of its responsibility to
respect the human rights of Angolans.

"Members of the troika encourage all those
within the UNITA leadership committed to bringing
the current conflict to a peaceful conclusion to work
constructively with the Government of Angola to
create the conditions conducive to genuine
reconciliation and open democratic dialogue and
cooperation.

"Members of the troika condemn UNITA's
ongoing attacks on civilian populations within the

Republic of Angola and note with grave concern the
escalation of the fighting into Namibia. The troika
calls upon UNITA fighters to lay down their arms
and encourages the Government of Angola to
provide mechanisms for the demobilization of
former UNITA combatants.

"Members of the troika, in this connection,
welcome recent statements by Angolan President
J ose Eduardo dos Santos acknowledging the need for
a political dialogue involving all those committed to
peace, and reaffirm the importance of the
continuation of the Government of National Unity
and Reconciliation.

"Members of the troika encourage the
Government of Angola to enhance the protection of
human rights for all Angolan citizens in accordance
with the Constitution of the country and note the
importance of creating the conditions for open
political debate and the development of a democratic
society in Angola.

"Members of the troika underscore the
important role of a free media in promoting
Angola's ongoing democratic development and
encourage the Government of Angola to respect the
free press and its practitioners.

"Members of the troika call upon the
international donor community to continue to assist
the Government of Angola to fulfil its primary
responsibility for addressing the needs of its people,
including the victims of the continuing humanitarian
crisis. The troika notes that, for the year 2000, the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and the Unit for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Assistance have issued a consolidated appeal for
humanitarian assistance to Angola for $258 million.

"Members of the troika affirm their support for
the work of the Committee on sanctions against
UNITA, under the leadership of Ambassador
Fowler, and call upon regional organizations such as
the Southern African Development Community, the
Economic Community of West African States and
others to render support for its activities, and
continue to urge all States strictly to enforce
sanctions against UNITA.
"Members of the troika agree that the United
Nations Office in Angola (UNOA) has a valuable

 

role to play in exploring effective measures for
restoring peace, assisting the Angolan people in
capacity-building, humanitarian assistance and the
promotion of human rights, and coordinating other
activities, including compliance with sanctions against
UNITA.

"Members of the troika underscore the
importance of a rapid conclusion of a status of
mission agreement for UNOA and urge the
Government of Angola and the United Nations
Secretariat urgently to reach agreement so that UNOA
can begin to function, as outlined in Security Council
resolution 1268 (1999).

"On the occasion of the first anniversary of the
downing of two United Nations planes in Angola,
members of the troika call on the Government of
Angola to facilitate United Nations access to the crash
sites sufficient to allow for investigation and the full
repatriation of the remains of our colleagues killed in
these incidents.

"Members of the troika note also with deep
concern that over 18 months have passed since the
tragic loss of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General of the United Nations, Alioune
Blondin Beye, and that the United Nations and the
families of the deceased have yet to receive a final
report on the tragic events of 26 June 1998 and thus
call upon the Government of C6te d'Ivoire to produce
a report of its findings as soon as possible.

"Members of the troika remain gravely concerned
over the fate of the crews and passengers of Russian
and Ukrainian commercial airplanes shot down or
otherwise lost under suspicious circumstances over
territory then controlled by UNITA and call upon the
Government of Angola and all concerned parties to
cooperate in ascertaining the fate of the missing and
obtaining the release of survivors by UNITA."

