Mr. Kellenberger: I, too, would like to thank
you very much, Mr. President, for the trust that you
have placed in the International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC), which has, indeed, maintained a strong
presence in the field at the most difficult times. I would
like simply to tell the Council that it can count on our
organization and that we will continue to fulfil the
mandate entrusted to the ICRC by the Geneva
Conventions, which also cover questions such as
persons who are unaccounted for - a matter that has
been raised in this meeting.

As far as health structures are concerned,
especially hospitals, I said in my statement that in fact
the hospital situation can vary widely from one place to
another. There are administrative problems in some
hospitals, and that is one of the reasons why, at an early
stage, the ICRC was underlining very forcefully the
importance of strengthening administrative structures
in general and in the health sector in particular.

I would like to tell the Council that I was
encouraged by what I heard regarding additional
measures to be taken in order to improve security in
Iraq.

As far as coordination is concerned, I would like
to tell the Council that the ICRC, as an independent
actor, has previous experience in coordinating our
activities with those of United Nations agencies and
other humanitarian actors. I think we have had good
experiences in the past. I would simply like to say one
thing with regard to coordination. Although it goes
somewhat without saying, it is perhaps good to repeat
it. A precondition for efficient coordination is always
to have each actor trying to focus on his core
competency and on areas in which he feels he has a
competitive advantage. I think that is an important
precondition for efficient coordination. I think that all
of us humanitarian actors owe it to the donor
community to avoid unnecessary duplication. We also
owe it to the population of Iraq to carefully identify
any gaps that may exist.

I thank the Council once again for inviting me to
participate in this meeting.

