Ms. Rice (United States of America): I am
pleased to join all here today to support this important
draft resolution. We have been brought to this day by
the good faith and the hard work of many in the
international community. I especially want to thank
you, Secretary-General Annan. I want to thank French
Foreign Minister Douste-Blazy for his hard work and
for his Government's work, as well as the co-sponsors
of the draft resolution. But of course we owe the fullest
gratitude to Prime Minister Siniora of Lebanon and his
Government and to Prime Minister Olmert of Israel
and his Government. These democratic leaders have
served their people courageously through this
extremely trying and tumultuous time.
With the passage of this draft resolution, the
international community will help to open a path to
lasting peace between Lebanon and Israel that will end
the suffering and the violence of the past month. The
status quo that precipitated this conflict was unstable.

06-4649]

Since the conflict began, we have sought an immediate
end to the fighting. But we have also insisted that a
durable ceasefire requires a decisive change from the
status quo that produced this war. Today's draft
resolution lays the foundation to achieve that goal, for
with this draft resolution a new, stronger, Lebanon can
emerge, with the world's help. Now the hard and
urgent work of implementation begins.

Today's draft resolution accomplishes three
important objectives. First, it puts in place a full
cessation of hostilities. There is an insistence on an
unconditional release of abducted Israeli soldiers.
Hizbollah must immediately cease its attacks on Israel,
and Israel must halt its offensive military operations in
Lebanon, while reserving the right of any sovereign
State to defend itself. It is my understanding that the
Lebanese Cabinet will vote on Saturday concerning the
resolution, and the Government of Israel on Sunday. As
the Secretary-General has just noted, he will help the
parties to establish a timeline for the implementation of
this very important cessation of hostilities.

In addition to respecting the draft resolution's call
for a full cessation of hostilities, we believe that all
parties should take action to protect civilians, as was
called for in the four principles of the 1996
understanding. We urge the Governments of Lebanon
and Israel to commit to ending large-scale violence.
Hizbollah faces a clear choice between war and peace,
and the world should help to ensure that that choice is
the right one.

Secondly, this draft resolution will help the
democratic Government of Lebanon to expand its
sovereign authority, as called for in resolution 1559
(2004). It will do so by creating a new international
force that builds on the current United Nations force in
Lebanon, the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL). Although it will bear the same name, this
will not be the same force; it will be an enhanced
UN IFIL. As the Government of Lebanon has requested,
this new force will have an expanded mandate, a
greater scope of operations, better equipment and much
larger numbers - a target of 15,000 soldiers, a
sevenfold increase in its current strength.
The Lebanese armed forces, together with the
new stabilization force, will deploy to the South of the
country to protect the Lebanese people and to ensure
that no armed groups like Hizbollah can threaten
stability. As that deployment occurs, Israel will
withdraw to behind the Blue Line. Today's draft
resolution makes clear that these are parallel processes,
and it also calls for the opening of Lebanese harbours
and airports, which we expect will be for verifiably
civilian purposes.

With the deployment and the withdrawal, a full
ceasefire will go into effect. The Council has said that
it intends to adopt another draft resolution with further
measures to help that ceasefire become permanent. We
also look forward to the Secretary-General's proposals
to fully implement resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1680
(2006), including the question of disarmament. To
further strengthen Lebanon's democracy, the
international community will also impose a binding
embargo on all weapons heading into that country
without the Government's consent. Today, we call upon
every State, especially Iran and Syria, to respect the
sovereignty of the Lebanese Government and the will
of the international community.

Finally, the draft resolution clearly lays out the
political principles to secure a lasting peace: no foreign
forces, no weapons and no authority in Lebanon other
than that of the independent Lebanese Government,
which must have complete sovereignty over its entire
country. Those principles represent a long-standing
international consensus that was first expressed in
United Nations resolution 425 (1978), then affirmed in
the Taif Accords and reaffirmed in resolutions 1559
(2004) and 1680 (2006). On 16 July, the Group of
Eight leaders endorsed the same political conditions in
Saint Petersburg, and 10 days later the Lebanon Core
Group supported those principles in the Rome
conference.

The draft resolution also offers a way forward to
implement resolution 1680 (2006), which addresses the
delineation of the Lebanese border, including the
Sheba'a farms. We must ensure Israel's security and
respect the underlying framework to achieve a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the region, in
accordance with resolution 425 (1978).

Today in no way marks the end of our common
efforts. In many respects, the hard work of diplomacy
is only just beginning. In many respects, although it is
our hope that the draft resolution will lead to the
cessation of large-scale hostilities, no one can expect
an immediate end to all acts of violence. The
conditions of a lasting peace must be nurtured over
time, with the good will of the Lebanese and Israeli

Governments and with the sustained commitment of
the international community that we have undertaken
here.

Our most pressing challenge now is to help
thousands of displaced people within Lebanon to return
to their homes and rebuild their lives. The
reconstruction of Lebanon will be led by the
Government of Lebanon, but it will demand the
generosity of the entire international community. For
its part, the United States will continue working with
the Governments of Lebanon and Israel to ease the
suffering of the Lebanese people. Let me join the
Secretary-General in applauding the extraordinary
work of humanitarian workers and United Nations
workers who, at great risk to themselves, have taken up
the cause of suffering people during this turbulent time.

The United States has already committed
substantial resources to the humanitarian efforts in
Lebanon and Israel. In the critical days and weeks
following a cessation of hostilities, we plan to do even
more - beginning now - by increasing our
immediate assistance to Lebanon to $50 million. The
United States will coordinate closely with other major
donors, with the international financial institutions and
with all who are committed to Lebanon's future. We
will also encourage the active involvement of the
private sector in Lebanon's reconstruction. Through
our common efforts, we must help the people of
Lebanon to emerge from this conflict more prosperous
and stronger than ever.

The past month has been marked by
overwhelming suffering, heartache and loss, both in
Lebanon and in Israel. The draft resolution is
refreshingly clear that this tragedy began six years
after Israel withdrew completely from Lebanon and
Hizbollah crossed an international boundary, captured
and killed Israeli soldiers and began firing thousands of
rockets into Israeli cities. Hizbollah and its sponsors
have brought devastation upon the people of Lebanon,
dragging them into a war that they did not choose and
exploiting them as human shields.

The people of the Middle East have lived too
long at the mercy of extremists. It is time to build a
more hopeful future. The draft resolution shows us the
way. It is now the solemn responsibility of the
international community to help the people of Lebanon
and the people of Israel to transform this tragedy into
opportunity - an opportunity to overcome old patterns

06-4649]

of violence and to build a new foundation for stable,
sustainable and comprehensive peace.

We have embarked upon an ambitious course. Yet
it is the right course. It is the only realistic and
effective course, and we must see it through, for it is
the only way to help the people of Lebanon, the people
of Israel and all the people of the Middle East secure
the lasting peace that they both desire and deserve.

