Mr. Bui The Giang (Viet Nam): We thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this urgent meeting. We
also thank the Secretary-General for his presence and
for his statement.

My delegation is following with grave concern
and great regret the current dire situation in the Gaza
Strip, where unjustifiable violence and attacks against
both the Palestinian and the Israeli civilian populations
have mounted to unacceptable levels over the past few
days. We reiterate our condemnation of the
indiscriminate attacks against civilians.

While recognizing Israel's need for self-defence
against terrorist attacks, we denounce the excessive
and disproportionate use of force by Israel, in
collective punishment of the population in Gaza, which
has resulted in the death or injury of hundreds of
Palestinians, including women and children, and
widespread destruction of local property and
infrastructure.

At the same time, we are profoundly dismayed at
the inevitable prospect of exacerbation of the
humanitarian crisis in Gaza and its redoubled collateral
impact on more than 1.5 Palestinians there if the Israeli
military operations continue in the coming days.

Strongly convinced that there can be no military
solution to the conflict, my delegation urges the parties
concerned to immediately and unconditionally stop all
acts of violence. We demand that Israel open all border
crossings to allow for the urgent delivery of food,
medical aid and fuel to Gazans, the evacuation of the
injured and unhindered access for humanitarian
workers.

We commend the United Nations agencies,
including first of all the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA), and other humanitarian organizations for
their work in difficult conditions on the ground, and
call upon them to extend further emergency assistance
to civilian populations in Gaza.

We welcome the joint efforts by the Palestinian
Authority, Egypt and Jordan to strengthen inter-
Palestinian political dialogue and reconciliation. We
reconfirm our support for the important role played by
the Quartet, the League of Arab States and regional
countries in brokering a truce between the parties
concerned and restoring calm to Gaza.

We believe it is imperative for the Security
Council now to adopt an enforceable resolution that
can help stop the killing of innocent people, prevent
the situation from further risky escalation and bring the
peace process back to the direction set out in the Road
Map, the principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace
Initiative, the Annapolis joint understanding and the
relevant Security Council resolutions, including
resolution 1850 (2008).

In this context, our appreciation goes to the
Libyan delegation for preparing a draft resolution,
which we commit ourselves to studying carefully and
working actively and constructively on with other
Council members towards its early adoption.
