Mrs. Albright (United States of America): Madam
President, it is indeed a pleasure to see you in the chair and
to follow the tremendous work that you have been doing in
this area and others.

A year ago, we held the Security Council's first-ever
ministerial meeting on Africa. We hoped to build a new
and lasting partnership between Africa and the world based
on common interests, mutual respect and a shared
commitment to peace, prosperity and freedom. Since then,
some African countries and institutions have made inspiring
progress.

The majority of African nations are registering
economic growth as a result of the difficult but necessary
steps they have taken towards participation in global
markets. In nations such as Botswana and Mozambique,
democracy continues to put down strong roots. And new
hope has emerged for Nigeria's long-delayed return to
democratic rule. Organizations such as the Economic
Community of West African States and the Organization of
African Unity (OAU) are pursuing innovative approaches
to preventing and ending conflicts. Perhaps most
encouraging is the moratorium on the manufacture and
trade in small arms proposed by a group of West African
nations.

In December, I had a very successful trip to six
African nations. In March, President Clinton and six
African leaders pledged to work for peace, development
and the rule of law at the Entebbe Summit. In April, here
in New York, the Secretary-General submitted a thoughtful
and comprehensive report on peace and development in
Africa.

I wish that we had more good news, but the truth is
that tragedy and conflict have led the news from Africa this
year and it dominates our thoughts as we meet today. Just
last month, we were shocked and saddened by the tragic
terrorist attacks in Nairobi, Dar-es-Salaam and Cape Town.
Let me take this opportunity to once again congratulate
local authorities for their diligence in pursuing those
responsible and to express America's sorrow for those who
were hurt or who lost loved ones.

But acts of terror were not the only disturbing events
of recent months. From the Atlantic Ocean to the Red Sea
and from Africa's western coast to its southern highlands,
countries which had begun to recover from strife are
being swept back into it. Societies which were beginning
to rebuild are seeing their labours lost, and Governments
which had moved towards democracy are retreating into
tyranny.

For example, the dangerous standoff in the Horn of
Africa threatens to become a full-scale inter-State war,
Africa's first this decade. A bloody crisis in Congo has
undone progress achieved since the departure of former
President Mobutu. It has ensnared the armies of
neighbouring countries, sparking inter-ethnic violence and
raising again the spectre of genocide. In Angola the
parties have left the path to peace laid out in the Lusaka
Protocol and are poised to drag the country back into civil
war, fuelled by months of new arms purchases.

These and other conflicts are taking a tremendous
toll - in regional trust eroded, in development
opportunities lost and, most important, in human lives.
The leaders of countries in crisis have a choice. They can
stop now and prevent the slide back to full-scale war;
they can be statesmen and guide their nations towards a
future of cooperation; or they can continue full-tilt into
the past - a past of hatred, violence, instability and
isolation. No one else - not their neighbours and not the
international community - can make that choice for
them, but the international community does have a critical
role to play. Our nations, acting together, can make it
harder to solve disputes through violence, or we can make
it easier for African nations to choose and keep to the
path of peace.
We thank the Secretary-General for his personal
engagement in these difficult challenges and we welcome
the response his report has generated. Already we have
seen important proposals for improving cooperation
between the United Nations and the OAU, improving the
effectiveness of arms embargoes and developing African
peacekeeping capacity. The United States looks forward
to leading the working group on maintaining the security
and neutrality of refugee camps.

The working group led by Japan has correctly
singled out an area where the international community
could quickly make a great deal of difference: the
uncontrolled flow of arms, ammunition and explosives
into Africa's tensest areas. This dirty business fuels
conflict, fortifies extremism and destabilizes entire

 

regions. All of us whose nations sell such arms or through
whose nations the traffic flows bear some responsibility for
turning a blind eye to the destruction they cause, and all of
us have it in our power to do something in response.

Together, we should move now to curb arms transfers
to zones of conflict in Africa. We should begin by
committing to full and timely disclosure of all arms
shipments into those regions, and we should seek to build
international support over the next six months for a
voluntary moratorium on the sale of arms that could fuel
these inter-connected conflicts. The United States also
proposes that Governments and international and non-
governmental organizations meet to exchange information
on regional arms transfers and to explore further steps.

Secondly, arms control and sanctions regimes are only
as strong as their enforcement, and whether the sanctions in
question are aimed at a war nearby or a would-be
proliferator far away, the international community as a
whole will gain from stronger sanctions regimes. We
therefore urge United Nations Member States with relevant
expertise to prepare programmes to strengthen the capacity
of African Governments to monitor and interdict arms
flows. The United States is currently considering what
training and equipment we could usefully contribute, and
we would welcome proposals from others. The United
Nations could also develop a clearing house for technical
information and for rapid exchange of data on possible
Violations. Finally, sanctions cannot work where there is no
national legislation enforcing them and no penalties for
Violators. Member States that do not have such legislation
should strive to enact it.

The threat posed by arms flows, particularly small
arms, is by no means limited to the African continent. The
Government of Mali and others, notably those of Norway
and Canada, have done a great deal to bring this problem
to the world's attention. Let me take this opportunity to
welcome those initiatives and to propose two urgent steps
for worldwide action.

First, we must put in place responsible arms transfer
practices that are effective worldwide. Negotiations have
begun under United Nations auspices on a convention based
on the path-breaking Inter-American Convention against the
Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms,
Ammunition, Explosives, and Other Related Materials,
adopted by the Organization of American States. We should
conclude those talks by the year 2000. That should also
serve as a target date to restrict the export of shoulder-fired
missiles. Secondly, we should establish an international
centre to collect and share information on arms transfers.

Perhaps this is an appropriate place to put in a word
on Libya and Lockerbie. The United States and the
United Kingdom have responded positively to a proposal
made to the President of the Security Council by the
Libyan Foreign Minister in January 1998 for a Scottish
trial in the Netherlands, and we have said yes to the terms
they have proposed. There is nothing more to negotiate.
Libya should accept its own proposal and deliver the
fugitives for trial. Many of you encouraged all of us in
the United States and the United Kingdom to accept the
proposal. Frankly, it is now time for all of you to
encourage Libya to accept - to be able to say yes. I
think that my colleague Foreign Secretary Cook has
described very well the procedures that have been adopted
and the various proposals made in terms of the
monitoring. I think that we have done our part, and I
think it is now important for Libya to do its part.

Last year we left this ministerial meeting with new
momentum behind us and high hopes before us. The
majority of African States continue to move ahead, with
able leaders and citizens committed to progress and
hopeful for the future. Unfortunately, in some key
countries we have seen a failure of leadership, and in too
many places the rule of law is losing out to the law of
force.

Secretary-General Annan has eloquently appealed to
the continent's leaders to

"summon the will to resolve our problems by
political, not military means. For every day that we
fail to do so, the innocent people of the continent
pay a terrible price".

And he has urged us all - Africans and non-Africans -
to summon our will and to rise to the challenges we face
in Africa.

I hope that we will leave New York resolved to
summon our will and to act; and I pledge that the United
States will do its part through the steps I have outlined
today and by supporting African aspirations for peace and
justice.

