Mr. Sattar (Pakistan): I am grateful to you,
Madam President, and to the other members of the
Security Council for this opportunity to make a
statement on the situation in Afghanistan.

This morning we listened with attention and
respect to the statement of the Secretary-General
envisioning a hopeful evolution in Afghanistan. The
process proposed by Ambassador Lakhdar Brahimi
testifies to Mr. Brahimi's insight into the problem of
Afghanistan.

At yesterday's meeting of the "six plus two"
group, Pakistan joined in pledging full support for the
sovereignty and independence of Afghanistan and for
its unity and territorial integrity. An interim
administration of Afghans for their country needs to be
urgently facilitated in view of the news that we have
been watching since this morning. We greatly
appreciate the fact that Security Council members are
intensely engaged in efforts to bring peace to
Afghanistan. Those efforts have assumed greater
urgency because the situation in Afghanistan is
evolving faster than was ever expected.

Afghanistan and its people deserve an end to their
travail. For more than two decades, they have suffered
at the hands of both man and nature. They have been
victims of foreign intervention and internecine war, the
ambitions of warlords and the irrational obsessions of
Osama bin Laden, who has abused the Afghan tradition
of hospitality to spread terror across the globe. Over
the decades, more than a million Afghans have
perished. The economic infrastructure of their country
has been devastated.

The terrorist attacks of 11 September, which
killed thousands of innocent people in New York and in
Washington, DC, provoked righteous condemnation
by the United Nations. Pakistan joined the rest of the
world community in expressing grief and condolences.
We also followed words with action, and joined the
coalition for the war against international terrorism in
order to bring perpetrators, organizers and sponsors of
the outrage to justice.

The military action has inflicted unintended
suffering on innocent people in Afghanistan. We grieve
for them too. We believe that the military action will be
as short as possible, and that the achievement of its
objectives will pave the way for bringing an end to the
suffering of the Afghan people.

In a speech to the General Assembly on 10
November, President Pervez Musharraf called for
military strategy to be combined with political and
humanitarian strategies in order to bring peace and
stability to Afghanistan and relief and reconstruction to
its people. The United Nations has long endorsed the
principle that the Government in Afghanistan should be
broad-based, representative and multi-ethnic. Pakistan
has emphasized that, for stability, the post-Taliban
Government should be representative of the
demography of Afghanistan. The political strategy
should ensure the unity and territorial integrity of
Afghanistan, and the process of the formation of a
post-Taliban Government should be home-grown as far
as possible, with the United Nations and the
Organization of the Islamic Conference providing
needed facilitation.

But another important principle to be kept in view
is that the new Government should commit itself to the
implementation of Security Council resolutions on
Afghanistan and the principles of the United Nations
Charter. In the interest of peace and stability in the
region, it should maintain friendly relations with all the
neighbours of Afghanistan. We are happy to see that
those ideas are fully shared by the "six plus two" group
and by the Security Council.

Over the past month, Afghan groups have become
more active. The Northern Alliance entered into an
agreement with King Zahir Shah for the formation of
an interim Government. Also, on 24 and 25 October,
the Assembly for Peace and Unity of Afghanistan held
a large conference of more than 1,500 Afghan notables,
including mujahedin leaders and commanders,
influential maliks of powerful tribes and dignitaries
from various ethnic communities. The conference,
which was held in Peshawar, adopted a resolution in
favour of the traditional Afghan process of a Loya
Jirgah, or grand assembly, for the formation of a
Government of peace and national unity. It envisaged
an important role for King Zahir Shah in efforts to end
the crisis. The King expressed appreciation for the
conference as a beneficial opportunity for an intra-
Afghan dialogue aimed at forging national unity.

The military situation in Afghanistan is changing
at an accelerating pace. Northern Alliance forces have
claimed control of large areas of territory and are
reported to be pressing on Kabul.

It is particularly important at such a moment to
keep the political objectives in focus. The hope of
forming a broad-based, multi-ethnic Government is at
stake. We must therefore urge acceleration of political
action as well: to convene a meeting of eminent and
influential Afghans as soon as possible for the
formation of a broad-based, multi-ethnic interim
arrangement. In that regard, we endorse the four-step
approach proposed by Ambassador Brahimi. However,
speed is of the essence. Withdrawal of the Taliban from
Kabul has created a dangerous political vacuum.
Unless the United Nations is able to put together a
political dispensation which is representative of all
segments of the Afghan population, conflict and
turmoil will continue to afflict that unfortunate country.

For such an interim political administration to
play the expected role for peace, stability and unity, it
will be vital for it to move to Kabul, the capital and the
symbol of unity of the State. The peace and security of
Kabul will have to be secured. A multinational force
should be created with the coalition providing back-up
support. Fears have been expressed of reprisals and
even of ethnic cleansing in parts of Afghanistan. Such
a disaster needs to be prevented. Otherwise, hopes of
preserving the unity of Afghanistan could suffer a
mortal blow.

Pakistan hopes that peace in Afghanistan will be
followed by international efforts for rehabilitation and
reconstruction in Afghanistan. Only thus can we in
Pakistan hope for the refugees to return to their
country.
The need for a humanitarian strategy in addition
to the military and political strategies is urgent. This
requires urgent concerted and coordinated efforts,
supported with generous funding, to address the needs
of the Afghans, not only in refugee camps but also
inside Afghanistan. That will involve the delivery of
humanitarian assistance to people in their home
localities. It will also involve the setting up of camps
inside Afghanistan to provide emergency support and
assistance for internally displaced persons.

Except for Afghanistan itself, no country has
suffered more than Pakistan as a result of the turmoil in
Afghanistan over the last two decades. We have
provided asylum to over three million refugees. The
economic and social burden on Pakistan was
aggravated after 1989, as world assistance for their
maintenance dried to a trickle. The refugees entered the
labour force, displacing Pakistanis and increasing
unemployment in our country. We are not in a position
to open our borders to all those who may want to enter
Pakistan in search of food and relief. Unfortunately,
despite restrictions, over 80,000 new Afghan refugees
have crossed into Pakistan in the past two months.
Opening the borders will bring a massive influx of
refugees into Pakistan - creating a situation that we
cannot afford. There are more than 1.5 million
internally displaced persons in Afghanistan and around
5 to 7 million vulnerable people. It is therefore
essential to provide assistance to the needy Afghans
inside their own country. However, we do not have
hearts of stone, and Pakistan will continue to allow the
vulnerable Afghans and injured civilians, women and
children, to be housed in refugee camps close to the
border in Pakistan on a temporary basis. Pakistan, for
its part, will continue to do whatever it can to alleviate
the hardship of the Afghan people.

Once peace returns to Afghanistan, humanitarian
relief has to be sustained. No peace process can work
without the commensurate support to rebuild and
rehabilitate this war-ravaged nation. It is therefore
extremely important to evolve concurrently a
comprehensive post-conflict reconstruction and
rehabilitation plan, which will be put in place as soon
as peace returns to Afghanistan. It is imperative for the
international community to begin work immediately on
this plan and to arrange the necessary finances to
support and sustain it. Any reconstruction effort in
Afghanistan must, at the minimum, entail the
restoration of water management systems, the revival
of agriculture, the reconstruction of infrastructure, the
rebuilding of institutions and continued humanitarian
assistance to the Afghan people. To this end, the
President of Pakistan proposed the establishment of an
"Afghan Trust Fund" under the auspices of the United
Nations to assist in humanitarian relief, as well as in
national reconstruction and rehabilitation efforts in
Afghanistan.

This time, the international community must not
walk away from Afghanistan. It must demonstrate the
political will and the determination to engage and help
the Afghan people in rebuilding peace and the
economy of their country. The world community
disappointed the Afghans in the past. The negative
consequences of that neglect are clear for everyone to
see. We must not repeat that mistake.

Before concluding, I wish to reiterate Pakistan's
commitment to full cooperation with the United
Nations and Mr. Brahimi's efforts to promote peace
and stability in Afghanistan.

