Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation is seriously
concerned that the Palestinian and Israeli
confrontation- and the situation in the region as a
whole - is now on the brink of the most severe crisis
and severe escalation that we have seen. If we do not
break this vicious cycle of terror and retribution, and
even greater acts of violence and terrorism, then the
Middle East will be on the brink of a new full-scale
war.

We regret that the recent terrorist actions and the
massive Israeli Army actions provide the backdrop to
what has happened recently- that is, the promising
steps that have been taken to ensure a ceasefire and an
end to the violence. We are convinced that, in these
circumstances, all those who are looking for a way out
of the confrontation between Israel and Palestine and
who are looking towards restoring the negotiating
process must show a maximum of political will in an
effort to avert further degradation of the situation and
to end the real threat of war in the region.

We call on the leadership of the Palestinian
Authority to take vigorous steps to put an end to the
actions of extremists and to punish those who
participate in terrorist acts. We call on the Israeli
Government to show restraint and not resort to massive
retaliation, and to refrain from steps that could further
destabilize the situation in the region. Only in this way
will it be possible to stabilize the situation.

A major thrust of these efforts must remain for
the Israelis and the Palestinians to comply with the
Tenet plan and the Mitchell report recommendations, as
indicated in Security Council resolution 1397 (2002),
on a political settlement that must be based on the
principles of international law. We must not allow
further emasculation of what we have gained through a
lot of work in the last few months. In spite of the
"crisis logic", we must not lose the momentum of the
peacekeeping potential, in particular the decisions
taken at the Beirut Arab League Summit.

Russia, as a participant in the peace process and a
member of the quartet of international mediators, will
continue its useful work with the parties in order to
achieve agreement on a ceasefire, normalization of the
situation and renewal of constructive negotiations on
the basis of Security Council resolutions 242 (1967)
and 338 (1973) and the land-for-peace formula.

We believe the current situation demands that the
Security Council send a clear signal to both sides and
call on them to effect a ceasefire and renew their
political dialogue.

