Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): The Russian Federation has consistently
favoured the achievement of a comprehensive, lasting
political settlement and national reconciliation in Somalia.
An effective, peaceful settlement of this protracted
conflict is possible only through the further development
of the negotiating process to include all the main Somali
factions and groups and through establishing a broadly
representative Government on that basis.

We are pleased to note the definite progress made in
establishing a dialogue among the Somalis. This was
achieved recently through the energetic mediation efforts
of regional organizations and neighbouring and other
interested States. We would like to underscore in
particular the role personally played by the President of
Kenya, Mr. Arap Moi.

Some promising results came out of the recent
consultations in Cairo with the leaders of the prominent
Somali factions. Judging from available information, there
are grounds to expect that the results of these
consultations may promote an expansion of the basis for
the dialogue among Somalis.

The political support of the United Nations for
regional mediation efforts will continue in the future to be
an important factor to strengthen and stimulate efforts to
achieve a Somali settlement. However, we concur with
the view that Somali people bear the main responsibility
for the restoration of peace and normal living conditions
in their country. It is precisely their willingness to

 

espouse the logic of peace and to find generally accepted
solutions that in the final analysis will determine the
success of any mediation effort.

This applies fully to the need for the Somali factions
to ensure appropriate security conditions for the operations
of international humanitarian organizations. We support
efforts to provide humanitarian assistance and support for
the rehabilitation of Somalia drawing upon the capacities of
the United Nations Consolidated Inter-Agency Appeal for
Somalia and on the basis of coordinated efforts with other
international organizations in this sphere.

It is also important to ensure unfaltering compliance
with the international embargo on deliveries of weapons to
Somalia, for which the Security Council has made repeated
appeals. We support the proposal of the Permanent
Representative of the Republic of Korea to find ways and
means to enhance the effectiveness of the embargo regime,
including through the strengthening of coordination in the
Security Council committee on the embargo against
Somalia.
