Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): First, I would
like to thank Mr. Martin Kobler for his briefing on the
situation in Libya and for his continued efforts and
those of the entire staff of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya to ensure a successful political process
there. The Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Libya can count on the firm support of
the Senegalese delegation. We also support his seven
recommendations, which, if implemented by all of
the actors and parties involved, could help to secure a
lasting political solution to the crisis in Libya. I would
also like to commend Ambassador Olof Skoog for his
briefing and his leadership as Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011) concerning Libya.

With regard to the current situation in Libya, which
has been characterized by the continued worsening of
the tragic plight of migrants, refugees, asylum-seekers
and internally displaced persons who fall victim to
various criminal groups, we believe that the Secretary-
General's comments in his most recent report on the
situation in Libya (S/2017/283) were particularly timely
when he stated that

"there is a need for a comprehensive approach
to address the root causes in the countries of
origin that drive so many people to take this
dangerous journey".

Indeed, the smuggling of and trafficking in human
beings in Libya, including migrants, are among
the most serious violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law that the parties to the
conflict in Libya continue to commit, some of which
may constitute crimes of war.
The case ofwomen and girls is equally alarming, as
they are subjected to conflict-related sexual violence,
committed by the parties to the conflict in Libya, as
well as by smugglers, traffickers, affiliates of Da'esh
in Libya and other criminal groups. This happens even
when girls and women are detained in formal and
informal detention centres for irregular migrants. In
the face of the deteriorating humanitarian and human
rights situation in Libya, we remind all Libyan parties
of their duty to protect civilians and of their obligation
to respect and implement the provisions of International
humanitarian law and human rights.

At the political level, my delegation would like to
emphasize that the impasse in Libya does not allow for
the stimulation ofthe country's already fragile economy.
Of course, we are pleased that the Presidency Council
of the Government of National Accord has been able
to draw up and implement the budget for the current
year, and we call for improved collaboration with all
Libyan financial institutions in order to better confront
shortages of funds and liquidity, and to provide more
services to the population. However, on the security
front, my delegation regrets the recent fighting in the
oil crescent and in the capital, Tripoli. We believe
that the progress made in restoring oil production and
exports could be compromised by the continuation of
such clashes.

We are also concerned that Libya remains an
enabling environment for terrorist group activities,
despite the liberation of the cities of Sirte and Benghazi
from the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). The
presence of the ISIL in Libya shows the urgent need to
establish strong and unified governmental institutions
and security structures throughout the country in order
to contain this threat.

The necessary unification of all military and
security forces under the authority of the Government
of National Accord is one of the main challenges of the
Presidency Council, as the situation remains precarious
throughout Libyan territory with consequences that are
felt both nationally and regionally. Whether it concerns
the plight of migrants in Libya, the fragile economic
situation of the country, humanitarian or security
challenges, my delegation remains convinced of the
need to address them in the overall framework of the
search for a political solution to the Libyan crisis. There
can be no military solution, no matter where it comes
from, to this conflict.

As such, like the majority of Libyan stakeholders
and the international community, including the African
Union, we support the Libyan Political Agreement, while
taking note of the wish expressed widely by Libyans to
amend it. We would therefore like to invite all Libyan
parties to work to overcome their political differences
through dialogue, which is the only way to preserve
the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity
and national unity of Libya. That dialogue, of course,
should be as inclusive and representative as possible and
extended, in particular, to all tribes, women's groups
and youth groups with a view to initiating a process of
local and national reconciliation carried out by Libyans
themselves, with the good offices ofthe United Nations.
Issues that hamper the implementation of the Political
Agreement at the executive and security levels should
be high on the agenda of this dialogue.

My delegation hopes that, in the case of Libya, we
will not lose sight of the principle that sanctions are a
means of restoring peace and security and not an end
in themselves.

Finally, while welcoming the ongoing efforts
made by neighbouring countries and the quartet with
regard to Libya, my delegation wishes to reiterate to
the international community the appeal made by the
African Union through its High-level Committee on
Libya, calling for a better coordination of efforts in
support of Libya, among the various countries and
organizations concerned, and with all Libyan actors,
with a view to advancing the political process for the
restoration of peace and stability in Libya.

