Ms. Keita (spoke in French): I thank you,
Mr. President, for giving me this opportunity to update
the Security Council on the activities of the Joint
Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-S Sahel),
including the international support it enjoys, especially
from the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), as well
as the challenges facing the Force and the possible
measures that could be envisaged in that regard. I have
just returned from the Dakar International Forum on
Peace and Security, during which the issue of increasing
the strength of the Joint Force and improving its
relations with MINUSMA was widely discussed. I will
return to that point later in my briefing.

The security situation in the Sahel continued to
deteriorate over the past six months. Attacks attributed
to or claimed by terrorist groups against security forces
and civilian populations increased, as did violent
incidents involving members of various communities.
On 6 November, in Boungou, north-eastern Burkina
Faso, approximately 40 civilians and soldiers were
killed in an attack by terrorist groups. Nearly 100
elements of the security forces of Burkina Faso, Mali
and the Niger lost their lives in a series of attacks
targeting the Liptako-Gourma triangle over the past
10 days. And, on 18 November, 24 soldiers belonging
to the Malian armed forces died in a counter-terrorist
operation near Tabankort in northern Mali, close to the
Nigerian border.

In total, since the beginning of this year, security
incidents have tripled in the region as compared to last
year, particularly in Burkina Faso and the Niger. Four
hundred and eighty-nine incidents were recorded in
Burkina Faso this year, as compared to 151 last year.
Two-hundred and eighteen have occurred in the Niger
this year, versus 69 at the same time last year. In
addition, violence caused by terrorist groups in the
Sahel is now spreading to countries on the West African
coast and along a Sahelo-Sahara strip and virtually links
the Joint Force's areas of operation with those of the
Multinational Joint Task Force in the Lake Chad basin.
That fact was recently noted by many representatives
of the countries of the subregion in Dakar, who warned
against the risk of collapse of the security cordon in
the region. In that connection, the Heads of State of
Mauritania and Senegal have renewed calls for a robust
mandate for the Joint Force.

(spoke in English)

The situation in the Sahel is of serious concern, and
urgent action is needed. It is therefore encouraging that
the G-5 Sahel Joint Force has increased its operational
tempo. I welcome the commitment and determination
of the G-5 Sahel countries to overcome the many
challenges they face in operationalizing the Joint
Force. Since the issuance of the Secretary-General's
report before the Council (8/2019/868), the Joint Force
conducted an additional operation in collaboration
with the French forces. The operation took place in the
border area between Mali and Burkina Faso from 1 to
17 November. It involved 1,400 foreign troops - from
Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger - working alongside
the French forces, and resulted in the neutralization
of 24 suspected terrorists and the seizure of weapons,
ammunition, 100 telephones and 64 vehicles.

The terrorist attacks on the Joint Force base in
Boulikessi, in the Mopti region of central Mali, and
on the Malian armed forces post in Mondoro, on
3 September, which resulted in the killing of dozens
of soldiers, was a painful reminder of the dangerous
environment in which the Joint Force and other security
forces are operating in the Sahel. I would like to pay
tribute to the courage and dedication of the personnel
operating under the Joint Force in the fight against
terrorism, as well as to remember those who have paid
the ultimate price for their countries.

The Joint Force remains a critical part of a series of
regional and international security responses to address
extremist groups in the Sahel along with other cross-
border challenges, including trafficking - in persons,
illicit goods, weapons and drugs - migration and
displacement. However, the Joint Force alone cannot
secure the Sahel. More needs to be done to prevent
further deterioration of the situation. To that end, I
welcome the recent encouraging international and
regional initiatives to respond to the expanding threat
posed by terrorist armed groups in the Sahel. One such
initiative is a new partnership for security and stability
in the Sahel, announced in August by the Chancellor of
Germany, Angela Merkel, and the President of France,
Emmanuel Macron, on the margins of the Group of
Seven Summit held in Biarritz, France. The initiative is
aimed at reinforcing troop and police forces from G-S
Sahel countries at the national level, which will play an
instrumental role in combating terrorism.

Another important initiative to combat growing
insecurity and terrorism was announced by the leaders
of the Economic Community of West African States
meeting in Ouagadougou on 14 September. Their pledge
of $1 billion to fight terrorism and extremism over the
next five years is a sign of the renewed commitment
to take ownership and find solutions to the challenges
facing their countries. In parallel, it will remain critical
to continue supporting the efforts by the Joint Force, as
well as mobilizing external partners to that end.

Resolution 2480 (2019), adopted on 28 June, lifted
geographical restrictions on the provision of water,
rations and fuel to all battalions of the Joint Force.
MINUSMA has taken swift action to provide the
required support. On 3 October, the Joint Force requested
429,000 litres of fuel and oil and 35,000 rations for all
its battalions in all five countries. In response, after
completing a risk assessment under the United Nations
human rights due-diligence policy, MINUSMA began
delivering the requested items. So far, it has delivered
60,000 litres of fuel and 4,500 rations to designated
collection points in Mali. MINUSMA stands ready to
deliver the rest of the support as soon as the contingents
confirm their readiness to receive the items.

The delivery of life-support consumables to
all contingents operating under the Joint Force
has the potential to help the Joint Force enhance
performance and operate more effectively. However,
more equipment, capabilities, such as air assets, and
training will be needed for the Joint Force to make
a difference on the ground. In that regard, I wish to
recall that the provision of support to the Joint Force
by MINUSMA, as mandated in resolutions 2391 (2017)
and 2480 (2019), was and should remain one of several
assistance mechanisms for enhancing the G-5 Joint
Force's capacity.

In addition, I would like to welcome the efforts
of the Joint Force to implement the human rights
and international law compliance framework, with
support from the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and other partners. It
is of critical importance that the Joint Force and the
member States of the G-5 Sahel continue to take all the
necessary measures to ensure that the protection and
security of the civilian population remain at the centre
of their security efforts, both under the Joint Force and
at the national level.

Furthermore, we call on the Joint Force and G-5
Sahel countries to ensure that allegations of human
rights violations involving Joint Force contingents
are fully investigated, as they not only undermine the
population's trust but also the image and reputation
of the Joint Force and that of national security forces
and, ultimately, the very purpose of such military
operations. I am pleased to note the efforts undertaken
to operationalize the police component of the Joint
Force in operations related to fighting terrorism and
transnational organized crime. The police component
has an integral role to play in implementing the
Joint Force compliance framework and investigating
allegations of human rights violations by members of
the Joint Force.
(spoke in French)

Terrorism today is a shared problem, a problem for
all. No country can face it alone. In that connection,
I would recall that most G-S Sahel countries already
spend almost 20 per cent of their national budgets
on defence and security, which, however essential
to addressing the root causes of insecurity, means a
decline in investment in human security.

The international community must therefore
contribute to the effort to fight extremism in the Sahel.
It must support the Joint Force so that it can fully play its
role and achieve more tangible results on the ground. It
is important that funding promises be kept. I would like
to acknowledge the contribution made in that regard by
the European Union and other international partners,
whose support for the Joint Force is crucial and vital.
Once again, I reiterate the Secretary-General's call for
predictable and sustainable funding for the Joint Force.

Security initiatives will bear fruit only if
satisfactory responses are delivered on issues related
to underdevelopment, poverty, governance, the lack
of access to basic services, systematic exclusion and
the effects of climate change. We must offer people,
especially youth, opportunities for the future. Those
prospects must go beyond daily needs, to ensure
development, promote gender equality and facilitate
access to economic opportunities and social services.
That is why I call on all partners to ensure the rapid
disbursement of the pledged funds and to support
the implementation of the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel. Investing in sustainable and
inclusive development efforts is the most effective way
to address the root causes of conflict, violent extremism
and terrorism.

Lastly, I call on the Governments of the region to
go beyond security response and continue to establish
mechanisms and implement reforms to bolster
national unity and cohesion. That must be the thrust
of the partnership to be shored up in the fight against
terrorism, insecurity and inequality. Together, we must
mobilize more, as a matter of urgency, for the Sahel.

