Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): I wish
to begin by thanking Under-Secretary-General Lynn
Pascoe for his introduction of the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2009/189). I also wish to thank
you, Sir, for having organized this debate in order to
follow up on the initiative of Burkina Faso in
organizing an initial discussion in the Security Council
last September on the topic of the maintenance of
international peace and security, mediation and the
settlement of disputes.

My delegation fully aligns itself with the
statement to be delivered by the representative of the
Czech Republic on behalf of the European Union.
Mediation is an extremely important tool available to
the international community for conflict prevention
and management. It bears repeating that successful
mediation has often interrupted or even averted
tragedy, and public opinion tends too often to forget
that fact.

From its inception, the United Nations has played
a crucial role in that area and must continue to do so,
as the Secretary-General has done by dispatching
President Obasanjo to facilitate the dialogue between
the heads of State of the Great Lakes region on the one
hand, and between the Kivu armed groups and the
Congolese Government, on the other. Mediation was
also apparent in the case of Madagascar, where the
Secretary-General began by sending Mr. Haile
Menkerios and then appointed a special political
adviser, Mr. Tie'bile' Drame, whose efforts to promote a
return to constitutional order in that country should
continue. There are, of course, many other examples,
and I wish to reiterate France's support for the efforts
of Mr. Vijay Nambiar in Sri Lanka. My delegation
hopes that the Council will hear from him soon.

I wish to make one comment on the subject at
hand. The idea of mediation makes perfect sense in the
context of inter-State conflict or well-identified parties.
A broadened range of threats to international peace and
security - I refer in particular to terrorism, organized
crime and other such examples - makes the exercise
even more complex and fully warrants taking the time
to discuss the matter within the Council.

In his report, the Secretary-General draws certain
lessons that reveal the expertise required for successful
mediation, as well as the organizational aspects that
concern the Security Council first and foremost. In
particular, my delegation is referring to the
coordination and consistency of initiatives. The United
Nations has the authority and legitimacy to address that
issue, be it through mediation efforts or to support
those undertaken by others in order best to ensure
success.

From that point of view, there is a paradox in
hearing certain States invoke non-interference when
the Council could intervene before a crisis leads to
violence, and thus before the situation calls for a more
robust intervention on the part of the Council. We have
seen that in recent years and again lately.

Another important lesson is the need to act
quickly. That is crucial. The recommendations of the
Secretary-General, which seek to improve the ability of
the United Nations in supporting rapid intervention, are
apt and should be supported. In particular, my
delegation welcomes the establishment and
strengthening of the Mediation Support Unit, which
has already proven to be a useful instrument to support
good offices missions and the mediation efforts of the
United Nations and regional organizations.

Support for peace processes also involves
targeted and resolute action against those who would
threaten to derail those processes. Council action in
that area must be flexible and reactive; I am thinking in
particular of the inclusion in resolution 1844 (2008) on
Somalia of provisions on individual sanctions against
"[entities] that threaten the peace, security or
stability of Somalia, including acts that threaten
the Djibouti Agreement" (resolution 1844 (2008),
para. 8 (a)).

In conclusion, I wish to stress that the strategy for
implementing peace agreements must be outlined early
and be sufficiently inclusive. It is therefore crucial to
include all of the stakeholders in the process, as much
as possible. Here, the role of regional organizations
must be emphasized, including the African Union, the
European Union and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, all mentioned by Mr. Pascoe.
Those organizations have shown in the past their true
ability to act in close coordination with the United
Nations, and the Security Council in particular, in
order to promote political solutions that have averted
tragedy. We must also not forget the important role
played by civil society actors, non-governmental
organizations, civil society groups, and women.

My delegation welcomes the Secretary-General's
intention to strengthen the recruitment of women for
mediation activities. Furthermore, the United Nations
mediation and conflict prevention activities and
capacities should be strengthened in coordination with
the discussions under way on post-conflict action,
peacebuilding and, of course, improved peacekeeping.
Mediation, when it can implement true political
process or cooperation, is also a means of reducing the
burden of peacekeeping or of laying the foundation's
for the deployment of an operation or of a
peacebuilding and state-building strategy.

