Mr. Kleib (Indonesia): Let me begin,
Mr. President, by expressing our profound appreciation
to you for having convened this open debate on the
situation in Somalia. Before proceeding, let me convey
our heartfelt condolences to the bereaved families of
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM)
troop casualties in the wake of the latest deplorable
attacks.

Two decades of violent conflict have shattered
the dreams and lives of innocent Somalis, young and
old, including women and children. A child born
20 years ago in Somalia who has lived there
throughout his childhood might not be able to envisage
an alternative, peaceful life. The list of grievances is
indeed long. The many international meetings held,
including this one, are replete with such references.
More gatherings will be organized in the coming
months and years. This meeting should be a building
block in facilitating the end of conflict and a return to
normalcy in Somalia. Added value is key, and it must
be of a strategic nature.

The report is unequivocally clear on the fact that
there are multiple sources of instability. The situation,
as the report rightly urges, requires the completion of a
comprehensive strategy that addresses the social,
political, economic and security issues in Somalia.

But before any meaningful progress can be
achieved, there must be, first and foremost, genuine
and strong political will on the part of all stakeholders,
from within and outside Somalia. Allocating time to,
and pouring finite resources into, addressing this issue
has been the main choice in the context of our work.
Unfortunately, however, little headway has been
achieved.

The Council might also need to reflect on its
fundamental approach and see if it might have
overlooked key aspects of the peace process, which has
fallen short in terms of bringing tangible results. The
report recommended that the constitution-drafting
2
process be inclusive and meet the targets for the
political transition. We support that approach, but the
constitution should also reflect the wishes of society
and the stakeholders, as well as the cultural diversity of
the country.

Indonesia is deeply concerned for the security
and well-being of the Somali people. The humanitarian
crisis, worsened by the current drought, has caused
additional suffering for the population, a large part of
which is already internally displaced. It is also a matter
of concern that, along with the threats to human life
inside Somalia, including terrorism, the threats off its
coast remain very serious. The internal conflict
demands strong local institutions that can cope with the
fundamental challenges of governing a country as large
and diverse as Somalia. Building effective local
institutions is crucial to establishing a viable and
peaceful Somalia. Through that avenue, we can see the
Government regain its foothold in the country.

We share the view that the issue of piracy off the
coast of Somalia is not a stand-alone problem. It is an
extension of the continuing instability in Somalia. But
the issue of piracy, which has vast implications beyond
the country's territory, should also not be seen through
the single prism of security. We must accept the fact
that many people who become pirates are economically
marginalized and have no viable alternative. Therefore,
while we are grateful to the Secretary-General for the
report, we also look forward to receiving a
comprehensive report that will also elaborate the
economic difficulties faced by society. Deploying
troops and naval armadas would be a solution, but it
would be a short-term solution. A comprehensive one
would have to include ways to find alternative
livelihoods for pirates.

Indonesia commends the leading role played by
the African Union in deploying its Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) and lauds its troop- and police-
contributing countries. Like other peacekeeping
operations authorized by the Security Council,
AMISOM. should be provided with the needed
resources and equipment in an adequate and
predictable fashion. The Security Council should find
ways and means to address this precarious
circumstance. It has to act with resoluteness. AMISOM
should become the nucleus of a future United Nations
peacekeeping force in Somalia. The implementation of
the incremental approach must therefore be supported.
AMISOM. acts on our behalf. It is the duty of the
11-25878
international community, in particular the Security
Council, to fulfil its commitment to AMISOM. We
need to respond positively to the calls of the African
Union.

In closing, I wish to commend the work of the
personnel of the United Nations, the African Union,
humanitarian organizations and other partners who
have persevered and continued their work in Somalia
despite adverse security conditions. Let me also
underline that it is presently the responsibility of the
Transitional Federal Government to steer Somalia
through its wide-ranging challenges, now and not later.
Somalia, with the support of the international
community, must continue charting its path to peace,
security, democracy and prosperity in full consonance
with the wishes of the Somali citizens.

