Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to Mr. Abe for having
introduced the report of the Secretary-General on small
arms. The conclusions and recommendations in the
report confirm that the United Nations must, and
indeed is, playing a lead role in the implementation of
a comprehensive approach in this area. The Russian
Federation has spoken out consistently in favour of
enhancing the Organization's coordinating role in
tackling the illicit trafficking in small arms and light
weapons. Preventing the illegal spread of those
weapons is becoming particularly urgent in the context
of counter-terrorism and dealing with the consequences
of armed conflict.

A number of important events have recently taken
place that prove that the international community has
great capacity to combat the illicit trafficking in small
arms. In accordance with General Assembly resolutions
adopted in December 2003 and December 2004 on the
illicit trafficking in all its aspects, there were two
meetings of the Open-ended Working Group that is
developing an international instrument to enable States to
identify and trace illicit small arms and light weapons in a
timely and reliable manner. The draft instrument on that
matter quite rightly emphasizes such key areas as
weapons-marking, record-keeping and increasing
international cooperation in that area. The creation of a
comprehensive monitoring mechanism should provide
an effective barrier to the illegal trafficking in small
arms and light weapons throughout the world.

We attach great importance to the second meeting
of States planned for July 2005 to consider the
national, regional and global implementation of the
United Nations Programme on the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons. We believe that event
will make it possible to take stock of the
implementation by States of the Programme of Action
and to highlight existing problems on the eve of the
2006 United Nations conference to review the progress
made in implementation of the Programme of Action.
We are convinced that the bulk of the work in this area
should continue to be done in the format indicated.

The Security Council has on several occasions
discussed the problem of the illegal trafficking in small
arms and light weapons as it relates to conflict
situations on the Council's agenda. The Council's
comprehensive discussion in January 2005 was very
useful and timely with regard to resolving complex
problems related to maintaining and restoring
international peace and security in Africa, particularly
in West Africa.

The Russian Federation favours the adoption of
decisive and effective steps in cases in which weapons
are delivered to illegal armed groups. The experience
gained in the implementation of embargoes on the
transfer of arms to zones of conflict confirms the
effectiveness of the measures taken by the Security
Council. However, a top priority continues to be the
monitoring of compliance with the Council's bans on
the delivery of weapons and the enhancement of the
effectiveness of monitoring mechanism to investigate
cases of embargo violations.

In the context of peacekeeping operations under
the aegis of the United Nations - and this is a point
referred to in the Secretary-General's report - greater
attention has recently been given to the subject of the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
of ex-combatants, including with regard to the
mandates for peacekeeping operations and, in close
cooperation with parties to a conflict, the collection of
illegal small arms and light weapons and disrupting
their distribution. The support of donors for DDR
programmes is an important element in the success of
such programmes.

Experience in the area of resolving conflict
situations convincingly shows that there is a direct link
between the illegal trafficking in small arms and light
weapons and the activities of illegal armed groups, the
involvement of child soldiers in conflict, massive
violations of human rights and the rules of
international humanitarian law, and transborder crime.
The need to prevent small arms and light weapons from
falling into the hands of terrorists is becoming
increasingly clear, in particular with regard to the most
dangerous types of small arms and light weapons.

We believe it important to continue to pay special
attention to specific and feasible measures to combat
the illegal trade in small arms and light weapons at
both the prevention stage and during the post-conflict
phase. Accordingly, the experience of regional
organizations is both very timely and useful.

In conclusion, I would like to express my
gratitude to the representative of Japan for his
preparation of the draft presidential statement that we
will adopt later today.
