Mr. Schwaiger: Like others before me, may I
first pay tribute to the late United States Special Envoy
for Afghanistan and Pakistan, Richard Holbrooke.
European Union High Representative Catherine Ashton
has praised him as a remarkable man, a true diplomat
and a champion of peace and reconciliation.

The candidate countries Croatia and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia; the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia; the European Free Trade
Association country Norway, member of the European
Economic Area; as well as Ukraine, the Republic of
Moldova and Georgia align themselves with this
declaration. I will shorten my statement somewhat, but
I refer interested parties to the full written version
distributed.

Let me first join others in expressing our support
for the Secretary-General's report (S/2010/630) on the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and in thanking Special Representative
Staffan de Mistura and his team for their determination
and the important work they carry out on the ground,
under difficult circumstances. I also thank Ambassador
Tanin for his statement.

The Afghan Government, supported by the
international community, is embarking on a crucial
period of transition in which strong leadership will be
essential to making the necessary tangible progress in
the fields of security, governance, justice and
reconciliation, and socio-economic development. The
European Union hopes that new political momentum
for reform and implementation can be generated now
that the electoral process has been completed. We again
pay tribute to millions of Afghan women and men who
exercised their right to vote in the face of many serious
security incidents.

Like the Secretary-General, we would like not
only to commend the Afghan electoral institutions for
their integrity and intense efforts to investigate and
address fraud and other irregularities, but also to
underline the need for long-term electoral reform,
which should start as soon as possible. The European
Union took a lead role in supporting the electoral
process over the last years and remains strongly
committed to assisting with the reform of the electoral
process and institutions, in close cooperation with
UNAMA and UNDP/ELECT. The European Union
generally believes that more checks and balances in the
political system would serve to enhance its credibility,
legitimacy and inclusiveness, as well as its efficiency
and accountability.

The continuing deterioration of the security
situation and the high number of civilian casualties
caused by anti-Government elements are of utmost
concern to the European Union. We are particularly
worried about targeted attacks against the civilian
population, Government officials and international staff
in Afghanistan. In light of that, we welcome progress
made in the build-up of both the Afghan National Army
and Police, and also the mitigating measures taken to
prevent casualties among United Nations staff.

We all know that there can be no sustainable
transition of security responsibility without a civilian
framework for stability that makes the country
functioning and secure. Better governance, access to
basic services, justice, rule of law and human rights are
just as important as "hard security" and thus already a
focus of EU assistance. The EU will henceforth
reinforce its efforts in strengthening Afghan capacity
and will work with the Afghan Government to foster
effective and accountable State institutions, especially
at the subnational level, with appropriate institutional
links between the centre and the provinces. We will put
even more emphasis on promoting the rule of law,
civilian policing - both through the European Union
Police Mission in Afghanistan and the continued
support for police salaries - and civil service reform.

This year's international conferences have
defined the framework for transition and development
so that the focus can now be on implementation and
delivery. The EU is pleased to see the Kabul process
gain momentum and commends that, in November, the
Government could present a first 100-day progress
report on the implementation of the London and Kabul
conference commitments, as well as a monitoring and
reporting framework. That speaks to its growing ability
to take ownership and responsibility. We would like to
emphasize in this context that tangible development
gains are necessary on provincial, district and local
levels.

The EU, for its part, is on track regarding the
commitment to align with Government priorities and to
channel more assistance through Afghan Government
structures and multi-donor trust funds. At the same
time, in the spirit of mutual commitments, we hold the

Government to its undertakings and urge progress in
combating corruption and strengthening financial
management. In light of that, the EU welcomes steps to
further strengthen the Joint Coordination and
Monitoring Board in its support role for the Kabul
process.

The European Union commends the Government
of Afghanistan for the work done in the area of peace
and reconciliation. The establishment of the High
Peace Council was an important development in that
respect. We welcome the diversity of representatives
but could still see greater scope for the participation of
women and minorities, the inclusion of civil society
and the integration of considerations of human rights,
truth and justice into the process. As Security Council
resolution 1325 (2000) on women, peace and security
recognizes, women can and should play an important
role in peace processes.

The EU will continue to back an Afghan-led,
inclusive and transparent peace and reconciliation
process and commends the role played by UNAMA,
including through the Salaam Support Group. We fully
subscribe to the Secretary-General's assertion that any
political settlement must respect the Afghan
Constitution and Afghanistan's international
commitments, including human rights. It must not
undermine the achievements made in recent years. We
also encourage the regional actors to play a supportive
role.

The situation in Afghanistan continues to concern
the whole world and remains a key priority for the
European Union. Just last week, High Representative
Ashton addressed European parliamentarians and
citizens to confirm that the EU's commitment is for the
long term, and as the Council knows, it is very
substantial. We call on everyone to make their
contribution to a better, more secure and prosperous
future for the people of Afghanistan.

