Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation thanks you,
Sir, for having convened this meeting, which provides
an opportunity to discuss strengthening the partnership
between the African Union and the United Nations with
respect to the strengthening ofpeacekeeping operations.

We thank the Secretary-General for his briefing
and for his leadership on this crucial issue. We are
also grateful to Mr. Smai'l Chergui, African Union
Commissioner for Peace and Security, for his briefing.

My delegation would also like to align itself with
the statement to be delivered by the representative
of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.

Bolivia reaffirms the importance of continuing to
improve cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union. We underscore the responsibility of
the international community to make that relationship
effective so as to reach a common understanding of the
root causes of conflict.

In that regard, we welcome the signing of the
United Nations-African Union joint framework for
the implementation of Agenda 2063 and the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. That agreement
lays the groundwork for a systematic and strategic
partnership based on the principles of mutual respect
and comparative advantages. We also welcome the
efforts devoted to reaching the goal of silencing the
guns by 2020.

We believe it is necessary to deepen the integration
of activities related to peacekeeping and peacebuilding,
and to strengthen and enhance dialogue and cooperation
and coordination mechanisms with a View to achieving
the overarching goal of overcoming challenges to peace
and security facing both organizations, which include
joint strategies related to demobilization, disarmament
and reintegration, as well as conflict prevention and
prioritizing leadership and participation by women and
young people on peace and security issues.

We also commend the signing of the memorandum
of understanding between the two organizations, which
will improve capacities to fight terrorism and prevent
violent extremism, factors that continue to hamper
peacebuilding and development in Africa.

With regard to cooperation and coordination
mechanisms, a noteworthy example is the deployment of
joint and hybrid operations, which constitute a key tool
in the ongoing quest for peace, security and resilience.
They are also a useful tool for fighting threats such as
terrorism, transnational crime and humanitarian crises.

Bolivia likewise underscores the increasing level
of strategic partnership and commitment between the
Security Council of the United Nations and the African
Union Peace and Security Council in building a
structured and equitable relationship. That partnership
must be strengthened on the basis of mutual support
and continuous technical assistance, both for political
issues and for peacekeeping operations.

We also believe that we should continue exploring
the different modalities for partnership, support and
assistance to African Union operations, in accordance
with resolutions 2320 (2016) and 2378 (2017). In that
context, Bolivia fully supports the initiative of the three
African members of the Security Council regarding
the draft resolution on the financing of African Union
peace-support operations, which we are convinced will
contribute to consolidating predictable, sustainable and
flexible budgets and to strengthening the mobilization
of the international community when it comes to
providing the financial support needed to enhance
African capacities in the area of peace and security.

Moreover, Bolivia once again reaffirms its full
support for the subregional and regional architecture
for conflict resolution in Africa. African solutions for
African problems are essential given the nature of the
African Vision and its recommendations: Africans
themselves possess a deeper understanding of their
own reality.

In conclusion, Bolivia believes it is crucial to
grant a greater leadership role to the African Union
in decision-making on matters that concern it in full
respect for the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of all its member countries.

