The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of the
Russian Federation.

I too should like to thank Ms. Bensouda for
introducing her nineteenth report to the Security
Council and for today's briefing. We are seriously
concerned about the deterioration of the security
situation in Darfur, given the instensification of
insurgent fighting. Just in the first three months of
this year, as a result of incursions of the Sudanese
Liberation Army/Minni Minawi, 135,000 civilians
were forcibly displaced. Also troubling is the escalation
of skirmishes among different tribes as competition
for resources has tightened. Against that backdrop, we
note the robust efforts of the Sudanese Government
to reconcile warring parties and prevent the spread of
intercommunal violence.

The pressing humanitarian issues, including that
of refugees and internally displaced persons, can be
resolved by normalizing the military-political situation
in the region. Furthermore, improving the situation will
depend to a great extent on the timely implementation
of the decision taken at last year's Doha conference to
allocate $1 billion to the development needs of Darfur,
and on the easing of the debt burden and the lifting of
the economic sanctions against the Sudan levied by the
United States in circumvention of the Security Council.

Of key importance is the further implementation
of the political settlement on the basis of the 2011
Doha Agreement and the recent Government-launched
national dialogue. We are convinced that the rebels in
Darfur must ultimatelyjoin this parallel process without
precondition. In that context, it is high time to reflect
on applying sanctions against intractable insurgents,
as provided for in the Security Council's resolutions.
We could begin with the leaders responsible for the
killing last year of leaders of the Justice and Equality
Movement faction, who had earlier joined the Doha
peace process.

Russia supports the efforts of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) to investigate the situation
in Darfur, pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005). In the
general political context, the information confirmed
in the ICC Prosecutor's report regarding unabated
violence in Darfur is of serious concern to the Council.
In that regard, we call on the Court to objectively
assess criminal acts perpetrated by all sides in the
recent clashes. The activities of the Court to fulfil its
mandate to investigate the situation in Darfur cannot
be disconnected from general efforts to normalize the
situation in that troubled Sudanese province. A delicate
balance must also be struck between the interests of
reconciliation and justice.

We take note of the Prosecutor's observations
regarding the cooperation of States with the International
Criminal Court in the framework of the Darfur dossier.
The situation in that regard demonstrates once again
the importance of States' support to the successful
functioning of the Court. When assessing the extent
of a country's compliance with its relevant obligations,
we should take into account that there can be varying
degrees of compliance in each specific case.

In regard to the Security Council's appeals for
so-called follow-up activities in referring cases to
the ICC, our position has not changed. We believe
that proposals should be considered on the basis of
their practical suitability, taking into account the
Council's purview, the ICC's mandate and the general
international legal context. Neither the Rome Statute
nor the agreements struck between the United Nations
and the ICC stipulate automatic actions in response
to such situations. Moreover, we see no added value
to such measures at present. In particular, as is well
known, serious concerns regarding the application of
the Rome Statute to acting Heads of State have been
raised by by the African Union. In our view, issues
relating to the functions of the Rome Statue should not
be resolved in the Council.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

There are no more names inscribed on my list of
speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded
the present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 11.40 am.
