The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now set
aside my functions as President of the Security Council
and make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of Mexico.

On behalf of Mexico, I thank Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy for her introduction of the annual
report of the Secretary-General on children and armed
conflict (S/2009/158).

It is clear that, in spite of the progress that has
been made, children continue to be direct and
defenceless victims of armed conflicts, and that we
must intensify our efforts to change that situation.
Mexico upholds the principle of the best interests of
the child and considers that the international
community must redouble its efforts to provide broad
and effective protection to children affected by armed
conflict.

The Security Council Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict has worked hard, initially under
French and now under Mexican leadership, to ensure
that all parties involved in a dispute respect the rights
that are unambiguously guaranteed under the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and its Optional
Protocols.

We condemn all acts that jeopardize the integrity
of children, such as attacks against schools; the
recruitment or use of child soldiers; rape and other
sexual violence, which affects girls in particular;
abduction; denial of humanitarian access; maiming;
and, of course, killing.

For us, it is clear that violations of the norms of
international humanitarian law are international crimes.
We therefore consider that the work of the International
Criminal Court in the case against Thomas Lubanga
Dyilo, who is accused of conscripting and enlisting
children under the age of 15 and using them in
hostilities, underlines the importance of fighting
impunity for those who violate the human rights of
persons as vulnerable as children and who violate
international humanitarian law. There are millions of
children in situations of armed conflict who are
subjected to systematic violations of their rights, a
situation that demands that we act with extreme
urgency.

As a State party to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child and its Optional Protocols, and above all
as a State that is aware of its responsibility as a
member of the international community, Mexico
invites the States that have not yet done so to ratify
those and other instruments aimed at protecting those
who today are affected by the scourge of war,
exploitation, violence and abuse.

Mexico recognizes the important work of United
Nations agencies and programmes, in particular
UNICEF, and the International Committee of the Red
Cross, as well as the extraordinary efforts of civil
society organizations and individuals who, selflessly
and often at the cost of their own lives, work every day
to help children affected by armed conflict.

The Security Council has the primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security. On that basis, Mexico calls on the Security
Council, within the framework of its mandate, to
continue addressing the repercussions of armed
conflict on children and to promote specific actions
aimed at fulfilling the recommendations of the
Working Group, including imposing sanctions on the
parties in conflict.

As Chairman of the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict, Mexico will promote actions to
put an end to the atrocities committed against children,
with particular attention to refugees; displaced,
separated and kidnapped children; those affected by
AIDS/HIV; the disabled; and those subject to sexual
exploitation and detention, as well as to address the
consequences of the trafficking of weapons, anti-
personnel mines and other types of munition on the
lives and future of children.

Mexico calls on the international community to
strengthen its efforts to protect children, in particular,
first, to slow their recruitment and prevent their
reincorporation into armed groups; secondly, to
guarantee humanitarian access in every situation;
thirdly, to contribute to children's physical protection
by preventing their maiming as a result of landmines
and the proliferation of arms; fourthly, to cooperate
with and assist States that suffer the consequences of
armed conflict in order to strengthen or establish
programmes for the disarmament, demobilization,
rehabilitation and reintegration of child soldiers into
their communities and families; and fifthly, to promote
assistance, with due consideration for age and gender,
that includes health care, psychological support and
education, always taking into consideration the well-
being of children.

I wish once again to thank all the members of the
Security Council for their confidence in and support
for Mexico in its chairmanship of the Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict, and to reiterate my
country's commitment to this issue.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now call on the representative of the
Philippines.
