The Secretary-General: We meet at a time of
historic and often inspirational change in the Middle
East and North Africa. Several momentous transitions
in the Arab World are under way, moving ahead with
difficulty but in the clear direction of the freedoms that
had been denied for so long.Yet, as old orders crumble
and new ones struggle to emerge, this is also a time of
widespread apprehension and tragic violence.

The peace process between Israelis and Palestinians
remains stalemated, as the window for a two-State
solution narrows dangerously. The League of Arab
States Arab Peace Initiative remains an important
part of the framework aimed at ending the occupation
and achieving a long overdue agreement. I count on
the continued generosity of the League's members
in providing financial support for the Palestinian
Authority and the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East at this
time of need. I urge members and other members of the
international community to do more in both regards.

In Syria the conflict has become a threat to regional
and international peace and security. A human tragedy
is unfolding in full View, but also in the darkness of
prisons, under the rubble of entire neighbourhoods and
in the traumatized minds of children. I appeal to all
with influence to persuade the parties that there is no
military solution to this crisis.

Tensions in the region are also inflamed over
nuclear issues. Members of the Council should do
their part to discourage any escalation and to insist
on peaceful solutions that respect the United Nations
Charter and international law.

There has also been unrest linked to an act of
hatred towards one religion that has caused both
understandable offence and unacceptable violence.

Against that complex backdrop, I welcome this
high-level discussion on the partnership between the
League and the Council.

Chapter VIII of the United Nations Charter
provides vast opportunities for regional organizations.
The Security Council long ago recognized the vital role
they can play in consolidating peace agreements and
enhancing peace and stability.

With a new political era at hand in the Arab world,
the Arab League has acquired a new sense of purpose.
The League was among the first organizations to
publicly acknowledge that the Tunisian revolution
was rooted in economic and social disparities and the
aspiration for greater freedom and justice. The League
was also among the first organizations to condemn the
atrocities committed by the former Libyan regime and
to urge the international community to take action.

Both the United Nations and the League worked
to help ensure the transparency of landmark elections
in Tunisia and Libya. Our joint role has been most
prominent in Syria. Members of the Arab League
made significant contributions to the United Nations
military observer Mission. Of course, we together
appointed, first, Joint Special Envoy Kofi Annan and,
subsequently, Special Representative Lakhdar Brahimi,
as our emissaries in the search for a political solution.
Those mediation efforts need solid and concrete support
from the Council.

Looking ahead, I see four areas that merit special
attention.

First, let us improve the exchange of information.
Dialogue between our secretariats should be focused
and frequent. Another avenue for enhanced contacts
may prove to be the placement of the Office of the
Joint Special Representative for Syria and his deputy in
Cairo - a possibility that is being explored.

Secondly, we should put conflict prevention at the
centre of our agenda. The United Nations continues to
strengthen its ability to act early while helping regional
organizations build capacity for facilitation, mediation
and dialogue.

Thirdly, let us explore new areas for collaboration.
The Middle East holds vastpotential for the development
of sustainable energy; let us explore what more we
can do in the context of my Sustainable Energy for
All initiative. Our relationship need not be limited to
political action on the immediate crises of the day.
Fourthly, let us ensure the success of the transitions
that have been set in motion. We must continue to
be ready to provide concrete assistance, if and when
requested. Outsiders can share their experience
and encourage progress - humbly, patiently and
respectfully - but the major work has to be done by,
and in each, society.

At this tumultuous time for the Arab region, people
are looking to our organizations to be on their side in
the fight forjustice, dignity and opportunity.

The League ofArab States is a trusted partner ofthe
United Nations. I look forward to working even more
closely with the League to realize the aspirations of
people across the arc ofthe United Nations membership.

