At the outset, allow me to thank Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix and Special Envoy Parfait Onanga-Anyanga for their insightful briefings. Viet Nam would like to commend and express our support for the work of the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) and the Special Envoy. I also welcome the participation of the Permanent Representatives of the Sudan and of Ethiopia in our meeting today. Viet Nam is closely following the situation in the Sudan and South Sudan and strongly welcomes the recent progress made in the political and security spheres of both countries as well as in the relations between them. We believe these achievements can create important momentum for both sides to actively engage in addressing the Abyei issue. We are pleased to see that, according to the most recent report on the topic (S/2020/308), Abyei has become more stable and secure. However, the security situation in Abyei remains fragile due to increasing intercommunal violence, crime and the presence of armed elements. We are also concerned about the threat of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) in Abyei, as the Sudan, South Sudan and many countries in the region have reported confirmed cases. I would like to emphasize the following five points. First, we underline the importance of a timely and appropriate resolution of the issue of Abyei, which we believe is of vital importance to the peace, security and stability of the Sudan, South Sudan and the region. In this regard, we call on the Sudan and South Sudan to resolve the issue at any early date through peaceful means, in accordance with international law, the Charter of the United Nations and the agreement between the Government of Sudan and the Sudan People's Liberation Movement on temporary arrangements for the administration and security of the Abyei Area, of 20 June 2011. At the same time, the Security Council should continue to take into full account the views of the two sides on this issue. Viet Nam warmly welcomes the efforts of UNISFA aimed at promoting cooperation and dialogue between the Sudan and South Sudan. We acknowledge UNISFA's robust support for the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism and note that progress has been made on the benchmarks of resolution 2497 (2019). We are also aware of the challenges posed by COVID-19 to this process and encourage UNISFA to continue to support both countries in conducting dialogue via remote means. Secondly, while the final solution to Abyei is still pending, it is important to ensure security and sustainable livelihoods for the people in the Area, given the increasing impact of climate change and the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic. The presence of UNISFA has been essential to maintaining stability in Abyei. Viet Nam calls on the Governments of both the Sudan and South Sudan to continue to support UNISFA in carrying out its mandate, as well as to support the appointment of a civilian deputy head of mission and the establishment of the Abyei police service, as recommended by the Secretary-General. Cooperation between both Governments and UNISFA in combating COVID-19 should also be strengthened. Thirdly, we highlight the role of the regional and subregional organizations, namely, the African Union (AU) and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD), in supporting the resolution of the Abyei issue. We also commend the role of neighbouring countries, especially Ethiopia, for their vital contributions to UNISFA. Further cooperation between the United Nations and regional actors will provide synergy to help the Sudan and South Sudan resolve their outstanding issues. Fourthly, with regard to the mandate of the mission, Viet Nam supports its extension, as recommended by the Secretary-General in his report. We look forward to working with Council members on the renewal of the UNISFA mandate in the coming weeks. We believe it is important also to take into consideration the views of the Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan, the AU, IGAD and troop- contributing countries in this matter. Fifthly, we would also like to commend the strong role of women in UNISFA, which we see as a strong example of female participation in United Nations peacekeeping. The current female-to-male ratio in UNISFA is 10.9 per cent, much higher than the average representation across all missions. This is a solid foundation for UNISFA to further strengthen its activities in promoting gender equality as well as the empowerment of women on the ground, which is already very commendable.
