Mr. Mladenov: I brief the Security Council
today as we continue to face a growing humanitarian,
security and political crisis in Gaza and the West Bank,
including East Jerusalem.

The prospect of sustainable peace is fading by the
day as the spectre ofviolence and radicalism grows. Our
efforts today focus on the immediate challenges, namely,
preventing the risk of an economic and humanitarian
implosion in the West Bank and Gaza and preserving
the hope, slim as it is, that Israelis and Palestinians
will be able to live in peace, side by side, in States of
their own that are recognized and integrated into the
global and regional community. We are working hard to
preserve that prospect as the viability of the two-State
solution is systematically eroded by the deteriorating
reality on the ground. The number of extremists is on
the rise again and the risk of war continues to loom
large. In order for Israelis and Palestinians to get back
on track towards a peaceful resolution of the conflict,
the first thing that is required is leadership that believes
that peace is possible through negotiations. It also
requires an international community that is committed
to supporting both parties in reaching agreement on
the basis of the relevant United Nations resolutions
and bilateral agreements and that understands that the
weaker party - the Palestinian people, who have lived
under occupation for more than 50 years - need our
support now more than ever. It should never be about
Israel or Palestine. It should always be about Israel
and Palestine.

Unfortunately, unilateral steps, continuing
violence, financial pressure and the lack of progress
towards peace are exacting a heavy toll on Palestinian
society and undermining the foundations of peace.
In 2018, the Palestinian Authority (PA) had a budget
deficit of approximately $1.04 billion, over 60 per cent
of which was covered by donor aid. That shortfall is
expected to increase in 2019 because of the withdrawal
of significant amounts ofdonor funding and a worsening
economic situation.

Earlier this week the Government of Israel decided
unilaterally to withhold approximately $140 million
in Palestinian tax revenue transfers. That decision is
the result of legislation adopted by the Knesset last
year that instructs the Israeli Government to withhold
money equivalent to the amount that the PA pays to
Palestinians convicted of involvement in terrorism or
other security-related offences by Israeli courts and to
their families.

Today the Palestinian leadership is meeting
to discuss its financial and political response to
that measure. These are very serious developments
that put at risk the financial stability of the Palestinian
Authority and, ultimately, the security of Israelis
and Palestinians alike. The Secretary-General has
repeatedly warned that unilateral moves undermine the
chances for peace.

The recent halting of United States assistance to
Palestinians may also impact ongoing efforts to bridge
existing divisions. The ending ofvital training, facilities
and equipment support could potentially risk security
coordination. I encourage ongoing efforts to ensure
that this crucial assistance is continued. The important
work being carried out by Civil society organizations
working towards peace is also under threat, and I hope
that donors will continue their support to civil society,
which serves a critical role in preserving the fraying
links between Israelis and Palestinians.

We also regret Israel's decision on 28 January not
to renew the mandate of the Temporary International
Presence in Hebron, established pursuant to the
provisions of the 1995 Interim Agreement on the
West Bank and the Gaza Strip - also known as the
Oslo II accord - between Israel and the Palestine
Liberation Organization (PLO). I echo the Secretary-
General's appreciation for their service and the
generous contribution of all participating countries
over the years. The United Nations continues to engage
with relevant Member States and the parties on the
ground to ensure the protection, safety and well-being
of civilians in Hebron and the rest of the occupied
Palestinian territory.

Alongside these worrying developments, and
despite the concerted efforts of Egypt to bring the
Palestinian factions together, recent Palestinian
political moves may further widen the growing divide
between the West Bank and Gaza. On 27 January, the
Fatah Central Committee recommended the formation
of a new Government comprising PLO factions and
independent figures. On 29 January, Prime Minister
Hamdallah's Cabinet submitted its resignation.
Consultations on the way forward continue, including
on holding long-overdue legislative elections. Hamas
and the other factions have called, instead, for the
formation of a Government of national unity with
the task of organizing legislative, presidential and
Palestinian National Council elections.

Elections conducted in line with Palestinian laws
and with established international democratic standards
throughout the occupied Palestinian territory may now
be the only way out of the current internal political
impasse. As the Palestinian political dynamics evolve
and as we drift further away from the realization of a
negotiated two-State solution, I again call on Israeli and
Palestinian leaders to recommit to the principles and
vision enshrined a quarter of a century ago in relevant
resolutions and bilateral agreements.

Last month (see S/PV.8449), I outlined some
steps that were necessary to support the stability
of the Palestinian Authority, including expanding
opportunities for free trade, addressing fiscal leakages,
enabling the Palestinian Government to increase
the services it provides to its people, and ensuring
continued security coordination. Such steps are not a
substitute for peace. They must be matched by political
moves, including an end to the policy of settlement
construction and expansion and the designation of
land for exclusive Israeli use, as well as creating
opportunities for Palestinian development in Area C.

In this context, I reiterate that settlements are
illegal under international law and remain a substantial
obstacle to peace. In the absence of final status
negotiations, however, such steps should significantly
support Palestinian institution-building and improve
lives. The United Nations, together with our partners
in the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination
of International Assistance to Palestinians (AHLC)
format, will continue working to create an environment
conducive to such developments.

Meanwhile, in Gaza and the West Bank, including
East Jerusalem, 11 Palestinians were killed during
the reporting period by the Israeli security forces in
various incidents, including attacks on Israeli Civilians,
demonstrations, clashes and military operations. On
7 February, an Israeli teenager was murdered in a park
outside Jerusalem by a Palestinian perpetrator, who
was later arrested by Israeli security forces. There is no
justification for violence and terror.

Meanwhile protests and violent incidents at
the Gaza fence continued, with seven Palestinians,
including three children, killed by Israeli live fire on
8 February. This brings to 40 the number of children
killed in the context of Gaza protests since they began
in March 2018. Children must not be targeted or put
in harm's way. They must be protected. Lethal force
should be used only as a last resort.

During the reporting period, Palestinian militants
fired 18 rockets towards Israel. The indiscriminate
launching of rockets, mortars and incendiary kites or
balloons from Gaza must stop. Hamas must ensure that
protests remain peaceful and prevent provocations near
the fence, including attempts to breach it.

In the West Bank this past month, Israeli forces
killed four Palestinians, including two children.
Demolitions and seizures of Palestinian-owned
structures also continued across the occupied West
Bank, including East Jerusalem. Thirty-nine structures
were demolished or seized by the authorities or by their
owners upon receipt of a demolition order, resulting
in the displacement of some 70 people. Overall, some
200 Palestinian households in East Jerusalem have
eviction cases filed against them, mostly by Israeli
settler organizations, placing some 900 people at risk
of displacement.

The upsurge in settler violence over the past
year continues to be a serious concern. During the
reporting period, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs recorded 20 incidents in which
Israeli settlers injured Palestinians or damaged their
property. On 26 January, armed Israeli settlers entered
Al-Mughayyir village near Ramallah, where they
attacked Palestinian residents. Ensuing clashes, also
involving the Israel Defense Forces (IDF), resulted in
the killing of a 38-year-old Palestinian man and the
injury of 15 others.

For years, we have described the situation facing
the population and focused on the urgency of providing
Palestinians confined within Gaza's boundaries with
the means to live a dignified life and to have hope for
the future. Hamas's continuing control of Gaza, Israel's
severe movement and access restrictions, and the
Palestinian Authority's restrictive measures are pushing
the situation to a breaking point. The militant build-up
continues as the risk of ever-more radical and extremist
groups pushing both sides into war grows by the day.
With the prospects of intra-Palestinian reconciliation
dimming, the people of Gaza feel more and more left to
their own devices, with no representation, no relief and
no way out. On 5 February, the PA paid its employees
in Gaza reduced salaries for the month of January
and reportedly over 5,000 employees did not receive
salaries or other payments due.

Despite the difficulties, the United Nations
continues its efforts to implement the package of urgent
humanitarian and economic interventions in Gaza
called for at the September AHLC meeting. The State of
Qatar has donated an additional $20 million to expand
United Nations cash-for-work programming in Gaza.
This will create some 10,000 new temporary jobs. The
World Bank has also launched its $l7-million cash-for-
work programme, which will create an additional 5,000
temporary jobs.

Job creation is critical to the stabilization of Gaza's
economy. However, all our efforts that we are currently
undertaking are short- to medium-term only. Ultimately,
only sustainable political solutions - including
reuniting Gaza and the West Bank under a single,
democratic and legitimate Palestinian Government
and ending the closures of the Strip - will genuinely
change the current course. I welcome the tireless efforts
of Egypt to continue dialogue with Palestinian factions
with the aim of maintaining stability in Gaza and
achieving genuine reconciliation. I urge all parties to
remain engaged in this critical effort.

Turning very briefly to the region, recent incidents
that occurred on the Golan, heightening tensions
between Israel and Syria, are also of concern. On
11 February, the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force observed, in several separate incidents,
the Israel Defense Forces firing tank and high-explosive
rounds into the area of separation, which was followed

by three rockets being fired into a different part of the
area of separation. These developments undermine
the 1974 Disengagement of Forces Agreement and
jeopardize the long-standing ceasefire between Israel
and Syria.

Lebanon, meanwhile, formed a Government
on 31 January, almost nine months after the last
Parliamentary elections. The Cabinet adopted a
ministerial statement that laid out a Wide-ranging
economic reform agenda. This was followed by a vote of
confidence on 15 February, for which the Government
gained majority support of 111 out of 128 votes.

The situation in southern Lebanon and along the
Blue Line remained generally calm, and on 13 February
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
facilitated the second tripartite meeting of this year.
UNIFIL has also requested to visit and independently
verify the sixth tunnel that the IDF discovered in
January, but has yet to receive a date for an assessment.

In closing, I have repeatedly raised the alarm on the
dangerous trajectory of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
The United Nations and its partners have provided
a series of recommendations that, if implemented
effectively, would begin to establish an environment
that is conducive to a return to negotiations. We
have advocated for a strengthened commitment to
bilateral agreements; we are implementing a series of
humanitarian interventions aiming at stabilizing Gaza,
supporting Palestinian reconciliation and ultimately
lifting the closures; and we have continued to stress
that the recommendations of the 2016 Quartet report
(S/2016/595, annex) remain deeply relevant.

What is needed, first and foremost, is the necessary
leadership and political will for change. Until that can
be found, Palestinians and Israelis will continue to slide
into increasingly hazardous territory.

