Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): We
would like to thank Ms. Sanda Raskovic-Ivic,
President of the Coordination Centre of the Republic of
Serbia for Kosovo and Metohija, for her statement. We
also welcome the presence among us this morning of
the Prime Minister of Kosovo.

We congratulate the new Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Joachim Rucker, and
thank him for his briefing today. My delegation
pledges its support and cooperation to him and wishes
him a successful tenure of office. We are also grateful
to the former Special Representative, Mr. Soren J essen-
Petersen, for his dedicated service, diplomatic skill and
tireless efforts at the head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
during the past two years.

Tanzania is encouraged by the stage reached in
the future status process for Kosovo. We reaffirm our
confidence in the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Martti Ahtisaari, and commend him for
conducting the high-level meeting in Vienna on 24 July
bringing together the President and Prime Minister of
the Republic of Serbia and the President and the Prime
Minister of Kosovo. The fact that such high-power
delegations were able to meet is in itself a remarkable
achievement, despite the persisting differences. We
encourage them to persevere on the path of dialogue to
determine the future status of Kosovo.

While acknowledging the distance between their
stated positions on substantial autonomy versus full
independence, we urge them nonetheless to show more
flexibility and compromise so as to narrow down their
differences and find common ground, in the interests of
a peaceful and sustainable solution to the status of
Kosovo.

My delegation is pleased to note the progress
made on the implementation of standards by the
Kosovo authorities and the adoption of the European
Partnership Action Plan, which replaces the 2004
Kosovo Standards Implementation Plan. This is yet
another display of the commitment of the Government
of Kosovo to the political process. We encourage it to
continue with standards implementation in parallel
with the talks on the future status. The implementation
adds confidence and momentum to the talks.

We have also noted the shift of the
decentralization process from Pristina to the future
status process. This change should bring a fresh
impetus to the decentralization issue, which is also
crucial to the whole peace process in Kosovo.

The question of the inclusion of the Serb minority
in both the future status talks and the Kosovo
Institutions remains a stumbling block to a true multi-
ethnic, multicultural society. It is imperative that the
Serb minority fully participate in both. We reiterate our
call to the Republic of Serbia to encourage it to take
part in the process and to the Kosovo leadership to step
up its effort to reach out to the minority groups. Both
sides should promote initiatives that will enhance
mutual trust, tolerance and coexistence.

In the same vein, efforts should also be geared
towards creating an environment more favourable for
returnees. In this regard, we welcome the signing, in
Pristina on 6 June by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Belgrade and Pristina
representatives, of the Protocol on Voluntary and
Sustainable Returns, which had an immediate impact
on some returnees. However, many more are still
reluctant to return, owing to economic and security
factors. We appeal to donors and to the international
community as a whole to provide the required funding
to encourage the voluntary smooth return and
reintegration of refugees, returnees and internally
displaced persons, including restitution and
compensation relating to property claims.

With regard to the security situation, the
Secretary-General's report (S/2006/707) states that it
remains stable but fragile. We commend KFOR,
UNMIK and the Kosovo Police Service for taking
measures to enhance security throughout Kosovo.
However, we are concerned about incidents that have
led to breaches of security, especially those targeting
individuals and religious sites. The reported increased
vandalism against Serbian Orthodox churches is
deplorable and must be stopped forthwith. We support
the efforts of the Kosovo police to increase security at
such sites.

In conclusion, we pay tribute to UNMIK, the
European Union, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, the United Nations family in
Kosovo and other funding organizations for their
coordinated efforts and their contribution to the peace
process in Kosovo.

