Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): Ijoin the delegations that took the
floor before me in thanking you, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting and in welcoming the presence
of Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix and thanking him for the
detailed information he has just given us on the most
recent developments concerning the current tense
situation near the Blue Line.

In view of the confirmation by the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) of the existence
of tunnels south of the Blue Line and the launching
of a large-scale military operation announced by the
Israeli armed forces with the aim of destroying several
tunnels dug from Lebanon to Israel, the Government
of Equatorial Guinea expresses its deep concern about
overall stability in the region.

The attribution by the Israeli Defense Forces of
the excavation of the tunnels to Hizbullah has sounded
the drums of war in Upper Galilee. Tensions are
increasing and with them the risk of a miscalculation
that could turn into a confrontation between the patrols
of the Lebanese army and the Israeli Defense Forces,
which are already squaring off against one another in
those areas.
Bearing in mind that the tunnels discovered were
excavated from homes in Lebanese villages and that, if
the genuine intention of their perpetrators was allegedly
to use them to infiltrate Israel and launch offensives
against the opposing party, the tunnels clearly pose a
threat to the security of both the Israeli and Lebanese
civilian populations and constitute a flagrant violation
of resolution 1701 (2006), which calls on the parties
to uphold a permanent ceasefire along the Blue Line.
In that context, my delegation wishes to stress the
importance of ensuring stability on the border and the
region in strict compliance with resolution 1701 (2006)
and in coordination of UNIFIL.

We commend the Head of Mission and Force
Commander of UNIFIL, Major General Stefano Del
Col, on his efforts. He has maintained contact with
both sides at the highest level to maintain clear and
credible channels of communication in order to avoid
misunderstandings on this sensitive issue. We again
urge the Lebanese and Israeli authorities to prioritize
their close cooperation with UNIFIL and to use the
latter's liaison, coordination and tripartite mechanisms
to reduce tension.
The responsibility for the security and well-being
of the people on both sides of the Blue Line ultimately
rests with the Governments of Israel and Lebanon. That
is why we believe that, before resorting to force, the
priority must be to preserve calm and stability in the
region. As has been underscored, the ongoing relative
calm that has prevailed along the Blue Line since 2006
is a positive development. Therefore, the continued
commitment of all parties to resolution 1701 (2006)
remains essential for maintaining stability in the
region. We also understand that Israel has the right to
legitimate defence.

The message bears repeating: The Government
of Equatorial Guinea wants Council members with
the capacity to influence the parties to become even
more involved in making decisive progress towards a
permanent ceasefire. That must be done by prioritizing
not only their interests in the region but ultimately
the well-being of the people, who often live under the
shadow of war or its looming threat.

In conclusion, this is our desire not only because
we are a member of the Security Council but also
because of our firm conviction that, through political
negotiation, the parties concerned can satisfactorily
resolve all the problems, including those relating to the
Israeli-Palestinian, Israeli-Syrian and Israeli-Lebanese
negotiations, in such a way that a comprehensive,
just and lasting peace can soon be achieved in the
Middle East.

