Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): Iwould like to thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Nicholas Haysom, and Ambassador Tanin for their
briefings. My delegation expresses its appreciation
for all the important work that the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the
United Nations family are doing in Afghanistan.

Lithuania aligns itself with the statement to be
made on behalf of the European Union (EU).

Afghanistan is continuing its difficult transformation
towards peace and self-reliance. The deaths, caused
by an improvised explosive device, on 21 June of
16 civilians who were returning to their village in the
Marja district of Helmand province, and the attempted
attack on the Afghan Parliament earlier today, which
injured 31 civilians, are only a few of the many
reminders of how dramatically challenging the situation
remains. We firmly condemn all such attacks. Faced
with these daunting challenges, it is essential that the
Afghan Government continue demonstrating its firm
determination to end the conflict and improve the lives
of its citizens.

We welcome the completion of the Cabinet
formation, which, due to the nature of the National
Unity Government, was a difficult yet absolutely
necessary event. We encourage Afghan leaders to
complete pending appointments of officials, including
in the justice sector and at the provincial level. The
new leaders have delivered on their promise to appoint
four women ministers. In addition, President Ghani has
nominated the first-ever female Supreme Court judge
in Afghanistan. I am sure that they will be a valuable
asset to the Government's work and will also have a
real impact on the promotion of women's rights across
the country.

It is crucial that the Unity Government create an
accountable, transparent and effective Government.
After decades of corruption and obscure dealings,
Afghanistan is in dire need of bold reforms. In that
regard, President Ghani's agenda, entitled "Realizing
self-reliance", as presented last year in London, is the
way forward. The President's initiatives on reviewing
Government revenues and spending, formulating 100-
day action plans for each ministry and establishing an
independent anti-corruption commission are certainly
steps in the right direction. It is crucial not to lose
momentum and to persevere in their implementation,
as such reforms will improve service delivery, increase
citizens' participation and strengthen their trust in
elected officials.

The need for progress on electoral reform deserves
a separate mention. While the establishment of the
Special Commission on Electoral Reform provided
a mechanism towards enhancing electoral integrity,
the Commission has yet to start its work. The current
mandate of the lower house of the National Assembly
expired and has been extended, but there is still no
electoral calendar. That must be urgently addressed,
along with the implementation of socioeconomic
policies and a development agenda. Counter-narcotics
policies should be promoted as well, including
through creating incentives for farmers to turn to legal
livelihoods.

At the same time, existing security concerns must
be addressed, since a continuing lack of security may
thwart progress in other areas. As the Secretary-
General's report (S/2015/422) shows, the number of
civilian casualties in the reporting period increased by
almost a quarter compared with that in 2014, continuing
the trend of record high numbers. Improvised explosive
devices remain the second leading cause of civilian
casualties.

The anti-Government elements' spring offensive
has been more intensive than the year before, with a
45 per cent increase in armed clashes. We condemn
the continuing attacks by anti-Government elements
and their deliberate targeting of civilians, including
the 13 May Taliban attack on a Kabul guesthouse and
on those working in the justice system. We call on all
parties to comply with international humanitarian law,
which prohibits attacks against civilians. In that regard,
it is vital that the Government push forward an Afghan-
led reconciliation and peace process.

More needs to be done to protect women's rights
and expand their access to justice. Reports estimate that
up to 87 per cent of Afghan women have experienced
domestic abuse at least once. Domestic violence,
coupled with high maternal mortality, a lack of
economic rights and limited opportunities for justice,
makes Afghanistan one of the world's most dangerous
countries for women. The latest UNAMA report on
violence against women shows that Afghanistan's court
system is failing to provide adequate access for women
who are victims of violence. We encourage the Afghan
Government to strengthen access to the justice system
and increase women's trust in legal proceedings, which
are often overshadowed by corrupt practices.

My delegation welcomes the first human-rights
dialogue between the European Union and Afghanistan,
which took place on 15 June in Kabul. We encourage
further discussions, in a cooperative spirit, on ways to
improve the human-rights situation in Afghanistan.

The future of Afghanistan depends not only on the
Afghans themselves, but also on the actions of their
neighbours. A peaceful and prosperous Afghanistan
is in the interest of all the countries of the region.
Lithuania commends the Government's efforts aimed
at improving bilateral relations with its neighbours,
including Pakistan, and in multilateral cooperation
forums, such as activities carried out under the Heart of
Asia-Istanbul Process. Any positive steps on peace and
stability taken by Afghanistan should be reciprocated
with tangible actions by neighbouring countries. To cite
some practical examples, from 2012 to 2015 Lithuania
provided funding for a regional project involving
Afghanistan, Pakistan, Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan.
That initiative contributed to the development of a
compatible veterinary control system in the four Asian
countries, in line with international standards and the
EU legal framework.

In June 2015, after 13 years of active participation
in Afghanistan, the Lithuanian Special Operations
Forces completed the longest-ever non-stop Lithuanian
international mission abroad. The mission's success
was a result of effective cooperation between the
Government of Afghanistan and its allies. As a result,
the Afghan National Security Forces have gained the
useful experience they need to ensure their country's
security on their own.

Lithuania remains engaged in the NATO-led
Resolute Support Mission in Afghanistan, which is
one of the major commitments of the Alliance in 2015
and 2016. The mission's mandate will end in December
2016. With this in mind, we need to discuss the
further engagement of the international community in
Afghanistan after 2016. The international community
has to continue assisting and supporting Afghanistan
as it continues to build a secure and just future. We
welcome the establishment of a Tripartite Commission,
as per Security Council resolution 2210 (2015), to
conduct an examination of the role, structure and
activities of all United Nations entities in Afghanistan.
We encourage all participants to actively engage in that
process.

