Mr. Le Drian (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, I to express to you, Sir, my support for the German
presidency, wish it every success and underscore
the powerful, as well as operational, symbolism
represented by the consecutive French and German
presidencies. For together with our friend Mr. Heiko
Maas, we wanted for the Security Council to act so as
to safeguard what we refer to as humanitarian space, or
the ability of humanitarian workers to carry out their
work safely and effectively in accordance with the
principles of impartiality, flexibility and independence.

The first condition necessary for ensuring the
sustainability of that space is respect for international
humanitarian law. The 1949 Geneva Conventions,
whose seventieth anniversary we will commemorate
on 12 August, bear the mark of the history of our two
countries - France and Germany - and the tragedies
that have punctuated our shared history and that of our

continent. As Mr. Maurer, President of the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), mentioned earlier,
the Geneva Conventions and their Protocols Additional,
of which we call for the universal ratification, are today
violated in many conflicts. Certain parties go so far
as to intentionally integrate their violation into their
military strategies. Humanitarian workers and medical
infrastructure are being deliberately attacked to deprive
people of any relief and to secure their surrender. That
was the topic of the Arria Formula meeting that we
convened this morning. We are also witnessing the use
of starvation and sexual Violence as weapons of war,
as well as the recruitment of child soldiers, which is
intended to achieve the same goal - to win faster by
maximizing the human cost of the conflict.

Improved compliance with international humanitarian
law requires in particular three types of action to which
the Security Council can contribute: first, ensuring
access for humanitarian aid to populations in need;
secondly, developing preventive measures; and, lastly,
combating impunity.

First, humanitarian personnel must have access to
civilians, which means that they must be protected from
all forms of violence and threats. It is unacceptable that
in South Sudan and the Central African Republic, for
example, humanitarian workers and aid convoys are
targeted. We must also take measures to ensure that
humanitarian personnel are not unduly prosecuted
for activities conducted in strict compliance with
humanitarian principles. That is a key element with
regard to the credibility of our collective commitment
to combating terrorism.

Secondly, the Council shoulders the responsibility
for preventing violations of international humanitarian
law. That is what we do when we place the protection
of civilians, including women and children, at the
core of peacekeeping missions, such as the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali and the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic. Sanctions are a deterrent tool that must
be used more systematically against violations of
international humanitarian law, in particular against
those responsible for sexual violence. Moreover, France
stands particularly ready to make attacks against
humanitarian personnel a designation criterion in
sanctions regimes, such as is now the case concerning
the Central African Republic.

I had an opportunity to remind the Council of
the imperative of protecting children associated
with armed forces and groups. I am pleased that the
Dominican Republic and Djibouti have endorsed the
Paris Principles and the Paris Commitments since the
call for their universalization at the open debate of the
Security Council in October 2017 (see S/PV.8082). The
Security Council must also ensure that the non-United
Nations forces it supports conduct their operations in
strict compliance with international humanitarian law,
which, for example, is made possible by the human
rights compliance framework of the Joint Force of the
Group of Five for the Sahel, which the Security Council
has supported with the goal of limiting the impact of
the Force's operations on civilians.

It is also up to States to lead the way. With regard
to France, international humanitarian law is the rule
of conduct for all its operations, and it is integrated
as soon as the planning phase, as currently illustrated
by Operation Barkhane in the Sahel, where we
maintain close dialogue with the ICRC. International
humanitarian law is an integral part of our security and
defence cooperation, in particular through the training
provided to military and civilian staff in national
regional schools in Africa, including in conjunction
with the ICRC.

I take this opportunity to pay tribute to the
International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement
and the International Committee of the Red Cross,
which, as guarantors of the Geneva Conventions, play
an essential role in the fight for the dissemination and
implementation of international humanitarian law.

Thirdly, let me address the fight against impunity.
We must do everything we can to strengthen national
capacities and ensure systematic, impartial and
independent investigations and, where national
mechanisms are insufficient or inadequate, support
the use of international mechanisms. In that regard,
France reiterates its call for the universalization of the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court and
congratulates Malaysia on its recent accession.

A unit has been set up in France that is specifically
responsible for war crimes and crimes against
humanity. International cooperation, in particular
among European judicial authorities, the Commission
of Inquiry and the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed
in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011, led to
the arrest in February of three former members of the
Syrian intelligence services, as part ofa Franco-German
investigation, and the issuance of international arrest
warrants against senior officials of the repressive
Syrian apparatus. It must be possible to systematize
that type of cooperation.

Our discussions today prove the need for
international mobilization to safeguard and strengthen
the humanitarian space. That is why Mr. Heiko Maas and
I have decided today to launch a call for international
mobilization for humanitarian action, to be known as
the Humanitarian Call for Action, which we hope will
lead to the adoption of a declaration of commitment
by States on the margins of General Assembly at its
next session.

Conflicts are becoming increasingly long and
complex, while their impact on civilian populations
is as severe as in the era of major global conflicts. In
the face of that situation, international humanitarian
law constitutes a remedy, and sometimes the last
resort, against arbitrariness. It is up to us to remind
ourselves that its application is not a moral option, but
a legal obligation.

