Mr. Quifiones Senchez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of my delegation, I wish to thank
you, Madam President, for the opportunity to address
this body once again to respond to the comments made
by the representative of the United States. I do not
believe that the claims presented by Cuba distort the
objective of this debate. It is in our interest to
contribute constructively to Security Council debate on
terrorism so as to promote cooperation and the true
fight against that scourge.
We are dealing with a case of the clear violation
of Security Council resolution 1373 (2001). Time and
again, we hear the same baseless arguments. Once
again, Council members and the other delegations
present in this Chamber await specific responses
regarding actions by the Government of the United
States to deal with a clear and infamous case of
international terrorism.

The reality is far different from what they would
have us believe. Thursday, 8 May, will be the first
anniversary of the permanent release of the terrorist
Posada Carriles. To date, despite all the evidence at its
disposal, the Government of the United States has not
charged Posada Carriles with his terrorist activities. We
are witnesses to ridiculous and shameful efforts by the
prosecution to continue to delay this case, which are a
legal delaying tactic to prevent justice from being
done. At the same time, the terrorist's legal defence is
being given countless deadlines in order to continue an
endless immigration trial, which we know does not
ultimately guarantee the imposition of any kind of
punishment for his terrorist acts. Once again, we
reaffirm in this Chamber the falseness of the claim that
the United States authorities have acted in accordance
with international law.

The double standards, the hypocrisy and the lies
seem to be limitless. Among the arguments used
against the extradition of Posada Carriles to Venezuela,
they say that he runs the risk of being tortured. The
accusing Government is trying to evade the criminal
past of Posada Carriles, who, at the command of the
Central Intelligence Agency, tortured young Latin
Americans. Obviously, it is protecting him. The
accuser seems to forget that it has been exactly four
years since the atrocities committed by the United
States occupation forces at Abu Ghraib came to light. It
wishes to forget the approval of torture at the illegally
occupied Guantanamo naval base, the secret
kidnappings of people throughout the world, the secret
flights and the clandestine prisons, all on the pretext of
fighting terrorism.

The United States ought to be silent - at least
for the sake of decency - concern itself with resolving
its problems and become a true fighter against
terrorism by complying with the international legal
order.

Fortunately, the Cuba in which acts of torture
were committed ceased to exist long ago. It was the
Cuba of drunken Marines in the streets of Havana
desecrating our national monuments - the Cuba of the
dictator Fulgencio Batista, murdering or torturing
students with the tacit complicity of the United States
leaders of that era. On 1 January 1959, Cuba freed
itself from the terrorist assassins and torturers of the
Batista dictatorship, who left our country to go to their
true safe haven, the United States of America.

Despite the rigged trial that took place in Miami
against our five heroes, the struggle of our compatriots
against anti-Cuban terrorism has been amply
demonstrated in the United States. They were
convicted solely for having risked their lives to fight
terrorist groups that operate freely in that city. The
whole illegal trial against our five heroes has amounted
to scandalous support for the anti-Cuban terrorist
groups operating there. It is truly embarrassing that,
while our five heroes are unjustly imprisoned and
subjected to draconian sentences and punishments and
while their human rights are brutally violated, the
terrorist hijackers of Cuban ships and aircraft receive
easy terms of bail, and some of them are even set free
in the United States. This demonstrates once again that
the United States Government does not punish the
crime of terrorism when it is perpetrated against
countries that do not bow before its imperialist policy.
The five heroes must be released. They cannot be
compared to Posada Carriles, who has committed acts
of a different kind: terrorist acts.

The struggle against terrorism requires
seriousness, commitment and, above all, political will.
Cuba reiterates its urgent request that the Security
Council, using the means at its disposal, duly consider
our claims and act accordingly.

