Mr. De Aguiar Patriota (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish):
I warmly congratulate you, Mr. President, and the
Permanent Mission of Uruguay to the United Nations
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council and for having convened this meeting and
having drafted an excellent concept note (S/2016/22, annex).

(spoke in English)

I also thank the Deputy Secretary-General, the
Vice-President of the International Committee of the
Red Cross and the representative of Oxfam for their
enlightening briefings. Let me express my appreciation
for the courageous work carried out by the Red Cross
and the Red Crescent Movement, even under extremely
dangerous circumstances.
We associate ourselves with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Switzerland on behalf
of the Group of Friends of the Protection of Civilians in
Armed Conflict.

We stand at the crossroads of three ambitious
reviews on international peace and security, all
of which are highly relevant to our debates on the
protection of civilians during armed conflict. There
are clear convergences among the report of the High-
level Independent Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446), the report ofthe Advisory Group ofExperts
on the Review of the Peacebuilding Architecture (see S/2015/490) and the global study on the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace nad
security. Those three documents, which have been
well received by the membership at large, emphasize
the primacy of politics and encourage the adoption of a
more integrated approach towards "sustaining peace".
All three reviews endorsed the fundamental notion that
preventing and resolving conflict through peaceful
means is the most effective way to shield civilians from
the miseries of war.

Conversely, the ill-advised notion that the
protection of civilians is better guaranteed through
the use of force finds no evidence in reality, and more
often than not exacerbates the suffering of innocents
and leads to negative humanitarian consequences.
The stark lessons of Libya must not be ignored: once
unleashed, the spiral of war and destruction cannot
easily be contained. The basic ethical precept of
medicine since Hippocrates - "do no harm" - should
be applied to multilateral discussions as a basic tenet
for the protection of civilians in situations of armed
conflict.

Moreover, Brazil has consistently advocated that
the use of force, if and when authorized by the Security
Council as a last resort means of protection, should be
employed responsibly. That means that action should
be judicious, proportionate and strictly limited to the
objectives of the mandate. In order to achieve that, we
believe that two practical steps, both of them based on
existing mechanisms in the Security Council, could
be taken. First, we should borrow from the procedures
related to the peacekeeping system practice of reporting
to and briefing delegations. Secondly, we should create
monitoring mechanisms by establishing panels of
experts modelled after the United Nations sanctions
committees. The international community has a right
to expect full accountability from those to whom
authority is given to resort to force.

The latest report of the Secretary-General on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict (S/2015/453)
depicts a bleak scenario. Non-State actors, including
terrorist groups with no regard for international
humanitarian law and international human rights law,
deliberately target civilians, and vulnerable populations
in particular, as a military tactic. Such violations
deserve the strongest condemnation.

At the same time, it is of the utmost importance
that national Governments make all the necessary
efforts to fulfil their obligations under international
humanitarian law, including, among others, preventing
indiscriminate attacks against the civilian population
and protected sites, such as schools and hospitals. As the
concept note circulated by the delegation of Uruguay
points out, one of the main objectives of today's debate
must be to enhance humanitarian compliance and legal
accountability. This meeting should also reaffirm
the universal and binding character of the Geneva
Conventions, as well as other obligations set forth by
relevant customary law.

In order to ensure that civilians in situations of
conflict will be safe, we should continuously strive to
enhance our legal, political and diplomatic framework
aimed at strengthening compliance with, and ensuring
the implementation of, international humanitarian law.
During the thirty-second International Conference of
the Red Cross and Red Crescent, held last month in
Geneva, Brazil supported the creation of a voluntary
and non-politicized meeting of States to share
international humanitarian law expertise and discuss
humanitarian trends and challenges. We must ensure
that the intergovernmental process launched by the
Conference will contribute to a future agreement in
that regard.

The forthcoming World Humanitarian Summit in
Istanbul, to be held in May, will be another auspicious
occasion to reaffirm our commitment to international
humanitarian law, including the imperative to protect
civilians from the consequences of armed conflict, and
to improve international coordination. Likewise, the
high-level plenary meeting on refugees and migrants,
to he held prior to the general debate of the General
Assembly at its seventy-first session next September
will discuss concrete measures to safeguard these
particularly vulnerable populations.

The dialogue on humanitarian Partnership,
co-chaired by Brazil and Sweden, has established a
productive informal venue for the examination of how
to improve global responses to key humanitarian issues
and challenges among Member States, the United
Nations and specialized agencies.
Lastly, the Security Council, in exercising its
prerogatives under the Charter of the United Nations
on the maintenance of international peace and security,
should continue to address emerging humanitarian and
protection issues as a matter of priority. We welcome
the Council's request to the Secretary-General to
increase the frequency of the reports on the protection
of civilians, now to be submitted every 12 months, and
encourage the Council to hold regular meetings on the
issue.

