Mr. Bessho (Japan): Before I speak on the issue of
Somalia, I wish to express Japan's strong condemnation
of the heinous terrorist attack that took place in London
yesterday. On behalf of the Japanese Government, I
express my sincere condolences to the families of the
victims and our solidarity with the people of the United
Kingdom. I wish a swift and full recovery to those who
were injured.

I thank you, Mr. President, and the United
Kingdom, for convening this timely briefing. I thank the
briefers for their informative updates on the situation in
Somalia. I also extend my deep appreciation to President
Farmajo for his robust commitment to achieving peace
and stability in the country.

Progress towards peace and stability in Somalia
has been unfortunately fragile so far. Many challenges
lie ahead, such as formulating a national security
framework, building capacity for a representative
Somali National Army, combating Al-Shabaab, agreeing
on Federal-State resource- and revenue-sharing
mechanisms and facilitating universal suffrage in 2020.
Robust and sustained international assistance is critical,
and Somali ownership is indispensable. Japan praises
President Farmajo's active leadership in tackling these
problems, and we promise to extend our full support for
his endeavours.

The ongoing famine has threatened progress
in State-building since the establishment of the
Government in 2012. As Secretary-General Antonio
Guterres remarked during his visit to Somalia, tackling
the risk of famine helps address the root causes of
terrorism. Recognizing the very serious famine
situation, Japan decided last week to extend an additional
$26 million in emergency humanitarian assistance in
response to the call by the Secretary-General, with
$8.5 million directed to Somalia. This is in addition to
Japan's assistance to Somalia in the amount of more
than $22 million, decided in January 2017.

Improvement of the security situation in all corners
of Somalia is the top priority. The role of the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) is key in
combating extremism, including Al-Shabaab. In order
to avoid security gaps as AMISOM. draws down next
year, reinforcement of the capabilities of the Somali
National Army must be conducted in an urgent and
coordinated manner. While international donors have
mobilized abundant resources over the years, there has
been insufficient progress in building a representative
and effective Somali National Army. Among the
reasons are minimal integration of clan-based militias
and a lack of coordination among donor communities.

We welcome the initiative by the United Kingdom
to host the London conference on Somalia in May
and commend President Farmajo and the Secretary-
General for co-hosting the conference. That will be a
perfect opportunity to address these problems and use
limited international resources in a more coordinated
manner. In particular, we hope the meeting will provide
momentum for agreement among political leaders from
each State on a national security framework, with a
clear demarcation of the responsibilities between the
Federal Government and states.

Improvements in the country's long-term security
also depend on strengthening the capacity of the
Somali police forces, including via salary support,
institution-building and the provision of basic social
services. Japan has contributed more than $400 million
since 2007 in these areas and will continue to support
Government efforts.

Macroeconomic improvements are critically important
for achieving sustained peace and prosperity. Japan
has long given priority to this area and welcomes the
successful conclusion of the regular consultations by
the International Monetary Fund last month. Sustained
efforts in implementing measures to improve the fiscal
framework, raise tax revenues and conduct structural
reforms are key. Japan hopes that the political leaders
demonstrate strong leadership and cooperation on
resource- and revenue-sharing mechanisms that will
serve as a backbone of the Somali economy.

Finally, the first reported hijacking of a large
commercial vessel offthe coast of Somalia in five years
has reminded us of the need for continued international
counter-piracy efforts in the region. Japan will continue
its warning and surveillance activities and escort
operations while also supporting social services and
economic development in the coastal regions, in close
cooperation, naturally, with the Somali Government
and the international community.

