Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I thank you very much,
Mr. President, for the opportunity to speak today on
this vitally important topic. I know that the time is
short, so I will summarize my statement.

Australia welcomes the report (S/2009/304) of
the Secretary-General, as have others today. Post-
conflict peacebuilding is a key challenge of our time.
The Secretary-General's leadership is critical to
advancing United Nations efforts to address that
challenge. His report provides important guidance to
all our efforts to improve our response in the aftermath
of conflicts.

We fully endorse the principle that peacebuilding
following a conflict is the responsibility of the
Government of the affected country. There must be
local ownership of all efforts. At the same time - and
this is not a contradiction - stronger and better-
resourced United Nations leadership on the ground will
result in better outcomes for the partner country. To
improve analysis, planning and coordination, for
example, the role of the resident coordinator's office
should be strengthened. We also welcome the
recognition that there should be a commensurate
increase in the accountability of senior United Nations
leadership.

We need to recognize the importance of the
security-development nexus and to ensure an integrated
approach among the various mission elements. We
would argue that the importance of effective civil-
military-police relations needs to be a key
consideration for those taking leadership roles in
missions and also in the training and preparedness of
deployed civilians.

We welcome the report's acknowledgement of the
role that local and traditional authorities and civil
society have in recovery and development. Australia's
experience in the Pacific, like New Zealand's, has
demonstrated the importance of supporting traditional
leadership - including those outside the formal State
apparatus - in recovery efforts.

We also welcome the report's emphasis on the
needs of women and girls. The early post-conflict
period provides an opportunity to consolidate new
leadership and employment roles that may have been
taken on by women during the period of the conflict.

In terms of the international architecture,
Australia welcomes the enhanced cooperation
framework recently agreed between the World Bank
and the United Nations.

With regard to deployable civilian capabilities,
we in Australia are in the process of developing such a
capability. We look forward to cooperating with the
United Nations and others in undertaking a
comprehensive review of how to broaden and deepen
the pool of civilian experts and improve their
interoperability.

In conclusion, I should to thank you again,
Mr. President, for the opportunity to participate in this
debate, to reiterate our gratitude to the Secretary-
General for the important report that has brought all
together and for the valuable ideas that he has shared
with us, and finally, to underline our willingness to
keep working to improve all our efforts in this area.

