Mr. Bakuramutsa (Rwanda) (interpretation from French): Allow the Rwandan delegation to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council. The wisdom you inspire and your
experience as a seasoned diplomat give confidence to the
countries whose problems are on the Council's agenda
that those problems will be speedily resolved. My
delegation is entirely at your disposal to help you carry
out your task.

I wish to take this opportunity to thank Ambassador
Legwaila, Permanent Representative of Botswana, and his
delegation for their outstanding work, particularly with
respect to convening public meetings that allow all
Members of the Organization to participate.

My delegation wishes to congratulate the
International Commission of Inquiry to investigate reports
relating to the sale or supply of arms and related mate'riel
to former Rwanda government forces in the Great Lakes
region. It is very important to note that the contents of the
Commission's first report contrast remarkably with those
of the second. The latter brings to light elements of
incontestable information and pieces of evidence and
confirms what non-governmental organizations and the
BBC, of international renown, had already uncovered.

Indeed, if the Commission was able in so brief a
time to produce such remarkable work, despite the
obstacles it encountered, it could do even more and its
impact would be particularly significant on matters related
to security and stability in the region. That is why my
delegation will be pleased to see the adoption of the draft
resolution before the Council today. In this context, I
wish to thank the American delegation for its initiative
and all delegations that helped in drafting and amending
it.

My delegation will never tire of repeating that
control over the implementation of a resolution, especially
one formulated under Chapter VII, can be exercised only
with the authority granted under another, stronger
resolution. That is why, if it was to be effective, this draft

 

resolution should have been restrictive. Unfortunately, it is
too weak to allow the Commission effectively to tackle the
task assigned to it.

We are convinced that the Council is aware of the
many foreseeable consequences if the Commission is
unable to achieve the objectives of its mandate. These
consequences are, first, that the Commission will encounter
difficulties in fulfilling its mission. The Security Council
has not sufficiently equipped it to overcome these
difficulties.

The second consequence is the destabilization of the
region, which will continue because of the infiltration of
arms and militia members into both Rwanda and Burundi.
It should be noted that these infiltrations are already taking
place, and a rapid solution must be found to the damage
they are causing.

The third consequence is the loss of human life,
displaced persons and refugees. The fourth consequence is
economic regression and the risk of famine in the region.
The fifth consequence is the possibility of the subregion
going up in flames. As we have said on other occasions,
the continuation of the Commission's work is vital for
ensuring peace and security in the Great Lakes region.

The uncontrolled circulation of arms spares no country
in the subregion. The arms acquired under these
circumstances are being used by Rwandan militia members
who support the Burundi extremists to destabilize the
Government of Burundi. Furthermore, Rwanda has just
received approximately 8,000 refugees from Zaire, who
were expelled from their native land by other citizens of
their country in cooperation with militia members and
Rwandan soldiers whose legal acquisition of arms we
denounce, as we do the refugee status from which they
continue to benefit, despite the international Convention on
refugees signed at Geneva. We are astonished that this
Organization has not denounced that situation, which is on
a level with the illegal acquisition and circulation of
weapons in the region.

I say again that the success of this resolution and its
implementation is not only of concern to Rwanda but is
vital for the population of the entire subregion. May I
request, through you, Mr. President, that the Security
Council and the Secretariat, which is the main source of
information for the Council, to cease taking a sectoral
approach to the question of Rwanda, as the problems of the
subregion are interlinked and interdependent.

I would like to give some examples of that approach,
which has become a matter of routine for this
Organization, and which my country is now, and will
long continue to be victim to, unless the wisdom and
understanding of members of the Security Council help
this Organization to change it.
The efforts made by the Rwandan Government to
take control of its own future are encountering difficulties
as a result of that sectoral approach. We are now
considering the problem of the rearming of former
Rwandan troops. That problem is linked to the arms
embargo against the people who committed genocide. But
the sectoral approach obliges us to consider the matter as
if it were a simple offence committed by some
businessman carrying out some sort of illicit operation. In
fact, those people conceived, planned and carried out the
genocide. It should be noted that the word "genocide"
appears nowhere, which contributes further to playing
down the offence, which is limited to rearmament despite
the embargo. The sectoral approach means that we are
completely overlooking the fact that those who are
acquiring weapons are the same people who
masterminded the genocide, supported in various ways by
various collaborative State networks. The International
Tribunal, which should have inquired into those cases, is
not mentioned anywhere, which has further weakened the
role and importance of that Tribunal.

Again, the sectoral approach makes it impossible to
establish the links between the fact that criminals are
acquiring arms and the fact that the International Tribunal
is not actually functioning. This vision prevents us from
implementing the conventions that we ratified on both
genocide and refugees. Thus, those responsible for the
genocide in Rwanda and their militias enjoy refugee
status, when they are actually armed and leading an
armed band.

The Government of Rwanda would like to encourage
national reconciliation. But what meaning can
reconciliation have if it takes place between those who
survived the genocide and its perpetrators, when the latter
are in the process of rearming themselves to carry out
other massacres? What do the orphans - the victims and
survivors of genocide - and all peace-loving Rwandans
feel when they see that the efforts of the Government that
put a stop to the genocide are being undermined by the
acts of the very people whose moral duty it is to prevent
acts that disrupt peace and security, and who are
supposed to be implementing a Security Council
resolution on an arms embargo?

 

The sectoral approach is also applied to the return of
refugees. How can the Government of Rwanda encourage
the return of refugees when their self-proclaimed leaders
are in the process of rearming themselves and are receiving
various kinds of support from Member countries of this
Organization.
Again, the sectoral approach taken to the situation in
Rwanda makes it impossible to see that the acquisition of
appropriate equipment could contribute to the return of
refugees and stability in the country. By arming themselves,
the criminals continue to send a war-like and criminal
message to the refugees, whereas the Government of
Rwanda has established a policy for the unconditional
return of refugees and, by way of support from the
Secretariat, has received unusable and inappropriate
equipment that the so-called Assistance Mission for Rwanda
could not take away with it. At the same time, the
masterminds of the genocide and their militia organizations
are building up their arsenal and receiving humanitarian
assistance, which enhances their power and authority over
the refugees in the camps.

The sectoral approach to the Rwandan problem makes
it impossible to see that arming militia members and former
Rwandan troops is contributing to the massacre taking place
in Burundi. The fact that the Rwandan criminals have gone
unpunished encourages the criminals in the region to do
likewise. This is why we request the Council and the
Secretariat to revise their approach, to consider the question
holistically. If it did so, it would become clear that the
Commission has more importance than the draft resolution
attributes to it.

I should like to depart slightly from the subject on the
agenda to pass on a message from the Government of
Rwanda, given the importance of the matter. The
Government of Rwanda has instructed me to deny firmly
the information contained in the Secretary-General's report
suggesting that negotiations with the Government with
respect to establishing a small political office in Rwanda
have become difficult. I wish to recall that paragraph 46 of
the report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Rwanda of 29 February 1996, states
that the Rwandan Government did not give its consent to
any of the three options presented by the Secretary-General.
In my official statement at the formal meeting of the
Security Council at which resolution 1050 (1996) was
adopted, I confirmed our acceptance of the proposal for a
political office contained in the report of the Secretary-
General. In my letter of 1 March 1996, addressed to the
President of the Security Council, and in the letter from the
Minister of Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Rwanda,
addressed to the Secretary-General, the clear-cut position
of the Government was that it accepted the proposal for
a political office, as set out by the Secretary-General in
his report. My Government took the initiative of inviting
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General to
Kigali to hold consultations on specific proposals
regarding the status, mandate and duration of the United
Nations political office. He never discussed the subject
with the Government again.

The delay in the Secretariat's reaction made it
necessary for me to approach the Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, since the office fell under his aegis,
to remind him of the recommendations contained in the
Security Council resolution on the subject and to insist on
a meeting between the Secretariat and the Government to
discuss the question of the political office.

Despite all those steps, my Government was not
contacted by anyone to consider the statute and the
mandate of this unit. It should be noted that preparations
for the departure of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Rwanda (UNAMIR), and particularly the
decision of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General to leave his post, did not favour the Secretariat's
negotiating on that office.

This is why the Rwandan Government was very
pleased to welcome the Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs to Kigali, and the question of the political
office was in fact resolved this morning. In this
connection, we should once again like to remind the
Council that it is customary for the Government of
Rwanda to be consulted in every matter of interest to the
country and to the Rwandans.

Furthermore, the Government of Rwanda would like
to clarify information contained in the report of the
Secretary-General regarding the UNAMIR equipment that
was left behind in Rwanda. The Secretary-General's
report refers to equipment which is valued at
approximately $9.2 million and intended to be handed
over to the Rwandan Government, as well as another
parcel of weapons in a state of disrepair, which was
valued at $6.1 million and was also to be given to the
Government.

I would like to remind the Council that that
equipment is being given to the Government of Rwanda
pursuant to the request to the Secretary-General for non-
military materiel to speed up the reconstruction of the

 

country as well as to facilitate the return of refugees. That
request by Rwanda enjoyed the support of the Security
Council in various resolutions that recommended that the
Secretary-General give part of UNAMIR's mate'riel to the
Rwandan Government while respecting the rules and
procedures of the General Assembly.

After having evaluated the equipment left behind by
UNAMIR, the Government of Rwanda found that, in the
first place, the value of the equipment was much lower than
the figures quoted in the Secretary-General's report.
Secondly, the equipment consisted of materiel not suited to
the needs expressed to the Secretary-General by the
Rwandan Government - namely, the kind of equipment
required to speed up the reconstruction and rehabilitation of
the country, and to facilitate the return of refugees. What
little equipment which remained was in such a state that it
was not economically viable to repair it, as this might have
become a burden on the State's budget. Consequently, my
Government wishes to inform the Council that the
equipment left to it by UNAMIR cannot be received due to
its nature and its condition.

It is true that Rwanda is in need, but it is also true that
the Rwandans have their dignity, and they intend to keep it.
Despite the insistence of the Rwandan Government when
speaking to the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, despite various steps, vis-a-vis various departments
of the Secretariat, and despite contacts with various
members of the Security Council who have in turn
approached the Secretariat, my Government can only
conclude that there has been a deliberate desire not to give
the proper equipment to Rwanda to help it to reconstruct
the country and, generally speaking, a desire to keep the
Government in the difficult situation caused by the
genocide and destruction of the infrastructure and economy
of the country.

In conclusion, Rwanda and the entire world have
witnessed the behaviour of this Organization before and
during the genocide in my country, which is a Member
country and a former Trust Territory of the United Nations.
Many accounts have been given of the situation, but it
gravely concerns my Government when we observe a
continual and systematic lack of desire to give adequate and
necessary support to the Rwandan Government to help it
reconstruct the country, to complete its efforts to bring all
the sons and daughters of the country together, to stanch its
wounds, to rehabilitate the survivors and to establish justice,
which would form the basis of a state of law.

Over and above that, my delegation regrets the
continual confusion caused by the incomplete information
provided by the Secretariat to the decision-making bodies
that might have a certain impact on the future of Rwanda.

The content of the most recent report coordinated by
the Danish Government, which is entitled "Joint
evaluation of emergency assistance to Rwanda", and
whose authors we would like to thank, may go unnoticed.
What it calls "Lessons from the Rwanda experience" will
never serve as a lesson for anybody.

My Government keenly hopes that the office to be
created in Rwanda by the Secretariat and the Security
Council will help the United Nations do what it has so far
been unable to do for Rwanda and its inhabitants.

I should like to conclude, by thanking, on behalf of
my Government, those countries that respected the
Security Council resolutions by initiating legal
proceedings against those responsible for genocide in
Rwanda - countries such as Belgium, Cameroon,
Canada, Switzerland and Zambia - as well as those
countries, such as Seychelles that provided the
information making it possible to trace the sale and
delivery of arms to members of the former Government
of Rwanda.

