Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to commend you, Mr. President, for having
convened this open meeting on an issue as grave and
shocking as that of the tragic situation of children in
armed conflict. I would also like to pay tribute to the
very lucid and courageous statement made by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Olara Otunnu, whom my Office fully supports and
will continue to support, both morally and financially.
We encourage him in his efforts and request him to
continue to fight such appalling excesses, which know
no boundaries, whether geographical or otherwise. We
also commend the sharp and inspiring statement by
Ms. Carol Bellamy.
The report of the Secretary-General is interesting
and very clear. It details the atrocities that continue to
be committed against children in the context of armed
conflict, ranging from their use as sexual slaves in one
country to their forced recruitment in a number of
others, as well as the devastating effects that AIDS,
anti-personnel landmines and something as basic as a
lack of access to primary education have on children.

The report is clearly useful, and the fact that it is
sometimes very stark in its denunciations is
commendable. The facts have thus now been laid bare,
at least at the geographical level. There is now a
general awareness on the part of the public - thanks in
large part to the non-governmental organizations -
although that may not yet be sufficient. Furthermore, a
legal framework has now been established.

What, then, remains to be done? We must commit
ourselves fully, not just partially. As Mr. Otunnu said,
we must fully enter the era of implementation. We
therefore support his recommendation to examine the
actions of the parties to a conflict and give an in-depth
and unvarnished account thereof. As the Ambassador
of Germany said, the Council must put more bite into
its monitoring efforts. In other words, we must take
action.

The Council has not remained passive. It has
adopted three important resolutions; it has affirmed
that the protection of children who are exposed to
conflict is something that affects international peace
and security. It is desirable that a fourth resolution be
adopted soon. Furthermore, many of our countries -
mine included - have ratified the important Protocol
on the involvement of children in armed conflict and
the Statute of the International Criminal Court. But that
is not enough.

Ms. Bellamy courageously mentioned, inter alia,
a shocking form of humiliation in the context of the
tragic situation of such children - their abuse by
humanitarian personnel and by the personnel of
peacekeeping forces. She touched a sore spot when she
pointed out that this meeting would soon end and that
the Council would turn its attention to other burning
issues. She reminded us that we cannot be passive, but
must go further in determining who is responsible and
in ending impunity. She concluded that we were all
responsible. In the hardship and suffering of children
and in the atrocities carried out against them -
atrocities that we had hoped belonged to terrible
periods of the past - all of us have a share of the
responsibility.
