Please allow me to congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for the month of July - the third and last consecutive presidency in the European spring. Without question, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) will remain at the top of everyone's agenda throughout the summer. I therefore applaud the fact that you start your presidency by organizing this debate on pandemics and security. It shows the commitment and energy infused to the Council by elected members, and I congratulate all the newly elected members that will join the Council in 2021. Even without the extraordinary changes brought about by COVID-19, 2020 was already going to be a challenging year in many respects. We need only to look back at the Secretary-General's January speech (see A/74/PV.54), where he outlined the four horsemen in our midst: geopolitical tensions on the rise, global mistrust on the rise, the climate crisis and the dark side of technology. So far, the coronavirus has acted as a contrast fluid, putting geopolitical differences that were already visible into sharper focus. It has also exacerbated global mistrust and put into play the dark side of technology. The World Health Organization (WHO) must now fight not only the pandemic but also an infodemic fuelled by cyberattacks and disinformation. Societies where human rights were already under pressure are now pushed to curb civic space further. Many important international meetings to agree on common action against climate change are being put on hold. At the same time, 75 years after the signing of the Charter of the United Nations, we see many around the world coming together in search of a global response and international cooperation. As an example, I need only point to the Global Goal: Unite for Our Future event last weekend, which brought together an incredible roster of celebrities and politicians expressing their desire to emerge from this crisis stronger, more united and safer. COVID-19 is already having a profound impact on the daily lives of the world's most vulnerable, with adverse effects on their employment, equality and security. I would now like to focus on three points, namely, the role of the Security Council, peacekeeping operations and building back better. First, when it comes to issues of peace and security, the world looks to the Security Council for leadership. In its 75 years of existence, the Council has contributed to unparalleled growth in prosperity and peace worldwide. That is why it is so disheartening to see that well-known and regrettable stalemates in the Council over the last few years have in recent months also extended to the fight against COVID-19. Although we are glad that resolution 2532 (2020), on COVID-19, was adopted yesterday, the failure of the Council to agree on a resolution on the pandemic at an earlier stage remains a disappointment. In the case of Ebola, resolution 2177 (2014) determined that the outbreak constituted a threat to international peace and security by undermining the stability of the most affected countries and possibly leading to further instances of civil unrest, social tensions and the deterioration of the political and security climate. It is therefore hard to understand why the Council could not come earlier to a similar conclusion on the far-wider-reaching coronavirus. In addition, in 2018, when we were a member of the Council, the Council united behind the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo to work closely with WHO to provide safety to health workers in eastern Congo and help eradicate the Ebola virus there. Last week the region was declared Ebola-free. That proves once again that the Council can and must also make an impact on the ground when it comes to pandemics. We ask the Council to look past its differences, to enshrine the multilateral response to the pandemic as outlined by the Secretary General and - especially - to keep echoing his call for a global ceasefire, which my country has wholeheartedly supported on several occasions. Secondly, over the past decades, peacekeeping operations have provided an invaluable contribution to peace and security in the world's most difficult places. This Tuesday, we remembered the 77 persons who paid the ultimate price in the service of peace over the past year - many in United Nations peacekeeping operations - and we pay tribute to their sacrifice. Apart from the risks that are always inherent to peacekeeping operations, the pandemic has added an extra level of complexity. The first is the significant challenge of rotating troops in and out of missions. With 2010 still in our minds, when the cholera outbreak in Haiti was linked to United Nations peacekeepers, we must take the utmost care to prevent a spread of the virus in already vulnerable areas. In addition, mandates have to be discharged and troops must continue engaging with the target populations. That demands a great deal from our Blue Helmets. Mediation efforts and interaction with the local population, essential to the implementation of the mandates, have become challenging at best. We are also mindful of the risk of potential implications of the COVID-19 pandemic on the incidence of sexual exploitation and abuse. We support the Secretary-General's efforts to prevent an increase of such cases in the context of humanitarian and peacekeeping settings during the pandemic. We must also be aware that peacekeeping operations are more than ever targets of disinformation campaigns. False rumours about missions spreading the virus need to be countered immediately so that missions do not lose popular support. In addition, the funding of peacekeeping is still in dire straits. We call on all countries to pay their contributions promptly and in full, especially in these difficult times. We are glad that we have adopted a timely resolution on peacekeeping budgets that also allows for the requested flexibility to absorb the financial implications of the pandemic. As champions of both performance and the protection of civilians in the Action for Peacekeeping agenda, an initiative we have supported since its launch in 2018, we underline the need for missions to be able to properly carry out their mandates. Thirdly, the socioeconomic consequences of COVID-19 and the lockdown measures taken in response are increasingly visible, and are so severe that they have resulted in nearly universal setbacks in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. In our response to the crisis, we must focus on the needs of those most vulnerable if we are to leave no one behind. Their exact composition varies by context, but we know that women and girls are among the hardest hit. We must also remember that the most affected need to be involved in overcoming the crisis. Their voices need to be heard. This crisis has laid bare the deep inequalities that exist within and among countries, and those inequalities inherently carry the risk of conflict. That is why we found it necessary to support to the Secretary-General's COVID-19 Response and Recovery Multi-Partner Trust Fund as the centralized United Nations response to the socioeconomic consequences of the crisis. This pooled fund is providing an immediate, context-specific response with the ultimate goal of building back better towards the Sustainable Development Goals with a strong Resident Coordinator and United Nations country team within the spirit of the reform of the United Nations development system. To that end, the Kingdom of the Netherlands has quickly provided €15 million. In conclusion, we have only begun to understand the devastating effects of the crisis on people everywhere. The broadest possible support of the Fund in further funding rounds is essential if we are to enable the United Nations, including the Security Council, to play its role in protecting those most vulnerable. It is also critical to leverage what is already being done, and to move from crisis mitigation to truly building back better together. Only thus can we ensure that the current crisis does not set us back, but instead makes us look towards a better future, with a more balanced global economy and measures to combat climate change.
