Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): We thank
the Nigerian presidency for convening this important
open debate today, especially in the light of the highly
tense political situations and armed conflicts in certain
regions of the world. We also commend the Secretary-
General for addressing these important debates and for
his leadership in fostering dialogue with regional and
subregional organizations.
The past years have been marred by such alarming
transnational and global security challenges as terrorism
and radical extremism, the presence of foreign fighters,
transnational organized crime, human trafficking,
illicit drug trafficking, illegal migration and other
serious threats. No country can fight those alone, nor
can the United Nations do so by itself. Hence the call
for closer cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations.

Today, as 80 per cent of all Blue Helmets are
deployed in Africa, the collaboration among the United
Nations, the African Union and the European Union is
particularly important, especially between the Security
Council and the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union. All three are working on building on
security cooperation mechanisms established since
2006, while developing more multidimensional and
solid relationships than in the past. Kazakhstan
encourages this positive progress towards greater
common ground among the three entities through
capacity-building for the AU in administrative, logistics
and financial dimensions, and a greater convergence
of political agendas. Hybrid and support missions,
co-deployment and transitions all require their specific
approaches in tandem with ensuring safety and
security for all peacekeepers. The engagement of a
larger number of African countries - through troop
and financial contributions, following the principle
of "non-indifference" - is a commendable trend that
must be supported.

We would like to commend in that regard the
activities of African subregional entities, including
the Southern African Development Community, the
Economic Community of West African States and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, among
others. We believe that such subregional organizations
complement the role of the African Union. The
experience of economic integration in the different
parts of the world is of high interest for my country,
as the founding member of the newly created Eurasian
Economic Union.

The benefits of United Nations cooperation
with the vast range of regional structures are well
known. However, the crux of that cooperation lies
in enhancing our mutual understanding of the root
causes of local disputes and other security challenges
and drawing on the insights of regional structures for
their prevention and peaceful settlement. We have to
seek ways of improving our early-warning system,
effective prevention, peacemaking, peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and, most of all, recovery in the post-
2015 developmental phase. Likewise, the United
Nations and regional organizations can work towards
more effective implementation of Security Council
sanctions and resolutions.

To achieve effective collaboration, my delegation
proposes expanding organizational dialogue and
strengthening representation in the respective
capitals. Equally critical are more distinct mandates
for coordination and improved arrangements, joint
planning, fact-finding and analysis, joint assessment
missions, mutual organizational learning and
harmonization of administrative borders, among others.

But let us be aware of other regions too. Central
Asia is an example. Although it is a bridge between the
East and West, it also has its geographic disadvantages.
To ensure security in the entire Asian region, in 1992
Kazakhstan initiated the Conference on Interaction and
Confidence Building Measures in Asia (CICA), a unique
security forum pan-continental in nature, to implement
confidence-building measures and forge political
dialogue and interaction to promote peace and stability
in Asia. Today, CICA, which extends from Cairo to
Seoul, unifies 26 countries from all the subregions of
the continent, including Western, Northern, Central,
Southern, Southeastern and Eastern Asia. Kazakhstan,
as one of the founding members, hosts the Central
Asian Regional Information and Coordination Centre
on narcotic drugs, a body that exemplifies the region's
cooperation with United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime. My country is also one of the founders
and the major initiator of the Shanghai Corporation
Organization's (SCO) regional counter-terrorism
structure, which includes six member States.

In addition, the United Nations Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force - assisted by CICA, the
SCO and others - adopted in 2011 ajoint plan of action
for the implementation of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy in Central Asia. That plan
became the first model document, setting an example
for implementing similar United Nations strategies in
other regions of the world.

To date, Kazakhstan is a member, observer or
partner of 15 regional organizations in various regions
of the world, and my country is proud to hold observer
status in two continental associations, namely, the
African Union and the Organization of American
States. We also signed a cooperation agreement with
the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe.
Kazakhstan is committed to the implementation of
the transformative post-2015 development agenda and
has proposed, therefore, that the new United Nations
regional hub, which my Government offers, should
promote sustainable development, humanitarian
assistance, disaster-risk reduction and building
resilience. That is particularly crucial in the light of
the withdrawal of the International Security Assistance
Force from Afghanistan and the growing disturbances
witnessed within the region.

Kazakhstan has also been a pioneer in creating
the Islamic Organization for Food Security, with its
headquarters now established in Astana, our capital.
My country was instrumental in fostering human
rights protection while chairing and serving as the
coordinating country of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation (OIC), the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and other regional entities.
Those initiatives resulted in a number of successful
events under our leadership, such as the establishment
of the OIC Independent Permanent Human Rights
Commission and the convening of the first CICA High-
level Seminar on Sustainable Democratic Development.

Finally, given the far-reaching implications and
effects of enhanced regional-global partnerships,
Kazakhstan remains committed to achieving greater
coherence, complementary synergy and dynamism
between the United Nations and regional organizations.

