Let me begin by thanking Mr. Karim Khan for his valuable work and comprehensive briefing. I warmly welcome His Excellency Ambassador Mohammed Hussein Bahr Aluloom of Iraq. Years after the atrocities that the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) committed, the grief of the victims and their families has never ceased and will last for generations. Moreover, as ISIL continues to be a significant threat in Iraq, we remain concerned by its repeated attacks against civilians and foreign diplomatic premises. We are also worried that its extremist ideology may continue to spread beyond Iraq's borders. In this context, we would like to reiterate the essential requirements to bring justice to the victims of ISIL and to prevent the terrorist group from committing further crimes. We appreciate efforts to achieve those goals, including the hard work of the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD) and the Government of Iraq. This is all the more remarkable in the past six months of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. The Special Adviser's report (see S/2020/1107) has shown advancements in almost all lines of inquiry into crimes committed by ISIL. A case in point is the provision of support by UNITAD to Iraqi authorities to implement witness protection measures, in accordance with the terms of reference. The significant progress in the support for Iraq in handling outstanding issues related to ISIL's crimes is commendable. We also welcome the Iraqi Government's strengthened cooperation with UNITAD, which has facilitated the implementation of the Team's mandate in key areas. We note with satisfaction that the Team has gained wide support from not only central, regional and local authorities, but also religious community leaders. The agreement between UNITAD and the Supreme Judicial Council of Iraq to assist Iraqi investigative judges in the development of case files for the prosecution of ISIL members for war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide is a significant development. That enhanced cooperation has demonstrated domestic efforts to hold perpetrators accountable for their crimes. However, the work ahead of the Investigative Team remain challenging. To advance further and fulfil its mandate, the mission should focus on its strategic priorities. It needs to strengthen cooperation with not only the Iraqi authorities, but also religious leaders, local communities, survivors, witnesses and families of victims. We encourage the Team to apply all the procedures and methods of protection so as to ensure that victims, witnesses and all other persons who cooperate with the Team can do so in safety and security. In conclusion, we welcome the support of Member States to the Investigative Team through the provision of experts and financial contributions. We also call upon the international community to strengthen their support for UNITAD in the implementation of its mandate in accordance with international law, relevant resolutions of the Security Council and the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, including respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity, independence and unity of Iraq.
