Mr. Thomson (United Kingdom): Since this is
our first opportunity to speak this month, I should like
to join previous speakers in welcoming China's
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
and to offer you, Sir, and your colleagues the full
support of my delegation during this challenging
month.

Like previous speakers, I should also like to
thank the Permanent Representative of Cameroon and
his delegation for their efforts during their presidency
of the Council last month.

We are very pleased to see here today and to have
heard the Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister
of Uganda. We thank him for making the effort to be
present.

The Danish Ambassador delivered this morning a
statement on behalf of the European Union and
associated countries. The United Kingdom fully
endorses that statement.

We welcome the Panel of Experts' report and
appreciate all the hard work that has clearly gone into
it. We look forward to continuing work on the detail of
the report. On this occasion, I should like to be quite
brief and to dwell on just a few of the main points.

Our priority - and, I think, our collective
priority - is the need to ensure that the people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo benefit from the
exploitation of the country's natural resources to aid
development, peace and stability. We therefore urge all
the parties named in the report to investigate seriously
the allegations made and to respond fully to its
recommendations.

My Government hopes that the Panel's Chair will
nominate a spokesperson to respond to questions from
organizations and individuals named in the report and
its annexes. We would encourage the Panel to share
information with Governments and companies named,
to the extent possible without compromising source
protection, so as to allow them to carry out full
investigations and take any necessary action.

We have noted with concern that key parties
identified in resource exploitation have also been
named as being involved in supplying arms to foreign
armed groups, in breach of their obligations as
signatories to the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement. We call
again on all parties to stop supplying foreign armed
groups in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

We note the explicit connection that the report
makes between resolving the issue of resource
exploitation and the establishment of an agreed, fully
inclusive transitional Government in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We call on all parties to the
inter-Congolese dialogue to renew their efforts to that
end.

My Government welcomes the statement made by
the Democratic Republic of the Congo's Public
Prosecutor that he will investigate the report's findings.
This response contradicts some other statements made
by the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo rejecting the report's allegations against senior
Government figures, so we hope that the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo will clarify
its position and respond constructively to the report's
recommendations.

The Government of Rwanda has issued a detailed
response to the Panel's report and we heard the
Rwandan representative speak eloquently on the
subject this morning. We call on the Government of
Rwanda, in common with other parties named in the
report, to respond constructively to the report's
recommendations.

The Panel notes unconfirmed reports that some
personnel of the Rwandese Patriotic Army remain in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We understand
that the Third Party Verification Mechanism (TPVM)
and the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo have looked into
such allegations and are satisfied that Rwandan
withdrawal from the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is complete. We call on both parties to
implement their Pretoria commitments in full and with
full transparency and we express our full support for
the TPVM. in carrying out its monitoring role.

The Ugandan Government responded publicly
and in detail to the report this morning. We call on the
Government of Uganda to respond constructively to the
report's findings and we, like others, look forward to
the findings of the Porter Commission. We welcome
the Government of Uganda's statement that the Porter
Commission has the judicial powers of the High Court
and is independent of the executive.

Finally, we also call on the Zimbabwean
Government to respond to the report's findings. We
listened carefully to the representative of Zimbabwe's
presentation this morning. The Council will need to
consider very carefully all aspects of the Panel's report,
including those relating to Zimbabwe.

