Mr. Gomersall (United Kingdom): My delegation
would also like warmly to welcome you to the Council, Mr.
President, and take the opportunity of your presence to
express our appreciation of your country' s presidency of the
Council in what has been a very busy month so far.

The United Kingdom also expresses its shock and
sympathy with the United States over the bomb outrage in
Oklahoma. We echo entirely Ambassador Albright's words
about the universality of terrorism, which calls for a united
condemnation and response.

No one, certainly not the British Government, is happy
with the state of discussions on the peace process in the
former Yugoslavia. But there have been two important
gains over the last year. First, there has been the
establishment of the Bosnian Federation, which my
Government regards as an essential building block towards
an overall settlement. Secondly, the isolation of the Bosnian
Serbs as a result of their refusal to accept the Contact
Group plan has been confirmed, in particular by the
decision of the Belgrade authorities to close their border
with Bosnian Serb-held territory. Central to the international
community's response to the Belgrade authorities' decision
was the establishment of the International Conference on
the Former Yugoslavia (ICFY) Mission to monitor this
closure.

These two developments have brought benefits, but
both need to be nurtured and developed further if the
Bosnian peace process is to move forward. Closure of the
border between the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
(Serbia and Montenegro) and Bosnia has had an
economic, military and political impact upon Pale. This
closure must be maintained and intensified - not only by
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) authorities but also by the Bosnian and
Croatian Governments - to ensure that trade diversion,
whether by land or by sea, is stopped. The Bosnian Serb
leadership must understand that there is no alternative to
resuming peace negotiations, with the Contact Group plan
as the starting point.

The ICFY Co-Chairmen have reported that the
border is generally closed and that cooperation with the
Belgrade authorities remains good. My Government fully
endorses that assessment and has the fullest confidence in
the work of the Co-Chairmen and of the ICFY Mission.
We are grateful for their efforts.

There are two important issues that now need to be
addressed without delay. The first is to ensure that border
closure is really tight; in this connection, we are
particularly concerned about reports of cross-border
helicopter flights. The second is to reinforce the ICFY
Mission so that it is able to continue carrying out its task
effectively.

As far as helicopter flights are concerned, my
Government has made personnel available to participate
in a team which will shortly begin the detailed analysis of
available data and thereafter report authoritatively. We
must be clear as to whether serious breaches of the border
closure are occurring, over it, in the air. Such breaches
would be unacceptable.

As for reinforcing the ICFY Mission, it is essential
that the international community provide the necessary
finance, manpower and equipment. We remain concerned
over the Mission's continued financial crisis, which has
necessitated a reduction in its strength. My Government
wants to see a fully financed ICFY Mission with its
strength increased to 250 personnel. Denying the Mission
the support it needs serves only to undercut efforts to
bring about a settlement in Bosnia. We hope that other
Governments will join the United Kingdom in responding
to the Mission's urgent need for resources, and that they
will bring forward the timing of their contributions.

 

A limited suspension of sanctions remains in our View
the appropriate response to Belgrade's cooperation to date.
The renewal of this suspension is justified. Furthermore, it
is right to use sanctions flexibly and imaginatively to
encourage initiatives in the interests of securing a peaceful
settlement. The fact is that the status quo in Bosnia is not
acceptable or sustainable and that United Nations peace-
keeping forces cannot be expected to remain there forever,
in the absence of progress towards a political settlement
and if there is not the requisite degree of cooperation from
the parties. Additional sanctions relief would be justified
only if the authorities of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) made further
commitments to advancing the peace process. The Council
should support the Contact Group's efforts to persuade
Belgrade to take these steps immediately.

