The President (Spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Serbia and Montenegro in which
he requests to be invited to participate in the discussion
of the item on the Council's agenda, In accordance
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite that representative to participate
in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Sahovic'
(Serbia and Montenegro) took a seat at the
Council table.

The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now continue its consideration of the item
on its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the
launching of a review mechanism, under the
auspices of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, as presented on 5 November
2003 in Pristina and Belgrade, on the initiative of
the Contact Group (France, Germany, Italy, the Russian Federation, the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of
America, with representatives from the European
Union), giving new momentum to the
implementation of the 'standards before status'
policy that was designed for Kosovo (Serbia and Montenegro), and endorsed by this Council in
application of its resolution 1244 (1999).

"The Security Council recalls the eight

standards, namely: functioning democratic
institutions; rule of law; freedom of movement;
returns and reintegration; economy; property
rights; dialogue with Belgrade; and the Kosovo
Protection Corps. The Council in this respect
urges the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government to participate fully and
constructively in the working groups within the
framework of the direct dialogue with Belgrade
on practical issues of mutual interest, to
demonstrate their commitment to the process.

"The Security Council supports the
standards for Kosovo presented on 10 December
2003. The Council awaits an implementation
plan, to be finalized by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General in his continuing
consultation with the Provisional Institutions of
Self-Government, and other relevant parties as
appropriate, to be submitted to the Council. The
plan should serve as a basis for the assessment of
the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government's
progress in meeting the standards.

"The Security Council takes note that the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
within his authority as set out in resolution 1244
(1999), inter alia, in the context of the review
mechanism, will continue to consult closely with
interested parties, in particular the Contact
Group. The Council reaffirms its intention to
continue to consider the regular reports of the
Secretary-General, including an assessment from
the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, as to the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government's progress towards meeting the
standards. The Council takes note that the
Contact Group intends to make a substantive
contribution to the regular reviews and to submit
its assessments to the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General.

"The Security Council supports the prospect
of a comprehensive review of the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government's progress in
meeting the standards. The Council notes that,
depending on progress made as assessed during
the periodical review, a first opportunity for such
a comprehensive review should occur around
mid-2005.

"Reaffirming the standards before status
policy, the Council stresses that further

advancement towards a process to determine the
future status of Kosovo in accordance with
resolution 1244 (1999) will depend on the
positive outcome of this comprehensive review.
The Council reiterates the primacy of the
regulations promulgated by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and
subsidiary instruments as the law applicable in
Kosovo.

"The Security Council reaffirms its full
support to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Holkeri and calls on the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government of
Kosovo and all concerned to cooperate fully with
him."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2003/26.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.40 pm.

