Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): My delegation is pleased to
have joined Council members in welcoming President
Mandela and is grateful for his important and inspiring
statement. For the sake of brevity, I will simply associate
myself fully with the welcoming remarks made by you, Mr.
President, the Secretary-General and other Council members
who spoke before me. We also join in the warm words of
tribute expressed to the late President Julius Nyerere of
Tanzania.

Malaysia strongly supports the Arusha peace process
and the efforts to build an internal political partnership in
Burundi. We commend the initiatives of regional leaders in
the peace process. We hold the View that no party should
be excluded from the talks and that all cooperation must
now be extended to the new Facilitator. Regardless of their
positions, parties still outside the peace process must not
use their non-participation as an excuse not to agree to
cease hostilities.

My delegation is seriously concerned about the dire
humanitarian situation in Burundi, which affects hundreds
of thousands of innocent civilians who are caught in the
middle. Attacks by armed groups on the civilian population
must be strongly condemned, and every effort should be
made to prevent such occurrences. We note the explanation
given by the Government of Burundi that the regrouping of
the population was not forced and was a response to real
concerns for their safety and well-being. We earnestly hope
that such measures are only temporary in nature and will be
terminated as soon as possible so that the people can return
to their homes in safety. In the meantime, United Nations
and humanitarian personnel should be given immediate,
full, safe and unhindered access to these camps in order to
ascertain the situation at hand so as to avoid further
hardships and prevent the loss of lives. It is imperative that
these personnel be afforded security guarantees, including
freedom of movement.

Given the large numbers of refugees and internally
displaced persons, a situation attested to by Mrs. Ogata
during her briefing of the Council last week, we call on
the international community, notably the donor countries
and international humanitarian relief agencies, to continue
with their generous assistance, while commending them
for the contribution they have already made in alleviating
the plight of these hapless civilians. We are concerned
that further human displacement will have serious
ramifications for peace and security throughout the Great
Lakes region.

As we focus on progress on the political front, we
should not, however, lose sight of the dire economic,
humanitarian and social conditions in Burundi. Earlier
expectations of improvements in the economy, following
the suspension of the regional economic embargo on
Burundi, have failed to materialize, mainly because of the
continuing violence and insecurity, resulting in large-scale
poverty, malnutrition and disease among the Burundian
people. The situation demands the infusion of substantial
economic and development assistance to Burundi.

The situation in Burundi should not be seen in
isolation from the continued instability in the region as a
whole. The linkage with the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is all too clear. The situation in
Burundi impacts on the region and vice versa. Peace in
Burundi is not likely to last in the absence of overall
regional stability.

The responsibility for ending the conflict lies,
ultimately, with the Burundian people themselves,
particularly their leaders. A genuine political commitment
is required on the part of the leaders to work on the gains
made thus far. We urge them most strongly to give
forthright and unqualified support to President Mandela
and to assist him in his difficult task. The parties must
seize the opportunity and negotiate in good faith and seek
to rebuild a united nation under a constitution that enjoys
the widest possible support. In the search for a final
political settlement, it must, first and foremost, be
acceptable to, and meet the needs of, the people of
Burundi themselves.

In expressing our strong support for President
Mandela, we wish him every success in his efforts. We
are particularly grateful to him for agreeing to spend his
valuable time in retirement undertaking this difficult

 

assignment for the sake of peace in Africa and peace in the
world.

Finally, I would like to commend you, Mr. President,
for highlighting this and other important African issues.
