Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
first like to strongly condemn the terrorist attack in the
city of London yesterday. I would also like to express
our sincere condolences to the Government of the
United Kingdom and the families of the victims.

We are grateful to the delegation of the United
Kingdom for holding today's important meeting
enabling us to examine the recent developments in the
brotherly country of Somalia. We thank Mr. Keating
and Mr. Madeira for their valuable briefings. I would
also like to congratulate President Farmajo of Somalia
on his election last month and to commend Somalia
for respecting the choice of the people and effecting a
peaceful and democratic transition of power.

It goes without saying that the election of
Mr. Farmajo, who had broad popular support and has
appointed a new Government, is a positive development
that will, we hope, help to continue the development
of the political process in Somalia and respond to the
aspirations of the Somali people with regard to State
institution-building, the elimination of terrorism and
the promotion of socioeconomic development. In that
regard, we look forward to the report being drafted
by the Secretariat in accordance with resolution 2275
(2016) concerning the future presence of the United
Nations in Somalia.

My delegation would like to reiterate how
important it is for the mandate of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) to fully
reflect developments on the ground so that it can
provide the Somali Government with the appropriate
support in confronting the challenges that the country
is facing. In doing so, it should focus on the concept
of establishing lasting peace, especially in the areas of
national reconciliation, the constitutional review, the
development of Somali armed forces that are strong and
united, and the establishment of effective institutions
that can provide basic services and ensure public order
and security in liberated areas.

Terrorism still represents a serious threat to the
progress achieved in Somalia in the recent past. That
threat is not limited to Somalia; it has spread to other
States in the region and beyond. We must promote
regional and international efforts to defeat Al-Shabaab
and other terrorist organizations. In that context, I would
like to commend the sacrifices made by the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the Somali
armed forces. It is a priority for the Somali stakeholders
to agree on a plan so as to achieve the goal of building
a united Somali army, given the progressive drawdown
of AMISOM. planned for 2018 before it withdraws fully
and its protection and security functions are completely
transferred to the Somali State.

We express our solidarity with the Government
and the people of Somalia with regard to the effects
of the humanitarian crisis caused by the drought and
the scarcity of rain. My delegation calls for increased
regional and international efforts to provide assistance
to those who need it. The consequences of the crisis
are numerous and extremely dangerous, particularly
for the humanitarian, political and security fronts,
and can include problems such as increased migration,
pressure on natural resources and ensuing conflict.
In addition, it is important to strengthen efforts to
build capacity in Somalia in the area of early warning
and prevention mechanisms to manage this type of
crisis - which Somalia has suffered from repeatedly
in the past - in order to prevent their recurrence and
reduce their severity in future.
Lastly, I would like to renew our congratulations
to the President, the Government and the people of
Somalia on their successful elections, and to reiterate
the full support of Egypt for that brotherly country in
its efforts to build a stable, strong and prosperous State.

