Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China would like to thank you, Sir, for convening
today's meeting. I also thank Under-Secretary-General
Feltman, Ambassador Cardi and Ambassador Vale de
Almeida for their briefings.

The implementation of the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA) during the first year has
registered good progress overall. At the sixth Joint
Commission meeting of the JCPOA, everyone gave a
positive assessment of the implementation of the Plan
of Action, exchanged views on the lifting of sanctions
and on nuclear issues in an earnest and in-depth manner
and committed to the continuous implementation of
the JCPOA.

China has taken note of the reports submitted
by Secretary-General Guterres (S/2016/ 1136) and
Ambassador Cardi (see S/2017/49) as the facilitator
for the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), and
appreciates the efforts that have gone into the drafting
of those reports. The reports provide an accurate
reflection of the implementation efforts made by the
parties concerned. It is of critical importance to send
a positive signal that all parties are committed to the
implementation of the resolution and the JCPOA. China
has taken note of Iran's legitimate concerns with regard
to the content of the reports. China appreciates the
efforts by Iran to implement the J CPOA and hopes that
the legitimate concerns of Iran will be duly reflected.

China also acknowledges the recent report (see S/2016/1113) by the Joint Commission to Security
Council on the work of the Procurement Working Group
and will continue to participate actively in the work of
both the Commission and the Working Group. Since the
JCPOA is not being implemented in a vacuum, there
will be difficulties and challenges along the way, and
joint efforts will be required. First, all parties should
reaffirm their political will and eliminate external
interference, so as to be able to stay the course in the
implementation. Secondly, the parties should honour
their commitments, in strict accordance with the
JCPOA, which provides the fundamental guidelines
for action. Thirdly, they should demonstrate goodwill
and properly address technical divergences through
consultations, on an equal footing, in the quest for a
long-term, sustainable solution. Only in so doing can
the implementation ofJCPOA be successful and lasting.

China has always advocated for the settlement of
the Iran nuclear issue by political and diplomatic means
and is dedicated to the strengthening of the international
nuclear non-proliferation system and the maintenance
of international and regional peace and stability. As
an active participant, promoter and contributor in the
process to resolve the Iranian nuclear issue, China
supports and safeguards the historic achievement of
the JCPOA, and will continue to work with all parties
to promote the sustained, comprehensive and effective
implementation of the J CPOA.

