Mrs. Mahouve Same (Cameroon) (spoke in French): I too would like to thank Mr. Kenzo Oshima
for his very useful briefing, which was highly
instructive and which has given us a better
understanding of the developments on issues that arise
daily in the work undertaken to reduce the suffering of
civilians trapped in conflicts. I would also like to
welcome the aide-memoire on this issue drafted under
the coordination of the delegation of Norway and the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA).

Humanitarian suffering caused by armed conflict
reminds us of the need for robust and concerted action
on the part of Governments, the Security Council and
others in a position to make a genuine contribution to
the implementation of all the recommendations
contained in the first and second reports of the
Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict (S/1999/957 and S/2001/331), so as to
improve the protection accorded them.

The types of conflicts have now changed to
include communal violence, ethnic cleansing, terrorism
and private wars financed by the international trade in
oil and diamonds. These are in essence internal
conflicts marked by a proliferation of armed groups.
Faced with the change in the situation, new
mechanisms and strategies are now necessary. We need
to establish a culture of protection, which will depend
on the capacity of the United Nations and the
international community to meet the challenges of this
new situation.

I should like to make the following comments.
Regarding penal justice, we think any form of impunity
in the area of humanitarian law or human rights
violations in which civilians in conflicts are victims
should be effectively combated.

We welcome in this respect the progress that was
made last year in the matter of decisions taken by the
Security Council to set up a group of ad litem judges
for the International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia, to increase the number of judges at the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and to
create a special independent tribunal for Sierra Leone.

Turning to access to civilians in the case of
conflicts, nothing has as much of a real impact on
civilians in conflicts as humanitarian aide to meet their
most urgent and immediate basic needs. We welcome
in this regard the initiative of the Secretary-General
described in paragraph 26 of his report S/2001/331,
which deals with working out a manual on criteria for
engagement and disengagement of humanitarian
organizations that are being set up. We encourage the
Council to continue active dialogue with parties in
conflict and also to use fact-finding missions in
conflict areas.

The separation of civilians from armed elements
remains, for our country, a crucial problem to be
resolved with determination because of the numerous
problems caused by the infiltration of armed elements
in the camps and the regroupment areas of refugees and
displaced persons. This infiltration sometimes reaches
the point of destabilizing some countries and regions,
in addition to the many dangers that ensue with regard
to the lives of civilians and humanitarian staff. The
measures described in paragraph 35 and 36 of the
report S/2001/ 133 of the Secretary-General, in
particular the June 2000 agreement between the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, are still topical and should continue to
receive every attention from the Council.

With regard to the media, we are all aware of the
importance of this sector in conflict situations. It is an
area where the Council has in its resolution 1296
(2000) provided for the opportunity for action to be
taken against those who incite hatred, crime and
genocide. My country favours a mechanism to monitor
the local media.

With regard to actors providing civilian
protection, consideration should be given to the
complementary role that certain elements in the
international community - regional organizations,
civil society, actors in the private sector, women and
young people - could play, with impetus and
coordination provided by the United Nations.

Finally, Cameroon encourages the Council to
keep up the momentum that it has already gained to
advance civilian protection and meet the humanitarian
needs of vulnerable groups such as women and
children. Special attention should be given to the
participation of women in the determination of
strategies for protection as well as in negotiating peace
agreements.

