Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, on behalf of the delegation of the Kingdom
of Morocco, I wish to extend our deep condolences to
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia on its loss of Crown
Prince Sultan Bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud. Our deepest
condolences and sympathy also go to Turkey following
the earthquake that occurred there yesterday.

We extend our gratitude to the President of the
Council for convening this open debate on the situation
in the Middle East, including the question of Palestine.
We also thank Mr. Lynn Pasco for his valuable and
comprehensive briefing.

Morocco aligns itself with the statements
delivered by the representatives of Egypt, Kazakhstan
and Qatar on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation and the Group of
Arab States, respectively.

Today's meeting is taking place only a few weeks
after Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas
delivered his historic address at the General Assembly
(see A/65/PV.19), in which he requested the full
membership of the State of Palestine in the United
Nations, including recognition of its sovereignty on the
basis of the 4 June 1967 borders and with East
Jerusalem as its capital. Based on our belief in justice
and legality as they relate to the question of
Palestine- as we stated during this year's general
debate (see A/66/PV.25) - my country renews its
determination to fully and effectively support the
request made by the Palestinian leadership on behalf of
the Palestinian people. We hope that the current
Security Council consultations on this issue will
culminate in the prompt achievement of that goal,
especially considering that there is universal consensus
on the two-State solution - the States of Palestine and
Israel - as well as recognition by many international
organizations, especially by this Organization, that the
Palestinian institutions and infrastructure are prepared
to shoulder the responsibilities of an independent State.

The Palestinian question is at a historic and
crucial crossroads, which requires the international
community to act responsibly in order to achieve the
legitimate demands of the Palestinian people. The
impasse in this long peace process does not bode well.
It could have a negative and adverse impact on peace
and security in the whole region.

That deadlock is the inevitable natural outcome
of the policies of force, intransigence and imposition of
the status quo pursued by the occupying Power. Instead
of dealing in a positive way with the plethora of
international initiatives to revive the peace process, the
Israeli authorities have intensified their efforts to
change the demographic composition of the occupied
territories by intensifying their settlement activities,
arbitrary arrests, home demolitions and displacement
of Palestinian people - including the confiscation of
their property, their collective punishment and the
excessive use of force against them. The most recent
chapter in this devious scheme was Israel's declaration,
on 14 October, authorizing the construction of 2,610
new illegal Jewish housing units in East Jerusalem, in
an attempt to fragment the new Palestinian State and
isolate East Jerusalem from the rest of the West Bank.

Like the Secretary-General, we are deeply
concerned about this dangerous and illegal escalation,
which runs counter to all international laws,
instruments and norms. As Chair of the Al-Quds
Committee of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation,
His Majesty King Mohammed VI, along with the
Kingdom of Morocco, strongly condemns all attempts
to alter the demographic composition of East Jerusalem
and change its religious, cultural and historic character.

The Security Council has reiterated time and
again that all unilateral actions taken by Israel in East
Jerusalem and the other occupied Palestinian territories
are illegal. It is time that the Council implements its
own resolutions and puts an end to such Israeli
practices. The international community, including the
United Nations, has the responsibility to take
immediate action in accordance with its legal, political
and ethical obligations vis-a-vis the Palestinian people,
in order to allow them to enjoy their full, legitimate
rights. In that connection, we support regional,
international and American Administration efforts, as
well as those of the European Union, which, in the
Quartet statement of 23 September, pledged to revive
the peace process, within a specific time frame, as a
last option and crucial hope and on the basis of
international instruments and terms of reference, as
well as United Nations resolutions, the Arab Peace
process, international law and the Quartet's own Road
Map.

The Palestinian Authority and the international
community have unquestionably acted with great
responsibility and complete respect for negotiations as
the basis for efforts to achieve a comprehensive and
fair peace. We are convinced that the stability and
security of the entire Middle East is inextricably linked
to the ability of Palestinians to exercise their political
and legal rights. That includes the right to establish an
independent Palestinian State with East Jerusalem as
its capital, as well as the withdrawal of Israel from all
other territories occupied since 1967.

The Kingdom of Morocco enjoyed the trust of the
international community in representing the African
and Arab Groups when it was elected as a
non-permanent member of the Security Council for the
period 2012-2013. We will do everything in our power
to enable the Palestinian people to regain their full
rights, including to establish an independent State with
East Jerusalem as its capital, as well as everything in
our power to maintain stability and security for all
areas and peoples of the Middle East, including Israel.

