Mr. Jagne (Gambia): The rightful place for a child
is certainly not in the battlefield, but in the classroom or
on the playground. The Graca Machel report on the
impact of armed conflict on children has been an
eye-opener on an issue which constitutes a cause for
serious concern. With the appointment of the Secretary-
General's Special Representative, children all over the
world now have a public advocate whose constructive
approach to the whole question, quite apart from his
enthusiasm and dynamism, will, in our View, contribute
in no small measure to the campaign to raise public
awareness of the problem and then, through concerted
international efforts, address it in all its facets.

The first step in this direction is to stop using child
soldiers, which would require States parties to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child to re-examine the
Convention with a View to raising the minimum age for
recruitment and participation from 15 to 18 years. It is
our firm conviction that, with the necessary political will,

 

this can be achieved. But that does not solve the problem
entirely, if we take into account the persistent problem of
internal conflicts and civil wars.

Experience has shown that, more often than not, under
such circumstances armed groups - be they rebels,
insurgents or whatever they are called - have very little or
no regard whatsoever for either international law governing
warfare or even their own local value systems. This is why
in conflict situations they go for the easy targets - women
and children, the most vulnerable group in society. What is
even more painful is the fact that such armed groups
usually attack civilian targets such as schools and hospitals,
acts viciously calculated to inflict maximum loss of
innocent lives.

My delegation is of the view that the perpetrators of
atrocities against women and children should not be
allowed to have a feeling of impunity. They must not go
scot-free. The time has now come to bring the full force of
the law upon them. It is our fervent hope that with the
eventual establishment of a permanent international criminal
court, those who abuse, brutalize and traumatize women
and children will be snatched from any hiding place by the
long arm of the law and brought to justice.

While thinking aloud on how best to deal with the
perpetrators of such heinous crimes, we should at the same
time give due consideration to the victims in a post-conflict
recovery programme, especially the rehabilitation and
reintegration of children. In this connection, my delegation
supports fully the proposal by Special Representative
Otunnu to start pilot projects for this purpose in
post-conflict situations. He deserves the support and
encouragement of all in this noble endeavour.

There is also an urgent need to address the related
issue of what the Special Representative calls the crisis of
youth. It will be recalled that the recent special session of
the General Assembly on the world drug problem revealed
that youths are the main victims of the drug menace.
Today, again, we are told that 90 per cent of conflict
casualties around the world are civilians, of which a large
and increasing number are children.

It is distressing to note that even if they are not killed,
they are abused, brutalized and traumatized, or, in some
cases, maimed. The situation is bad enough already to
warrant a prompt response. The high-level symposium held
in London recently devoted to the problem of children in
armed conflict is a step in the right direction as far as the
sensitization campaign is concerned. Similar meetings
should be held all over the world and at regular intervals.
We hope that in this way there will be renewed interest
in the relevant international instruments, as well as the
local norms and value systems.

In conclusion, my delegation wishes to reiterate what
we said during the special session on drugs about the
need to protect our children. It goes without saying that
children anywhere in the world are looked upon as the
future of society, and they should therefore be protected
by all means. We all have a common stake in doing so,
and it is a responsibility that we cannot abdicate.

