Monsignor Grysa (Holy See): The Holy See thanks
the Plurinational Republic of Bolivia and its presidency
of the Security Council for convening today's open
debate on a topic that brings us back to the early days
of the United Nations, specifically when, by resolution
181 (II) of 1947, the mandated territory of Palestine was
divided into two States, one Jewish, the other Arab. For
some 70 years, the Palestinian question has been the
topic of a great many reports, debates and resolutions
in the Security Council Chamber and in other United
Nations organs.

The Holy See has supported the two-State solution
from the very beginning, and my delegation reaffirms
once again the Holy See's unwavering view that the
two-State Solution as the only viable way of fulfilling
the aspirations for peaceful coexistence among Israelis
and Palestinians alike and the only feasible peace plan
that would allow both nations to live side by side within
secure and internationally recognized borders.

The facts on the ground, as presented to the Security
Council on a monthly basis by the Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, are a source of
persistent grave concern. Leaders on both sides bear
the heaviest responsibility in guiding their people in the
direction ofa mutually agreed resolution to the conflict,
rather than leading them into deeper conflict. The Holy
See calls on both Israel and Palestine to demonstrate
wisdom, responsibility and the political will needed to
reach a historic peace agreement that would meet the
legitimate aspirations of both peoples. Undertaking
dialogue with perseverance and good will must replace
inflammatory rhetoric, violence and conflict. Innocent
civilians must never be the target of terror or inordinate
military actions.

The Israeli-Palestinian discord and the intra-
Palestinian divisions have also been exacerbated by
external forces and the geopolitical interests of other
countries. The Holy See therefore wishes to exhort
neighbours in the region and other concerned States
from outside the region to facilitate and sustain the
peace process, instead of obstructing or scuttling it for
their own interests.

The Holy See wishes to reaffirm the historic status
quo of Jerusalem, in accordance with the relevant
United Nations resolutions, and rejects any unilateral
measure aimed at changing it. At the same time, it calls
upon the United Nations to carefully consider the status
of Jerusalem as recommended by General Assembly
resolution 181 (II) of 1947. My delegation believes that
the Holy City should be a place of convergence and
peace and that the followers of the three monotheistic
religions of Judaism, Christianity and Islam should
be guaranteed free and unhindered access to its
holy places. Accordingly, the initial proposal of an
international status guaranteed by the United Nations
remains of great importance in fulfilling the City's
singular calling. Indeed, the Holy City of Jerusalem
undoubtedly holds a very special place not only in the
hearts of the inhabitants of the city, but also for the
followers throughout the world of the three monotheistic
religions. May it become truly what its name means:
City of Peace.

My delegation notes with great concern the dire
humanitarian situation that the Palestine refugees
and the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA)
are facing. The Agency provides a range of essential
support for some 5.6 million registered Palestine
refugees, supplying the most basic human needs from
housing to education, health care and social services. In
a situation that shows no sign of being resolved quickly,
a fully functional UNRWA remains the best means to
prevent the situation in the region from worsening in
a way that would bring both greater cost and likely
greater expenditures to the international community.

Like UNRWA, various charitable action groups
and organizations of the Catholic Church provide
education, health care and social services to Palestine
refugees and to Palestinians in general. The Holy
See hopes and prays that, sooner rather than later,
a fair and durable solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict may be reached through the resumption of
final-status negotiations aimed at reaching a two-State
solution, with Israel and a Palestinian State living side
by side in peace and security within internationally
recognized borders.

