Mr. Latona (Mauritius): My delegation is
pleased to see you presiding over this meeting today,
Mr. President. We are also pleased to welcome to the
Security Council the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Vieira de Mello, and Chief
Minister Alkatiri. We thank them for their
comprehensive briefings. We also welcome the
representatives of the World Bank and the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP), and thank
them for their statements.

Let me also congratulate, through the Chief
Minister, the people of East Timor for successfully
electing the national Constituent Assembly in an
atmosphere of peace and free of violence. In effect, the
rate of participation in the election in East Timor of
over 91 per cent has proved once again that no spirit or
desire is bigger than that of self- determination. We are
happy to note that not only have peace and calm now
been firmly established in the country, but that the
people of East Timor are heading towards soon
achieving their cherished goal of independence in a
systematic and well-prepared manner.

The report of the Secretary-General is highly
commendable for its detailed information on the
situation in East Timor, especially after the peaceful
elections for the Constituent Assembly, on 30 August
2001. My delegation fully supports the
recommendations of the Secretary-General, especially
those relating to the continued presence of United
Nations personnel in East Timor.

Now that the cornerstone of popular democracy
and representative government has been put in place,
the primary aim of the transitional and future
Governments will have to be the consolidation of these
principles, so that reconstruction of the island can be
facilitated and expedited. In this regard, it is important
for the international community to extend the necessary
support to East Timor in all spheres of activity. The
Security Council should therefore continue to support
East Timor and to show that it remains fully committed
during the transition period. Any compromise or self-
complacency on the part of the international
community could lead to a standstill, or even to a
reversal of the situation, thereby jeopardizing the gains
already made.

The elections to the Constituent Assembly have
indeed paved the way to independence for the people.
However, for independence to be fully enjoyed, the
following three pillars are essential for a functioning
democracy in a new, independent country: an impartial
and independent judiciary, a competent and fully
trained civilian police service, and a solid and broad-
based administrative framework. The fledgling
judiciary will therefore need training and support in
order to make it more professional, and so that it can
perform its role effectively in ensuring the rule of law
and the protection of human rights. In this respect, we
welcome the promulgation of regulation 2001/25, of 14
September 2001, which lays down measures to make
the court system more effective and to expedite the
judicial process.

Likewise, a well-trained civilian police service
will be very important for maintaining law and order in
East Timor and for the promotion and protection of
human rights. In this regard, we welcome the progress
in the training of East Timorese for the higher posts in
the Police Service. In respect of the establishment of a
functioning public administration, we welcome the
major advances made in the past two years in building
a civil service and its institutions from the ground up.
With the increased facilities for the training of
personnel, we are confident that the East Timorese will
be able to shoulder responsibility for their country in
the best possible manner.

No sustainable peace or stability can be possible
in the absence of a secure environment in East Timor.
Although the elections were held in a very peaceful
manner, we should not overlook certain factors that
might negatively impact on the good works so far
carried out. In this regard, we express our concerns
over militia activities and illegal markets along the
borders - although those are on the decline - and over
the continued intimidation of refugees. The Council
should therefore ensure that the 80,000 refugees still in
Indonesia are free to return voluntarily to East Timor.
Until they are resettled in East Timor, it is imperative
for humanitarian assistance to continue unabated.

It is also important that the people of East Timor
feel secure in every walk of life. This can be possible
only by ensuring that they fully enjoy their rights
without discrimination, by promoting confidence-
building measures and by incorporating all human
rights norms into the Constitution that is currently
being drafted, and which is expected to be completed
within the next 60 days, as the Chief Minister has
informed us.

On the external front, East Timor desperately
needs the necessary diplomatic support from
neighbouring States, especially Indonesia. It is
encouraging to note that informal meetings are already
being held at higher levels between Indonesia and East
Timor. We welcome the meeting held on 12 September
between the President of Indonesia and the Special
Representative, accompanied by the Chief Minister and
the Senior Minister for Foreign Affairs and Mr. Xanana
Gusmao. We also welcome the ongoing negotiations
between Indonesia and the office of the United Nations
Development Office (UNDP) towards the
establishment of technical arrangements, as a basis for
the return of United Nations agencies to East Nusa
Tanggara.

There has been much talk about lack of
coordination among various United Nations agencies.
The situation in East Timor is one of those where such
coordination can be of paramount importance,
especially when we enter the phase of peace-building
and reconstruction of the East Timorese economy. It is
the View of my delegation that the experience gained in
Haiti should serve as a basis for future action in East
Timor.

A country that has suffered so much trauma and
been subjected to untold hardships can never embark
on nation-building without justice being seen to be
done in favour of the victims. Nation-building is never
complete without a consolidated, united and peace-
loving society. The same is true for East Timor. We
believe more is required than what is currently in place
in order to encourage longer-term reconciliation among
the East Timorese. Importance must therefore be given
to nation-building, capacity-building and institution-
building.

My delegation, like others, welcomes the
amendment to the Presidential Decree of 23 April that
established an ad hoc human rights tribunal to deal
with gross human rights violations in East Timor.
Although it expands the jurisdiction of the tribunal, it
fails, however, in its objective of restricting trials to
those cases that occurred in the months of April and
September 1999. We hope that the Government of
Indonesia will revisit its decision by expanding the
jurisdiction of the ad hoc tribunal to cover all cases of
human rights crimes committed in East Timor from
January to October 1999.

My delegation fully supports the establishment of
a Commission for Reception, Truth and Reconciliation
that would be empowered to hold hearings and seek
evidence in order to establish the truth about all
relevant events that occurred in East Timor from 25
April 1974 to 25 October 1999. However, the
Commission should not be seen as an alternative to
justice, but should supplement the judicial process. We
are confident that the Commission will help in healing
the wounds and in bringing the East Timorese closer
together than ever, in the interests of the whole nation.

With only three months to go before the mandate
of the United Nations Transitional Administration in
East Timor (UNTAET) expires, there is a need for a
decision on the successor mission. The United Nations
should not be complacent. Instead, it should at all costs
avoid having a half-accomplished mission. We
therefore believe that it is imperative for the
international community to remain involved in East
Timor for a period of two years, starting from
independence. The United Nations has no other
responsible choice but to remain committed to the
goals set out for UNTAET. The successor mission plan,
detailing and providing for an integrated peacekeeping
mission is the right decision by the international
community, given that UNTAET's mandate will not
have been fulfilled by the end of January 2002.

In this regard, we fully support the
recommendations of the Secretary-General and agree
that the United Nations should remain engaged in East
Timor to protect and consolidate the major
achievements so far realized. With regard to the
physical presence of UNTAET in a post-independence
East Timor, we fully agree that it should be the right
size to cater to the more specific needs of the country
in this new phase of its political future.

Finally, we support the draft presidential
statement circulated today.

