Mrs. Ukonga: Let me begin by thanking the
Nigerian presidency for inviting the Gulf of Guinea
Commission (GGC) to participate in this debate and
discussion on the subject of "Peace and security in
Africa: piracy in the Gulf of Guinea". This issue has
become a real cause for concern for the countries of the
region and the rest of the world because of the
increased number of acts of piracy, terrorism and
robbery at sea, illicit trafficking of arms, drugs,
persons and goods regularly being carried in the Gulf
of Guinea region.
I bring apologies from the Executive Secretary of
the Gulf of Guinea Commission, His Excellency
Mr. Miguel Trovoada, who was unable to participate in
this meeting due to reasons beyond his control. For me
personally, it is a great honour to represent the Gulf of
Guinea Commission at this very important meeting.

The Gulf of Guinea Commission welcomes this
development at the Security Council and hopes it will
lead to an effective collaboration to strengthen the
region's defence mechanism so as to prevent its
becoming another dangerous zone like the Gulf of
Aden.

Among other reasons, it was precisely to forestall
this nefarious development that the Gulf of Guinea
Commission was established. The Treaty establishing
the Gulf of Guinea Commission was first signed in
July 2001 and came into effect in August 2006. Its
secretariat was set up in Luanda in April 2007. The
Treaty states in Article 2 that the membership of the
Commission shall be "sovereign States bordering the
Gulf of Guinea, parties to the present Treaty". The
current members are Angola, Cameroon, the Republic
of the Congo, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, Nigeria, and Sao Tome and
Principe. Under Article 27, countries of the Gulf of
Guinea region can accede to the Treaty and be admitted
as members.

Among the objectives of the Commission, as
clearly stated in its Article 3, are the following: to
create conditions of mutual confidence and peace and
security conducive to the harmonious development of
States; to promote close consultation in the exploitation
of the natural resources of the Gulf, with a View to
ensuring the economic development of member States
and the well-being of their peoples; to harmonize the
respective policies of States regarding matters of
common interest, particularly matters concerning the
exploitation of natural resources; to protect, preserve
and improve the natural environment of the Gulf of
Guinea and cooperate in the event of natural disaster;
and to strengthen cooperation in communications,
especially maritime communication, with a view to
facilitating ties and trade among member States.

Article 5 of the Treaty clearly states the areas of
cooperation:

"In pursuit of the objectives stated above, the
High Contracting Parties undertake to pool their
efforts towards the harmonization of their
respective policies in the areas of common
interest.

"To this end, they pledge to identify areas of
common interest in the geographical area of the
Gulf and map out common policies, particularly
in the areas of peace and security, exploration of
hydrocarbons, fisheries and mineral resources,
the environment, movement of peoples and
goods, development of communications,
promotion of the economic development and
integration of the Gulf region".

Since its inception in 2007, the Executive
Secretariat of the Gulf of Guinea Commission has
striven to establish contacts and mechanisms that will
assist in attaining the objectives of the GGC, especially
in the face of the growing importance of the region as a
major supplier of marine and hydrocarbon resources to
the international community, including, inter alia, the
United States of America, China, France, Portugal and
Spain.

The Gulf of Guinea region is an important
shipping route and hub that connects the region with
Europe and America. This importance has equally
drawn both domestic and international attention to the
need for more focused and better coordinated attention
in addressing the growing challenges of piracy,
especially boarded piracy, armed robbery at sea,
terrorism, illicit trafficking in arms, drugs and persons,
and other illegal activities like illegal, uncontrolled and
undeclared fishing, among others.

In the Gulf of Guinea region we now have
installed facilities for oil and gas exploration and
exploitation, such as oil and gas production platforms
in shallow waters, floating production systems in deep
waters, drilling rigs for exploration in deep waters, and
onshore and offshore storage facilities. Those represent
very heavy investments, and the countries of the region
and their business partners cannot afford to watch
while pirates and armed robbers at sea threaten
facilities that are vital to the economic survival of the
countries of the region.

We also have ports for export and import in both
the maritime countries and their landlocked
neighbours. Ports like Douwala, Kribi, Abidjan,
Cotonou and Lome serve Chad, Mali and Burkina
Faso. Any threat to these ports, through piracy and
armed robbery at sea, also affects the economic
activities and survival of those countries that depend
on them for their imports and exports. Such criminal
activities would destabilize not only the host countries

but also the landlocked countries that depend on them.
Therefore, the situation involves a security imperative
for the development of the region.

Many of main cities and towns of the Gulf of
Guinea region are found along the coast. Hence any
threat to security caused by criminal activities at sea or
by ecological problems will affect many, many people.
The Gulf also serves as a very important route that
connects the region to Europe and America. Piracy and
armed robbery at sea directly affect the cost of sea
transportation in the region in terms of high insurance
costs and the frequency of ships.

If all these installations, facilities, populations
and sea routes are threatened by piracy, armed robbery
at sea and other criminal and illegal activities, the
problem is massive and has regional and international
consequences. How do we face the threats?

There is an urgent need for regional institutions
like the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and the Economic Community of Central
African States (ECCAS) to work with us, the Gulf of
Guinea Commission, to uproot the scourge of
criminalities from their respective subregions for a
successful realization of their mandates. We also
welcome the current initiative that is being pursued
within the United Nations system.

The fundamental idea for establishing the Gulf of
Guinea Commission was to provide maritime security
for the region in order to protect the exploration for
and exploitation of its natural resources - oil and gas
and fisheries - for the development of the countries of
the region and their populations. The Commission also
seeks to encourage best practices in exploration for and
exploitation of the natural resources of the region and
to assist in case of natural and environmental disasters.
The Commission is open to working in synergy with
countries of the region and with ECOWAS and ECCAS
to fight all the threats to the natural resources and
environment of the region.

Since our inception, we organized a defence and
security conference in Malabo in February 2010 with a
view to charting a way forward in the search for
effective and inclusive solutions to the increasing
incidence of threats to security and criminal activities
in the region. We also participated in the African
Union-coordinated conference on maritime security in
Africa. In July 2011, we were part of the ECCAS and
ECOWAS Maritime Safety and Security Seminar, on
which General Toure has ably briefed the Council.

We have realized, on the basis of all those
meetings, that fighting criminals at sea is a high-cost
operation. Securing a maritime space the size of the
Gulf of Guinea region goes beyond the capacity of any
one country, as no country in the region has the human,
material and financial capacity to cover it. This has
created a need for cooperation and close collaboration
among the countries of the region, which must work
closely with external partners to establish a robust, all-
inclusive regional defence mechanism that can be
simultaneously deployed, coordinated and controlled at
the regional level.

Fighting such illegal activities as piracy,
terrorism and trafficking of all kinds - arms, persons
and drugs - is not like fighting a war in the classical
sense of the word, that is, with organized armies.
Individual, bilateral and tripartite or quadripartite
approaches will only the drive criminal actors to
operate in those areas of the region that are not covered
by such security arrangements. That has been the case
with the arrangements made between Nigeria and
Benin, as well as the efforts of Equatorial Guinea and
some countries of the ECCAS region, which have also
set up a quadripartite arrangement.

The war will require technological know-how,
radar surveillance, equipment, good expertise for
effective monitoring, and preventive deterrence.

Why is the Gulf of Guinea Commission
involved? There will be a need to harmonize laws
regarding illegal activities. How do we deal with piracy
without the process being hijacked for the purposes of
political vendettas, among other things? We need to
improve the legal framework by ensuring that member
States adopt laws against piracy that can be used in all
countries of the region. We also need to encourage the
standardization of punishments for offences at the
regional level, so that one country does not sentence a
convicted pirate to two years' imprisonment, while
another hands out a 20-year sentence.

The Gulf of Guinea Commission is there to
perform such harmonization work for member States,
be they from ECOWAS or ECCAS. We currently have
members from West, Central and southern Africa with
shorelines on the Gulf of Guinea. It is therefore most
suitable to carry out the functions of any joint
mechanism that may be established to confront the

dangers now shattering the peace and security of the
region. We are a brand-new organization and, if
politically supported and provided with the necessary
human and material resources, funding and other
required logistical support, we will be in a very good
position to perform our functions and fulfil our
mandate.

The United States of America, France and
Germany have been at the forefront of efforts to
provide assistance, organizing training exercises for the
maritime and naval personnel of some member States.
Nigeria, Benin and Cameroon have benefited from
such assistance, which should be coordinated and
extended to all States of the Gulf of Guinea region,
under the auspices of the Gulf of Guinea Commission.
It is our fervent hope that the Security Council will
take these factors into consideration in the decision on
a comprehensive and coordinated approach to
combating piracy and other criminal activities, such as
terrorism, robbery at sea, trafficking in arms, drugs and
persons, as well as controlling illegal, unauthorized
and undeclared fishing activities. The Gulf of Guinea
Commission was established with the objective of
warding off such maritime challenges and to control
and contain them until they are eventually eliminated.

