Mr. Lelong (Haiti) (interpretation from French):
The Haitian delegation is pleased, Madam, to note the
ability, commitment and success with which you are
guiding the deliberations of the Security Council as its
President for the month of February. Without question,
these all bear the mark of your experience and skill; we
congratulate you.

As this is our first statement to the Security Council
this year, we wish also to congratulate the new members:
Chile, Egypt, Guinea-Bissau, Poland and the Republic of
Korea. We are certain that they will do excellent work as
members of the Council.

The delegation of Haiti thanks the Security Council
for taking under consideration the request made by
President Rene Preval in his letter dated 9 February 1996
for a further extension of the mandate of the United
Nations Mission in Haiti (UNMIH). Extending the
mandate will make it possible to consolidate the
achievements that have been made and to guide the
country towards the economic and social development to
which the people of Haiti aspire. Continuing the work of
UNMIH will encourage the completion of this task
through the Mission's support for our new national police
force as it gains the experience it lacks and as it continues
to acquire the equipment it still needs.

Since its deployment on 31 March 1995, taking over
from the multinational force, UNMIH has carried out its
mandate with success and excellence. Thanks to its
support for the Government, it has been possible to get
the country back on track and to begin the task of
rebuilding our institutions and our infrastructure, which
had been completely destroyed during the three years of
the coup d 'e'tat.

Politically speaking, a great deal has been achieved
since the restoration of constitutional order, which has
made it possible to look with optimism towards the
political future of the country. We have been successful
in our effort to make up the backlog which the three
years of the coup d 'etat caused in the political calendar of
our country. Legislative, municipal and presidential
elections have been carried out normally. Today, whether
in Parliament or in the towns of the country, the transfer
of power provided for by the Constitution has been
respected, and the leaders, honestly and democratically
elected, are performing to general satisfaction.

 

For the first time in the long history of our country, a
democratically elected president has transferred power to
another democratically elected president. The inaugural
ceremony, which attracted the attention of the entire world
because of its size and its scope, was the culmination of the
efforts of the Haitian people and the international
community to provide Haiti with a democratic regime.

Parliament, which has been reconstituted after the
elections of June and September, is playing the role
assigned to it by the Constitution, and it is therefore an
important factor on the national political scene. The
members of Parliament and senators of the Republic take
their responsibilities to heart and do not hesitate to request
an accounting from the executive branch on the way it is
conducting public affairs. The public debate that is taking
place on important matters is a dynamic impulse to political
life and creates transparency, which is so necessary for
confidence and for participation in the work of
reconstruction and rehabilitation undertaken in the country.

Regarding the struggle against lack of security which
was the main obstacle to the resumption of normal public
life and activities, major progress has been achieved.
Thanks to the strengthening of the role of public security
forces, with the assistance of the United Nations Mission in
Haiti, (UNMIH), security has improved. The fear that
reigned in the country is now disappearing. The population
feels much more confident with the more and more visible
presence of the National Police.

Nevertheless, the situation in matters of security
remains precarious. Indeed, there are serious risks of
disturbances. This was made evident by the attack against
two deputies of the Lavalas Movement, one of whom was
killed and the other seriously wounded. Violent
demonstrations, which caused more than seven deaths and
many wounded, broke out spontaneously throughout the
country as a result of that act. Likewise, we have seen
practically everywhere demonstrations protesting the high
cost of living and popular clamours over the persistence of
certain economic problems. These expressions of
discontentment are a matter of concern for the Government,
which is trying to give an adequate response to these
outbreaks of violence. In this connection, the role played
by the National Police in maintaining security is of
paramount importance. The creation of that institution,
which is enshrined in the Constitution, has filled in a very
important gap.

Today, our young policemen, who are deployed
throughout our nine geographical departments, are carrying
out remarkable work. This has won the admiration of the
populace. They ensure public security, organize patrols,
direct traffic and generally assist the population.
Nevertheless, it must be acknowledged that there are
certain shortcomings and limits to this newly created
body. The policemen still need more experience to be
able to perform better their duties. Likewise, the material
and equipment they require are lacking, and there is a
deplorable lack of training. The Government is paying
particular attention to all these points in the hope of
finding a solution to them in order to make it possible for
the National Police to fulfil successfully its role as the
guardian of peace and security.

As far as the judiciary is concerned, despite the
improvements in its functioning, it continues to exhibit
serious deficiencies. It is obvious that of all the
institutions in the country, its structure, functioning and
essence are perhaps the most eroded, as was the case in
earlier periods. For that reason, it has never responded
properly to the requirements of justice for the national
majority. Hence, it has been discredited and there has
been a tendency to resort to popular justice to punish
political crimes.

The creation of the Justice Academy, for that reason,
is a measure of great importance. More than 200 judges
and prosecutors trained at the Academy, as well as
50 bailiffs are now active. The Government thus intends
to provide our courts with more qualified personnel, more
capable of performing their functions. At the same time,
a programme of renovation and construction of the courts
is under way throughout the country.

The Government has also given attention to the
problems of the prison system. Steps have been taken to
ensure that the prisons, both as regards their functioning
and their state of physical repair, are more in accordance
with established norms. A new National Penitentiary
Administration, the members of which have undergone a
training course, are now in charge of the prisons. This
has resulted in an improvement in the conditions under
which prisoners are held.

One can see, in the light of this account - which is
not an exhaustive one, by any means - over the last 16
months, Haiti has undergone sure and positive evolution,
which the Security Council, having authorized the sending
of the United Nations Mission, must welcome.
Nevertheless, the work is far from complete. The battle
for democracy has not been completely won. A long
road has been travelled, undoubtedly. Important and

 

meaningful results have been achieved. But elements likely
to cause disturbances and to reverse the trend towards
progress continue to exist.

The Government is indeed deeply worried by the
activities of former military personnel and armed civilians
who are very close to the former Haitian army and who
disturb public order and constitute a threat to the
democratic process under way. It is clear that the enemies
of democracy and the state of law have not given up. The
appearance of the so-called red army in Cite Soleil could
disquiet the population. This group, which seems to have
certain links with the drug trade, is responsible for certain
disturbances in this heavily populated part of the capital in
recent months.

In this context, the departure from Haiti of the
UNMIH forces, scheduled for 29 February, would leave a
considerable void in the country, which our young National
Police, still inexperienced and underequipped, would not be
able to tackle properly. This is why President Preval has,
as one of his initial official acts, requested the extension of
UNMIH's mandate.

We believe that the presence in Haiti of UNMIH for
a further period should make it possible for the democratic
process to take root and gain strength with the
strengthening of our institutions. To leave Haiti now, when
a great deal still remains to be done, would only imperil all
the efforts made by the international community in aid of
the Haitian people, aid which has begun to give striking
results. My delegation hopes that the Council will
understand the need for and the soundness of this request
and will authorize UNMIH to continue its activities in Haiti
by adopting the draft resolution now before it.

In this connection, the delegation of Haiti would like
to express its gratitude to those delegations that have
supported this request. We would particularly like to thank
the Friends of the Secretary-General for Haiti, and the Non-
Aligned caucus in the Council - particularly its
coordinator, Ambassador Somavia - for their tireless
efforts to help Haiti, as well as the Group of Latin
American and Caribbean States, which has always
supported us in our struggle for the return of democracy to
Haiti and which also deserves our gratitude. We would
also like to extend our sincere thanks to the delegations of
the People's Republic of China and of the Russian
Federation for their understanding and their support.

In conclusion, I should like to express the gratitude of
the people and the Government of Haiti to the Secretary-
General and to his Special Representative, Mr. Lakhdar
Brahimi, for their dedication to Haiti. We would like to
express our gratitude to those countries that have agreed
to provide troops and civilian personnel. Finally, we
would like to pay tribute to those brave soldiers who have
laid down their lives in this Mission so that democracy
can once again flourish in Haiti.

