Mr. Bolton (United States of America): I would
like to join other delegations in thanking Mr. Koenigs
for his briefing this morning and for the work that he
and his team are doing. The United States is grateful
for the hard work and sacrifice of the United Nations
Mission of Assistance in Afghanistan (UNAMA). We
fully support the renewal of UNAMA's mandate and
strongly urge other nations to do the same.

The remarkable transition in Afghanistan since
2001 has underscored the importance of UNAMA's
contributions. Throughout the Bonn process, UNAMA
contributed enormously to progress towards our shared
goals in Afghanistan.

The recent London Conference marked the end of
the Bonn process and the launching of the Afghanistan
Compact - the new foundation for the international
community's support for Afghanistan. The United
Nations role in the formulation of the Compact and in
guiding reconstruction, governance and development
efforts in Afghanistan will be essential to ensuring
success over the next five years. As the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan is co-chairing the Joint Coordination and
Monitoring Board created by the Compact, the United
Nations responsibilities in Afghanistan will increase.
We look to the Special Representative to use his role
on the Board to maintain momentum in Afghan
reconstruction, to improve the effectiveness of
international reconstruction and assistance and to
persuade donors and the Afghan Government to stay
the course, as outlined in the Compact. United Nations
support and resources are critical to making the Board
an effective organization.

Our objective is to ensure strong leadership and
levels of financial and technical assistance adequate to
make progress throughout the country. A key measure
of progress will be growth in Afghan capacity. Under
the Compact, the Government of Afghanistan has
committed itself over the next five years to meeting
specific goals of improving security by fully
developing the Afghan national army and the Afghan
national police, providing good governance based on
the rule of law and respect for human rights, promoting
economic and social development and building a legal
economy free from the corruption of drug production
and trafficking.

We look forward to working with UNAMA to
help Afghanistan reach the goals established in the
Afghanistan Compact, the realization of which will
benefit the broader region as well as Afghanistan. The
support for the Afghanistan Compact demonstrates the
international community's firm commitment to
security, democracy and economic development in
Afghanistan, while highlighting the continuing
requirement for a strong United Nations role through
its leadership in many ongoing programmes.

The United States remains committed to
Afghanistan for the long term. We look forward to
working with UNAMA to improve security for
Afghanistan, including the promotion of international
human rights standards, with a reformed and fully
capable Afghan police force and judicial system.

With UNAMA, we seek to help Afghanistan to
develop its human capital through strengthened access
to health care and education for women and men at all
levels. Together with the people of Afghanistan, their
democratically elected representatives and UNAMA,
we look forward to creating a peaceful Afghan State
that is a source of stability in the central South Asia
region.

