Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): At the outset, I wish
to congratulate the United States on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for this month.

Malaysia associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Iran on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement and with that to be delivered
by the representative of Indonesia on behalf of the
Organization ofIslamic Cooperation.

We are deeply concerned by the continuing grave
violations against children in situations of armed conflict
around the world, as highlighted by the Secretary-
General in his report (S/2014/339). Despite a series
of measures taken by the international community to
protect children in armed conflict, they continue to be
recruited, killed, maimed, abducted, sexually exploited
and deprived of humanitarian access and health care.
In recent months alone, the international community
has been stunned by heartbreaking images of children
suffering in the crossfire of conflicts beyond their
control in many parts of the world, particularly in the
Middle East and Africa.

Malaysia is particularly concerned over the high
number of child casualties caused by the recent Israeli
aggression and atrocities in Gaza, which have claimed
the lives of over 500 children. The horrific and brutal
attacks also left more than 3,000 children injured and
countless others orphaned. The fact that non-military
United Nations facilities sheltering refugees, including
schools and hospitals, were deliberately targeted during
the conflict is deplorable and cannot be condoned. The
sanctity of schools and hospitals in times of war must
be safeguarded to ensure that communities in crisis
continue to have access to education and health care.
In that regard, we fully support the Secretary-General's
call, in line with applicable international humanitarian
law and in accordance with resolution 2143 (2014), on
Member States to consider adopting additional concrete
measures to deter the military use of schools and other
public places.

We also continue to be alarmed by the arrest
and detention of children in the occupied Palestinian
territories, many of whom are subjected to cruel and
degrading ill-treatment by the Israeli security forces.
The mistreatment and lack of adequate legal protection
for Palestinian children in detention are unacceptable
and must be urgently addressed.

Malaysia notes with deep concern the rise in
attacks on and abductions of children by terrorist
groups. We also condemn the continuous recruitment
and use of children in armed conflict in many parts of
the world. No child should be associated with parties
to conflict. It is high time that Member States upheld
their responsibility to protect children, particularly
those trapped in conflict situations. Malaysia therefore
warmly welcomes the Children, Not Soldiers campaign,
launched by the Special Representative for Children and
Armed Conflict and UNICEF, and aimed at ending the
recruitment and use of children by Government armed
forces in conflict by 2016. We recognize that this is an
ambitious undertaking, and we call on the Secretary-
General to ensure that the campaign is mainstreamed
throughout the United Nations work, from peace
processes to peacebuilding. We are confident that the
road map and the comprehensive plan of action that
have been incorporated into the campaign will yield
many positive outcomes.

We are also deeply shocked by the appalling level
of sexual and gender-based violence against children
documented in the Secretary-General's report. These
acts are horrendous crimes for which those responsible
must be brought to justice. They also have far-reaching
implications for the development of affected societies
in general. We are concerned that impunity for grave
violations against children, in particular sexual violence,
is common to several situations and exacerbates even
further the vulnerability of children. My delegation
believes that there should be no leniency or amnesty for
crimes perpetrated against innocent children, and we
continue to call on Member States to establish effective
accountability measures to bring justice, dignity and
rehabilitation for children victimized by armed conflict.

We fully concur with the Secretary-General's
recommendation that the Council strengthen provisions
for the protection of children in all relevant mandates
of United Nations peacekeeping, special political and
peacebuilding missions that include the deployment of
child protection advisers. Peacekeepers and front-line
personnel in conflict situations should be adequately
equipped to prevent and mitigate violations against
children. Malaysia also supports efforts to mainstream
the children and armed conflict agenda into the work of
the Security Council, which ensures the continued high
visibility of this subject matter.

Children are among the most vulnerable members
of any society, as they are the easiest prey for ruthless
perpetrators. At the same time, they are the key to the
future of any society in the world. The violence inflicted
upon children in armed conflicts can leave physical and
psychological scars that last for generations, affecting
efforts to rebuild peaceful communities and nations.
We therefore must put an end to acts by groups or
individuals who systematically and deliberately target
and abuse children in situations of armed conflict.

In conclusion, Malaysia would like to express
our continued commitment to working with Council
members and the international community to ensure
that the protection of children in armed conflict around
the world remains our priority.

