Mr. Smirnov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to welcome and congratulate
you, Sir, on Pakistan's assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council. We also thank Ambassador
Pleuger and the German delegation for their successful
handling of the Council's work in April.

We are grateful to Assistant Secretary-General
Tiirk for the detailed information he has given us on
developments in the situation in Bougainville and the
work of the United Nations Observer Mission there.

The Russian delegation is pleased that the
political process continues to move ahead in
accordance with the Bougainville Peace Agreement.
We welcome the commitment of the Government of
Papua New Guinea and the Bougainville communities
to continuing to demonstrate a firm political will and to
comply with the principal agreements. We also
appreciate their efforts to find agreed and mutually

acceptable solutions within the context of the peace
process.

We are pleased that the two sides have completed
work on the second draft of a constitution and are
preparing a third and final draft. We hope that this new
momentum in the Bougainville constitutional process
will make it possible to complete work on the
constitution by the end of next month, as scheduled.

We welcome the principled decision by the
Bougainville communities to destroy all contained
weapons, and we welcome too the progress made in
that area. We believe that complete implementation of
the programme to collect and destroy weapons held by
former combatants is essential to strengthening peace
and stability on the island.

It will be impossible to reach a lasting settlement
unless the peace process includes all those who are
now outside the process. We note the efforts by the
Government, the Bougainville parties and the United
Nations Observer Mission to ensure that the peace
process is fully inclusive. We welcome the post-
conflict peace-building support provided by the United
Nations Development Programme, other United
Nations agencies and the broad donor community. We
are aware too that regional bodies have played a
substantial role in the peace process and in fostering
economic and social development in Bougainville.

The Russian delegation greatly appreciates the
work being done by the United Nations Observer
Mission in Bougainville; we believe that its role in the
peace process is extremely important. We are willing to
participate constructively in Security Council
discussions on any recommendation on the future of
that mission that might be made following the
forthcoming visit to Bougainville.

