Mr. Cardi (Italy): I would like to thank Under-
Secretary-General O'Brien for his briefing.

Today, once again we have heard a sobering
briefing, which underscores that the humanitarian
situation in Syria has in no way improved. While there
are indications of a reduction in violence since the
adoption of the Astana agreement, fighting continues in
key areas and there is still no meaningful humanitarian
access to civilians living in besieged and hard-to-reach
communities. A considerable amount of humanitarian
assistance is given through regular programming and
cross-border assistance - the latter being provided
without the need for the regime's approval, thanks to
authorization by the Security Council.

But where needs are greatest, such as in areas
besieged by the Syrian regime, there has been no
improvement for many months. On the contrary,
compared to last year's levels, the number of cross-
line inter-agency convoys for besieged or hard-to-
reach locations has, in fact, significantly decreased.
And where convoys are allowed to enter, medical and
surgical items are still removed by the regime, in what
amounts to a despicable practice that is contrary to
international humanitarian law, as well as to Security
Council resolutions and International Syria Support
Group Ministers' agreements.

Besieged eastern Ghouta remains an area of
deep concern, in particular for the health needs of
the population. Besieged civilians in eastern Ghouta
need to be reached by the United Nations and other
humanitarian partners. One single convoy for a limited
number of beneficiaries is not the change of policy that
is needed. In Al-Waer and Barze in eastern Ghouta, we
call upon the Syrian Government to allow the United
Nations to carry out assessment missions and to monitor
the ongoing so-called evacuations that may amount to
forced population transfers to opposition-held areas.
Access by the United Nations should also be guaranteed
in the so-called liberated areas, such as Wadi Barada,
where, since rebels were evacuated, no monitoring or
humanitarian missions have been possible.

We are also worried about reports of increasing
restrictions for the United Nations and other
humanitarian agencies and organizations operating in
Idlib and north eastern Syria, where assistance has been
curtailed, leaving many in need. We remain concerned
about the possibility that chemical arms will be used
again in Syria. In that respect, accountability for their
use, including at Khan Shaykhun, must remain priority
objective of the Council.

The general decrease in violence that has followed
the Astana agreement is a step forward. Yet, some areas,
such as Idlib, eastern Ghouta and Dar'a, have seen an
increase in fighting, as the parties jockey for positions
and as the regime tries to strengthen its presence in key
strategic territory. The reduction in violence should
have prompted an increase in humanitarian access. As
we have seen, that has not been the case so far.

In that regard, through the implementation of the
Astana agreement of 4 May, we expect that substantive
and sustainable results can finally be achieved on the
humanitarian front. In that framework, the United
Nations must have an active role in the implementation
of the humanitarian dimension of the Astana agreement,
ensuring that assistance can be provided, according
to the United Nations impartial assessment of needs,
and that people who wish to leave or require medical
evacuation can do so - all with respect for humanitarian
law and principles. We would not like to see the creation
of parallel tracks on humanitarian issues, without the
direct involvement of the United Nations.

Finally, ensuring a real ceasefire and safe,
immediate and unhindered humanitarian access to all
people in need remains the priority. Realizing rapid
humanitarian dividends for the population will also
help to create the conditions conducive to progress
on the political track in Geneva, under the auspices
of Mr. Staffan de Mistura and in the framework of
resolution 2254 (2015).

