Mr. Radebe (South Africa): We would like to
take this opportunity, Mr. President, to thank you for
presiding over today's meeting and your delegation for
having organized this important debate. We thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon; Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict;
and Mr. Anthony Lake, Executive Director of UNICEF,
for their respective briefings. We also welcome
resolution 1998 (2011), which has just been adopted.

South Africa remains deeply concerned about the
plight of children in armed conflict. Children involved
in armed conflict are deprived of the opportunity to
grow up in an environment where they can realize their
full potential. South Africa is particularly concerned
that thousands of children continue to bear arms as
soldiers and that many also suffer as victims in armed
conflict. We thus remain steadfast in our firm
commitment to eradicating the recruitment and use of
children in armed conflict.

Significant progress has been made since the
compilation by Graca Machel in 1996 of the first
United Nations report on children affected by armed
conflict (A/51/306). South Africa is pleased that the
issue of children and armed conflict continues to
receive the attention it deserves on the agenda of the
United Nations in general and the Security Council in
particular. We are encouraged that the Council has
identified six grave violations committed against
children in armed conflict. Our country believes that
each should be given equal weight and attention by the
Council.

In that regard, we welcome the expansion of the
trigger mechanism for punitive measures against those
committing recurrent attacks on schools and hospitals.
We are concerned about the emerging trend of such
attacks. We call on all parties involved in conflict to
abide by international humanitarian law and to refrain
from attacks against civilian targets, particularly those
where children might be present.

South Africa is concerned that, despite the
positive efforts of the international community to
address the challenges faced by children in armed
conflict, parties continue to commit violations against
children. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Palestine, Afghanistan and elsewhere, children
continue to be casualties of war and their rights
continue to be violated. We are also concerned that a
substantial number of countries and situations where
children are involved in armed conflict are on the
African continent. We welcome the improvement of the
conditions of children involved in armed conflict in
some areas, such as in Burundi. We call on parties that
remain on the list to follow the example of those States
and entities that have adopted specific action plans to
improve the situation. South Africa is deeply
concerned about recently reported additional violations
in emerging conflicts, such as in Cote d'Ivoire and
Libya. We call upon affected Governments, with the
assistance of civil society and the international donor
community, to develop and implement concrete plans
to address the challenge of children affected by armed
conflict. The international donor community should
continue to provide long-term and sustainable
assistance to facilitate such programmes.

On our part, South Africa has ratified the
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child on the involvement of children in armed
conflict. The Optional Protocol sets the minimum age
for direct participation in hostilities, for recruitment
into armed groups and for compulsory recruitment by
Governments at 18 years. Furthermore, our national
children's act and national defence force policy are in
line with the Optional Protocol, in that they define the
age of majority as 18 years, which is also in line with
the South African Constitution. The children's act
recognizes the need for special care and protection
from harm, abuse and neglect of children. It gives
effect to South Africa's commitments in line with the
Convention on the Rights of the Child.

It is vital that we do not forget the long-term
needs of children who have been affected by armed
conflict. South Africa therefore underscores the
importance of adopting a broad strategy with regard to
conflict prevention, which should address the root
causes of armed conflict in a comprehensive manner
and create a conducive environment for the protection
and promotion of children's rights.

South Africa welcomes the unwavering
commitment of the Office of the Special
Representative and of UNICEF in the implementation
of the monitoring and reporting mechanism, which will
go a long way in addressing the recruitment and use of
children and other violations committed in armed
conflict. We encourage them to work within their
respective mandates and in an integrated manner with
other key stakeholders, including the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, concerned Member States
and non-governmental organizations, to ensure
coherence in addressing this scourge.

We also commend the work of the Security
Council Working Group, especially its role to review
progress in the development and implementation of
time-bound action plans by parties to conflict to halt
the recruitment and use of children, which are
violations of international obligations.

In conclusion, South Africa would like to express
our continued commitment to working with Council
members and the international community to ensure
that the protection of children remains our main
priority.

