Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): With
respect to what occurred this morning in Mogadishu, the
human face of these events was dramatically described
by my neighbour at this table, Rebeca Grynspan, when
she noted that one of her staff members who died had
left her six-year-old son an orphan. I trust that our press
release shall convey an equally humane dimension of
the senseless, direct attack on the United Nations.

We thank you, Sir, for convening this open debate.
We appreciate the presence of Deputy Secretary
General Jan Eliasson and the important contributions
made by Caroline Anstey, Rebeca Grynspan and Kofi
Annan. We would also like to thank you for the concept
note circulated for this debate (S/2013/334, annex). I
will limit my comments to five points.

First, there are certainly situations, in particular
in the African continent, where the struggle over the
control of natural resources can lead to conflict, even
conflicts deep-rooted enough to constitute threats
to international peace and security. However, there
are other situations where the struggle over natural
resources can create tensions that do not rise to the
level of threatening international peace and security. In
the majority of cases, there is no relationship between
natural resources and conflict situations. That is to say,
the jurisdiction of the Security Council in relation to
this area is very limited.

Secondly, that having been said, we recognize that
the exploitation of natural resources is a double-edged
sword, or, as one speaker put it, can be either a
blessing or a curse. It undoubtedly generates potential
benefits for the host countries, but as we have heard,
it sometimes becomes a source of adverse phenomena,
including high levels of corruption, displacement,
environmental degradation, and grave violations of
human rights. In extreme cases, their exploitation has
been linked to internal conflicts or even to regional
conflicts associated with the control of those natural
resources or their illegal trafficking. Diamonds and
river-bed gold mining are cases in point.

Thirdly, the Security Council must consider the
potential link between the management of natural
resources and the prevention of conflicts on a case-by-
case basis, and only to the extent that they may be
relevant to the particular context. In many situations,
the Security Council has adopted specific mechanisms,
such as those envisaged by the sanctions committees
and their expert groups, in addition to the mandates
of peacekeeping operations. Currently, there are at
least two countries that have export bans on a natural
resource: C6te d'Ivoire and Somalia. In Somalia's case,
the Monitoring Group states that the illegal export of
vegetable carbon still accounts for some 10 per cent of
Al-Shabaab's financial backing, despite its prohibition.
This debate must strengthen our commitment to
ensuring that sanctions that are currently imposed are
fully implemented.

Fourthly, the strategic nature of natural resources
requires cooperation frameworks to be more effective
and firm. We recognize current initiatives, such
as the Kimberley certification process system, the
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative, and the
International Tropical Timber Agreement. We value
tripartite initiatives between Governments, the private
sector and civil society that promote transparency and
the responsible management of the extractive sector.

Finally, in discussing the role of natural resources,
a wider context to consider is the collective legacy that
we are leaving to future generations. There are some
countries that are not on the agenda of the Security
Council, but whose carbon emissions are causing the
average global temperature to rise about 4 degrees,
which can cause a calamity of global dimensions. The
United Nations is currently reviewing its development
agenda with the aim of agreeing on a set of post-2015
global goals. Challenges such as climate change and
water scarcity must be carefully addressed so that such
issues are not the main drivers of conflict in the near
future.

