Mrs. Ferrero-Waldner (Austria): Let me begin, Mr.
President, by extending my appreciation to you and to your
country for having taken the initiative in February last year
to bring before the Security Council the very important
issue of the protection of civilians in armed conflict. It is a
particular pleasure to see you presiding over this meeting
today. I wish therefore to congratulate you, and, through
you, the Security Council, on the encouraging results
which - in a little more than a year's time - have been
achieved so far in addressing this matter.

The steady increase in civilian casualties in conflict
situations strikes us as one of the past century's most
horrific features. Sadly - and I am stating the obvious for
the Council - the 1990s proved no exception to this
pattern, but rather culminated in armed conflicts marked by
massive, deliberate brutality against civilians, with
particularly negative effects on women, children and other
vulnerable groups.
This is true for every region of the world, and I would
like to welcome the particular emphasis the Council has
placed recently on Africa. In my capacity as
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), I will concentrate today on
the OSCE region and on the steps taken by the OSCE to
better protect civilians in times of conflict.

An impressive number of instruments of international
humanitarian and human rights law have been adopted since
the Second World War. But as we enter a new century, we
are still far from a worldwide "climate of compliance". The
law continues to be broken, violated and, unfortunately,
ignored. I would like, therefore, to welcome the landmark
report of the Secretary-General to the Security Council on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. In this report,
he has presented a set of courageous yet very practical
proposals, including measures that the Council can adopt
within its sphere of responsibility with a view to developing
effective responses to this ongoing challenge. In adopting
resolution 1265 (1999) of 17 September 1999, the Council
welcomed the Secretary-General's report and supported
many of its recommendations. The Council also underlined
the importance of consultation and cooperation between the
United Nations and other relevant international
organizations and actors, including regional organizations,
in this respect. Furthermore, it expressed its willingness to
work in cooperation with regional organizations to examine
how these bodies might better enhance the protection of
civilians in armed conflict.

As the Council is aware, cooperation between the
United Nations and the OSCE takes place on a multitude
of levels. Apart from our day-to-day cooperation in the
field and the humanitarian and political tasks we face
together in some regions of the OSCE area, there are
important issues of common concern regarding the way
we approach the challenges of the new century. The topic
of this debate concerns one of them.

As stated in the Charter for European Security,
adopted in Istanbul in November 1999, the OSCE will
seek ways of reinforcing the application of international
humanitarian law in order to enhance the protection of
civilians in times of conflict. I believe that working
together with the Security Council in this respect would
only seem natural and mutually beneficial.

At this point, I should also like to highlight that at
the Istanbul Summit, the OSCE laid the foundations for
a strong focus on the concerns and situation of the
individual human being. Ultimately, it is the OSCE's aim,
as expressed in the Summit Declaration, "to improve
human security and thereby to make a difference in the
life of the individual".

Keeping these words in mind, Austria, which holds
the Chairmanship-in-Office of the OSCE, strongly
believes that in situations of armed conflict, the OSCE
must focus its attention on the victims and the
vulnerable - their interests, rights and protection. In this
connection, and as part of an integrated approach to
security policy, the Austrian Chairmanship-in-Office has
put special emphasis on taking concrete steps to better
protect civilians in armed conflict.

One important aspect is the protection of children
affected by armed conflict, an issue that has been dear to
us for a long time. In September last year, therefore, we
suggested that the question of children in armed conflict
be considered regularly in the OSCE framework. Austria
greatly appreciated the initiative of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and
Armed Conflict, Olara Otunnu, in proposing a 10-point
agenda by which the OSCE could undertake to make the
protection of children affected by armed conflict a central
policy concern.

At the OSCE Istanbul Summit of November 1999,
the heads of State or Government of the participating

 

States of the OSCE endorsed this approach. They
committed themselves to actively promoting children's
rights and interest, especially in conflict and post-conflict
situations. They decided to regularly address the rights of
children in the work of the OSCE, including by holding a
special meeting in the year 2000, dedicated to children in
armed conflict, and to pay particular attention to the
physical and psychological well-being of children involved
in war or affected by armed conflict.

In this connection, a Human Dimension Seminar on
children and armed conflict will be held from 23 to 26 May
2000 in Warsaw, with the aim of raising awareness within
the OSCE, including OSCE field presences, about the
effects of armed conflict on children and the aim of
examining the possibilities for intervention by the OSCE to
address them. I therefore take pleasure in informing the
Council that Mr. Olara Otunnu, as well as representatives
of the United Nations Children's Fund and other
international organizations and non-governmental
organizations, will contribute to that meeting.

Another key issue which is high on our agenda as
OSCE Chairman-in-Office, is the problem of internal
displacement. Persons displaced within their own countries
by internal conflict and grave violations of human rights
and humanitarian law pose a great challenge to which both
our organizations are called to respond. The protection of
and provision of assistance to millions of internally
displaced people must become a priority concern to us. The
same holds true for the ultimate aim of their return to and
reintegration in their places of origin. Within the United
Nations, important work has been done on this topic by the
Representative of the Secretary-General for Internally
Displaced Persons, Mr. Francis Deng. He has been a
catalyst of greater attention to the problem of internal
displacement, working both within the United Nations
system and in collaboration with regional organizations,
such as the Organization of African Unity.

Austria also took the initiative to raise the issue of
displacement within the OSCE. A Human Dimension
Seminar on this topic, with the participation of Mr. Francis
Deng, will be held later this year. Among its objectives will
be the promotion of the wider use of the Guiding Principles
on Internal Displacement and their integration into the work
of the OSCE.

In conclusion, let me express my conviction that there
is great potential for further and closer cooperation between
our organizations in dealing with the protection of civilians
in armed conflict. The examples which I have mentioned
may be just a beginning. There is scope to intensify our
efforts and to expand cooperation to other areas of
common interest, such as the fight against the
proliferation of small arms, the monitoring, protection and
promotion of human rights in conflict zones and the
training of field mission personnel, as well as
peacekeeping and peace-building operations.

I strongly believe that such common endeavours to
protect the vulnerable, building on our positive
experiences of cooperation in the past few years, will
soon lead to concrete results. They will be felt positively
by those whose well-being we wish to secure. This in
itself should encourage us to intensify our work in this
direction.

Finally, let me greet the Austrian students from the
University of Vienna who are studying international
organizations and who are sitting in the Gallery. They
have followed this meeting very diligently.

