Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I warmly welcome
President Touadera to the Security Council and thank
him for his substantive and result-oriented statement. I
also thank Under-Secretary-General Herve Ladsous and
the Permanent Representative of Morocco, Mr. Omar
Hilale, for their informative briefings.

Ukraine reiterates its full support for President
Touadera and his Government's efforts to lead the
country towards recovery, stability and development.
Without any doubt, the free, peaceful and democratic
holding of elections in 2016 began a new period in the
history of the Central African Republic. In that regard,
we welcomed the International Donors Conference on
the Central African Republic that took place in Brussels
in November 2016, resulting in pledges of significant
resources to be used to further stabilize the country
and rebuild its institutions. The Mutual Engagement
Framework signed by the President of the Central
African Republic and the Under-Secretary-General
at the Conference serves as an important mechanism
for political engagement between the country and the
international community.

We recognize the challenges that the Central
African Republic leadership faces on the path to peace
and reconciliation. Like other delegations, ours is deeply
concerned about the increased activities ofarmed groups
and their ambitions to control considerable parts of the
national territory. The continuing clashes among some
of those groups continues to pose a threat to civilians,
in particular in the central regions of the country.

The latest events around the city of Bambari
involving tensions between the Union pour la paix en
Centrafrique and the coalition led by the Front populaire
pour la renaissance de la Centrafrique demonstrated
that the security situation in the country remains
fragile. Taking that into account, Ukraine supports
peace and reconciliation efforts, including those within
the framework of the mediation sponsored by regional
States and organizations, provided that such efforts
are undertaken in agreement with the Government of
the Central African Republic. In that light, the African
initiative for the peace and reconciliation agreement
between the Government and all armed groups
could serve as a practical tool to support the national
leadership in persuading those groups to lay down their
weapons and join the disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation process that was initiated
by the President of the Central African Republic.

Ukraine reiterates its support for the adoption
and signing by Central African authorities of the
disarmament, demobilization, rehabilitation and
reintegration programme, the national security
policy and the development plan for the police and
gendarmerie. The proper implementation of those
strategic documents should advance significantly the
process of disarmament and reform of the security
sector in the Central African Republic.

It would be difficult to overestimate the vital role
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
(MINUSCA) in promoting peace and stability in the
country. To that end, cooperation between MINUSCA
and national authorities is essential. We are grateful to
Special Representative Parfait Onanga-Anyanga for his
tireless efforts.

Let me also stress the importance of proper
compliance with the Council-mandated sanctions
regime that was renewed by resolution 2339 (2017).
As Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2127 (2013) concerning the Central African
Republic, I would like to positively note the spirit of
cooperation between the Committee and the Central
African Republic on the issue of implementing the
sanctions regime. During my visit to the Central
African Republic in May 2016, I had the opportunity to
meet with the President and a number of his officials to
promote further awareness of the sanctions, measures
and the work of the Committee in general. In New
York, we continue to cooperate constructively with his
country's Permanent Mission.

Moreover, as Chair of the Committee, I would like
to express certain concerns with regard to the reported
failure to implement certain elements of the sanctions
regime, in particular the travel ban and asset freeze. In
that regard, although we understand the need to apply a
flexible approach so as not to disrupt the reconciliation
efforts undertaken through various initiatives, I
call on all States, in particular neighbouring States
and the concerned organizations, to actively use
relevant exemption procedures in line with resolution
2339 (2017) and the 2127 Committee guidelines to
ensure compliance with the existing regime, which
was designed by the Council to make its important
contribution to promoting peace and stability in the
Central African Republic. As always, the Committee
stands ready to assist in that process. The Council can
count on us.

