Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
has very closely followed the situation in South Sudan.
President Salva Kiir of South Sudan announced the
initiation of the nation-wide dialogue. The South
Sudanese Transitional Government of National Unity
has unconditionally accepted the deployment of the
Regional Protection Force. It also announced concrete
measures in support of the United Nations Mission in
the Republic of South Sudan (UNMISS) and of the
humanitarian workers in fulfilling their mandates.
China welcomes those recent developments.

The international community should take this
opportunity to call on all parties in South Sudan to
implement the Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan and return
to the search for a political solution in order to attain
peace, stability and development as soon as possible.
China welcomes the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development's (IGAD) recent convening of a summit
and the issuance of a communique on South Sudan,
and China supports IGAD's continued leading role in
mediating that matter.

The South Sudan Transitional Government has
taken an important step in implementing resolution
2304 (2014) and the Joint Communique. The Council,
in turn, should send out more positive messages and
signals in order to encourage the parties in South Sudan
to meet each other half way and jointly commit to
national peace, stability and sustainable development.
With respect to to sanctions, the Security Council
should act prudently in order to avoid reversing the
current positive momentum.

China supports the renewal of the UNMISS mandate.
China appreciates the Mission's role in implementing
the Peace Agreement, protecting the civilian population
and delivering humanitarian assistance. We hope that
the Secretariat can comprehensively review the new
and emerging challenges faced by United Nations
peacekeeping operations and systematically improve its
peacekeeping work in order to enhance the efficiency
and effectiveness ofpeacekeeping operations and ensure
the enhanced protection and safety of peacekeepers
by giving them a better capacity to deal with complex
situations and fulfil their mandates.

The Chinese Government is consistent in its support
of the peace process in South Sudan and has provided
assistance to South Sudan's State-building efforts,
within its capabilities. China has dispatched more than
1,000 peacekeepers to UNMISS. China stands ready
to maintain, alongside the international community, its
constructive role in assisting South Sudan to achieve
lasting peace and stability.

