Mr. Hasan (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): I am pleased at
the outset, Mr. President, to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month. We wish also to thank the delegation of Namibia
for its successful leadership of the Council for last month.

 

With grave concern we have followed recent
developments unfolding in East Timor. We invite all parties
to exercise restraint and to demonstrate wisdom in solving
the problem in a peaceful manner in accordance with the
United Nations Charter and the responsibilities of the
Government of Indonesia under the 5 May 1999
Agreement.

With satisfaction, we followed the popular consultation
conducted in a peaceful atmosphere. The Government of
Indonesia created conditions that brought about the success
of the ballot process. We appreciate the Government of
Indonesia's efforts to reach a just and internationally
acceptable solution to the question of East Timor.

The outbreak of acts of Violence, killings and
destruction of property is deplorable and unacceptable.
Thus, all of us are duty-bound to hasten to halt this
humanitarian catastrophe as soon as possible. The right
course for that lies in extending a helping hand to the
Government of Indonesia to help it control the situation and
restore security in East Timor. We are confident that with
disinterested assistance by the international community the
Government of Indonesia will be able to bring the situation
under control through tangible efforts including control of
the armed elements, maintenance of security and extension
of humanitarian assistance to alleviate the suffering of the
refugees and the disadvantaged civilians with the help of
the International Red Cross.

Resorting to threats of political seclusion or the
interference of foreign troops will complicate the situation
ad infinitum. Experiences of the recent past teach us this
lesson. Any political solution by the international
community should invoke the principle of Indonesia's
sovereignty, consent and due regard for the United Nations
Charter. We warn against giving this question, the
humanitarian question, dimensions that might turn out to be
greater than its true size and using it for political
expediency.

I wish here to refer to the statement made by the
Secretary-General in paragraph 8 and 9 of his report on the
work of the Organization (A/54/ 1) just issued:

"The humanitarian challenge is heightened
by the fact that the international community does
not respond in a consistent way to humanitarian
emergencies. Media attention is part of the
problem. The crisis in Kosovo, for example,
received saturation coverage. The more
protracted and deadly war between Eritrea and
Ethiopia, and the resumption of Angola's
savage civil war, received very little. Other
wars went almost entirely unreported. Partly for
that reason, responses to appeals for
humanitarian and security assistance have been
similarly skewed. Such assistance should not be
allocated on the basis of media coverage,
politics or geography. Its sole criterion should
be human need.

"I am particularly alarmed by the
international community's poor response to the
needs of victims of war and natural disasters in
Africa. Where needs are pressing, if we are not
true to our most basic principles of
multilateralism and humanitarian ethics, we
will be accused of inconsistency at best,
hypocrisy at worst."

We emphasize the need for the immediate halt of
disturbance and human suffering in East Timor. As a
representative of a State subjected to an unprecedented
humanitarian disaster due to the sanctions imposed by the
Security Council and the aggression carried out daily by
two permanent Council Members, I launch an appeal to
the Council to abandon the double standard and to be true
to the role assigned to it in the Charter. It must forthwith
lift the sanctions imposed on Iraq and halt the aggression
to which Iraq is subjected daily by the United States and
Great Britain in the so-called no-fly zones.

