Mr. Al-Khussaiby (Oman): At the outset it gives
me great pleasure to welcome His Excellency
Mr. Leonardo Simao, the Foreign Minister of
Mozambique, and to thank him for his important
statement.

The Security Council meets today on a happy
occasion to mark the official closure of the United
Nations Observer Mission in Mozambique (ONUMOZ).
The situation in Mozambique has been a cause for
concern to the international community for two decades.
The first multi-party elections in Mozambique, last
October, were undoubtedly a high-water mark in the
history of that country. On behalf of the Sultanate of
Oman, I should like to avail myself of this opportunity to
warmly congratulate President Chissano, Prime Minister
Mocumbi and the Government and all the people of
Mozambique on this historic achievement.

While we welcome the official closure of
ONUMOZ, following the successful discharge of the
mandate entrusted to it by resolution 797 (1992), we
express the hope that the international community will
continue to provide assistance to Mozambique in order to
enable it to give due attention to economic and social
reconstruction so that peace can be sustained.

Although the status quo in Mozambique is a cause
for optimism, the Mozambican parties should continue
their commitment to abide by the principles stipulated in
the General Peace Agreement. It is also imperative that
all parties should be guided by the spirit of national
reconciliation, which has now become the trend, and
should work together in order to reconstruct their country.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to
congratulate the National Elections Commission on the
excellent job done in arranging the overall democratic
elections in Mozambique. We should also like to pay
tribute to the tireless efforts of the Secretary-General, the
Security Council, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and the international community, which

 

has every right to be proud of its unrelenting support for
the Mozambican peace process. The positive contribution
of the Organization of African Unity to the efforts to
establish a peaceful and durable solution to the conflict in
Mozambique should not be overlooked.

