Mr. Gillerman (Israel): At the outset, let me
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your able conduct
of the work of the Council during the month of May.
Let me also commend the stewardship of Ambassador
Pleuger during the month of April.

The Council has convened here as usual, at the
urgent behest of the Palestinian Observer, under a
barrage of information, misinformation and
disinformation. In the interests of truth and objectivity,
let us first get the facts straight. I wish to state
emphatically and officially that the numbers distributed
by the Palestinians about the events in Rafah today are
exaggerated and totally false. I can only express my
disappointment that some members of the international
community - including, sadly, as reflected in the
statement attributed to the Secretary-General - have
been misled by the Palestinian propaganda machine
into making false accusations and drawing conclusions
which do not reflect the facts on the ground.

We have not, unfortunately, heard such strong
sentiments expressed when innocent Israelis have been
slain. So first, here are the facts: during a large
procession of several thousand demonstrators, which
included many gunmen, seven Palestinians were killed,
of whom four or five were armed terrorists. The
incident occurred as the crowd left central Rafah along
the main road towards the Israel Defence Forces (IDF)
in Tel-Sultan. The demonstration was organized by
none other than the Palestinian Authority, in violation
of the established curfew.

While Israel deeply regrets any loss of civilian
life, those numbers put into proportion today's incident,
which itself took place under conditions of heavy
fighting by Palestinian terrorists. Under the incredibly
difficult circumstances in which Israel has taken action
against the terrorist infrastructure in the Gaza Strip,
terrorists operate among civilians, and tragedy can
strike. Israel has done, and will continue to do,
everything it can to prevent harm to innocent civilians.
Even during times of war the death of innocent
civilians is regrettable, but we cannot be deluded by
false pretence and any ambiguity between the terrorists
and those who fight that deplorable scourge.

The Palestinian Observer has described a litany
of Palestinian suffering, without pointing the finger at
those responsible for that suffering: his own corrupt
and evil leadership, who, while rejecting offers of
peace by Israel and the international community, have
resorted to terror and violence, dragging Israel, the
whole region and the Palestinian people onto a road of
horror, bloodshed and destruction. It is this Palestinian
leadership that bears the blame.

In choosing the course of terror rather than the
road of peace, the Palestinian leaders have brought
unto their own the reality described by the Palestinian
Observer. This reality, described here today - albeit in
a blatant and biased manner - is the result of a corrupt
and evil leadership. And it this leadership that is the
region's and the Palestinian's real tragedy.

We find it regrettable that certain members of the
Council have galvanized to condemn Israel's response
to the ongoing Palestinian terrorist campaign, and not
those actions that have brought the region to despair
and compelled Israel to take defensive measures.

Once again, the members of the Council have
been forced to convene to debate a draft text that, for
any careful observer, should dispel the illusion that the
intent of its drafters is the improvement of the situation
in the region and the encouragement of a fair, lasting
and comprehensive peace settlement. The one-sided
text before the Council this afternoon rebukes Israel
but fails to expressly condemn - by name and not by
ambiguous terminology - the Palestinian terrorism
that necessitated Israeli action. The Palestinian
delegation has once again rejected any language that
seeks to recognize any consideration of the legitimate
aims of Israel's defensive counter-terrorist operation.

To be frank, this blatant and one-sided posture is
more a blemish on the record of those who presented
this draft resolution to the Council - and much more a
transparent exercise in double standards - than it is an
admonition of Israeli conduct.

The Security Council has never dealt with the
dangers to peace and security of smuggling arms
through the tunnels of Rafah from Egypt. It did not
meet to condemn the horrendous desecration of the
bodies of Israeli soldiers - young men who were
killed during a defensive operation to dismantle those
tunnels. It did not come together following the
hijacking by armed elements in Gaza last week of an
ambulance of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East. It did
not stand up against the murder of a mother and her
four daughters in the Gaza Strip or against the
continuing cultivation of a culture of hate and
destruction by the Palestinian leadership.

The Council will not serve the cause of peace in
the Middle East by condemning Israeli actions and
ignoring the violence, terrorism and incitement that
continue to emanate from the Palestinian leadership.
Such repeated rituals embolden terrorism; they do not
embolden those who seek to dismantle it.

Today, Israel stands at the gates of Hell in the
Gaza Strip. The southern city of Rafah serves as the
arms-smuggling gateway of the Palestinian Authority
and the main pipeline for transporting weapons and
ammunition in Gaza. Since September 2000,
subterranean tunnels constructed underneath the
"Philadelphi route" have been used by Iran and
Hizbullah, as well as by Palestinian terrorist
organizations like Hamas and the PFLP, for turning the
Gaza Strip into a base for missile and rocket attacks
against Israeli targets. These tunnels of terror provide
the conduit for the smuggling of large amounts of
diverse weapons, including among them hundreds of
kilogrammes of explosives; hundreds of rifles, mainly
AK-47 Kalashnikovs; tens of thousands of rounds of
ammunition; and dozens of rocket-propelled-grenade
rockets and launchers, which are entirely incompatible
with signed agreements and any plan for a return to
non-violent negotiations.

Israel views the illicit trade and trafficking in
small arms and light weapons as a humanitarian issue
as well as a security one. We cannot forget for a
moment that the terrorists seek to harm civilians not
only in the locations they target, but also in the
locations in which they seek shelter and from where
they launch their attack. The Rafah tunnels are
typically dug inside residential homes to evade
discovery by Israeli security personnel, in blatant
disregard for the safety and well-being of Palestinian
civilians. They are concealed under bathrooms, living
rooms and kitchens. They are intentionally hidden
under the beds of children and little babies, concealed
by loose planks and rags.

The smuggling of massive arsenals and weapons
at epidemic proportions and the cynical use of civilian
areas to launch terrorist attacks invariably lead to the
loss of innocent life and affect the basic right of people
to lead their lives peacefully, without fear of getting
killed for simply being in the wrong place at the wrong
time. Among local residents terrorized by these
concerns, there has been growing opposition to the
tunnel-building and weapons-smuggling in Rafah. Last
year numerous demonstrations by local residents were
staged outside the Palestinian Authority's police and
preventive security headquarters and other public
buildings to protest the ongoing policy of apathy
among the leadership of the Palestinian Authority.

Unfortunately, Israel does not have the luxury of
pursuing that policy of apathy and inaction. Faced with
the failure of the Palestinian leadership to comply with
its obligations to fight terrorism, stop incitement and
prevent the smuggling of weapons, Israel remains
obligated to act in self-defence against a threat that
poses a clear and present danger to innocent lives,
while upholding its obligations under international law.

The unhindered effort by terrorist organizations
to smuggle high-quality weapons, including rocket-
propelled grenades, Katyusha rockets and anti-tank and
anti-aircraft missiles, has already led to an escalation in
the security situation and can lay a further burden on
the population in the Gaza Strip. In recent months,
Palestinian terrorist organizations operating in Gaza
have commenced executing a systematic plan to turn
Gaza into a platform for launching rockets and missiles
capable of reaching the entire aerial territory of Israel.
In fact, the whole of Gaza, and Rafah in particular, is
on the verge of becoming a missile base aimed at
Israel's cities and civilian population. What would the
international community have Israel do? Just sit back
and wait for this horrific scenario to materialize?

As the Israeli Chief of Staff, General Moshe
Ya'alon, said only last week,

"It appears to us that although we are doing
the best we can to prevent the smuggling of
weapons to the Gaza Strip, the Palestinians have
managed to smuggle RPGs [rocket-propelled
grenades], which they are not supposed to have.
They have been successful in smuggling RPGs,
and quite a few too. We know for a fact that on
the Egyptian side of the border, at the top of the
Sinai desert, there are weapons that have reached
that area. As far as we are concerned, Iran,
through Hizbullah, is responsible for the presence
of these weapons in that area. They are the ones
that promote the smuggling of weapons into
Gaza, unfortunately through the Sinai. This has
happened because they have found the other
borders to be impossible to penetrate, either by
land or water. This is what makes this region, at
the Egyptian-Israeli border, the weakest link for
weapons smuggling".

If Israel does not act today to fight against the
weapons smuggled and manufactured in Gaza, next
month Katyusha rockets will be aimed at the homes of
its citizens. The purpose of the current Israel Defence
Force (IDF) action in Gaza is to terminate the transfer
of all illegal weapons by underground tunnels to Gaza.
One security measure employed in this regard is the
demolition of structures that pose an operative security
risk to Israeli forces. Recent actions have shown this
countermeasure to be an effective and lawful way to
minimize the occurrence of such attacks in general, and
suicide terrorism in particular. Since April of this year,
the Israel Defence Force has exposed eight
underground tunnels used for smuggling weapons in
the area of Rafah, in addition to 11 underground
tunnels since the beginning of this year and 90
underground tunnels since the beginning of the intifada
in September 2000. And just this week, the IDF
discovered a new tunnel in Rafah already activated for
use in smuggling arms into Gaza. The tunnel was 150
metres long and 5 metres deep and had four openings
that led directly into Palestinian homes in the area.

IDF actions in Gaza have been criticized as
collective punishment. Let me be clear: these tunnels
are collective in their harm to all peoples in the area
but require a response that is precise and decisive in its
effect. While certain security measures taken in self-
defence and necessitated by terrorist threats
unfortunately cause hardships to sectors of the
Palestinian population, this is categorically not their
intent.

Both customary law and conventional law make it
clear that the use of civilian objects and dwellings to
support a military attack constitutes a war crime. The
IDF does not demolish structures indiscriminately.
Only those involved in terror and Violence against
Israeli civilians hold no immunity. When terrorists fire
from within civilian structures, activate roadside
charges from trees and fields or use a structure to
conceal a weapons-transfer tunnel, military necessity
dictates the demolition of these locations. Under
international law, these structures are considered
legitimate military targets. Therefore, in the midst of
combat, when dictated by operational necessity, Israeli
security forces may lawfully destroy structures used by
terrorists. This is common knowledge, and yet it is too
often that the Security Council is called upon to apply a
different standard to Israel.

While operating against the terrorist
infrastructure, Israel is doing its utmost to minimize the
humanitarian impact on the civilian population. Israel
refrains whenever possible from attacking terrorist
targets from the air or with artillery, in order to
minimize collateral damage. In so doing, Israel risks
greater danger to the lives of its soldiers in order to
lessen the risk to local residents. The death of 13
soldiers in ground operations in the Gaza Strip earlier
this month is an example of the heavy price Israel pays
for its commitment to minimize Palestinian civilian
casualties. This was not the first time that the strict
employment of such standards has resulted in the death
of Israelis.

Israel's action in Gaza is all the more critical in
the face of the failure of the Palestinian leadership to
act determinedly against this threat. Today, weapons
smuggling is run and managed by terrorist
organizations with the approval and active participation
of the Palestinian Authority. Amazingly enough, the
Palestinian Authority has actually encouraged residents
to conceal tunnels in their residences, which results in
the demolition of their homes. This brings with it an
ample windfall: the construction of a new house by the
Palestinian Authority.

Despite all this, Israel's Prime Minister remains
committed to promoting his plan for disengagement
from Gaza. Earlier this month, leaders from the
international community met here in New York, in this
very building, to discuss ideas for implementing that
Israeli initiative. There was general agreement that the
plan would improve the situation in Gaza for
Palestinians and Israelis alike. However, the
Palestinian response has been to increase violence and
to renew its commitment to terror as a solution. Just
two days ago, Yasser Arafat addressed his people,
calling on them to terrorize the enemy. What signal
does rejectionist leadership, weapons smuggling,
parading with body parts and shooting mothers and
daughters send to those who desire peace in our
region?

The complete and utter refusal of the Palestinian
Authority to prevent those actions violates the most
basic norms of human rights, morality, signed
agreements and peace plans such as the road map. In
the vacuum left by those wilful violations, members of
Yasser Arafat's own Fatah Al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigade
and the Islamic Jihad were able to proudly and publicly
claim responsibility for the heroic attack earlier this
month on a pregnant Israeli mother and her four
daughters - aged 2 to 11 - gunned down at point-
blank range in Gaza.

Those violations cost the lives of the Hatuel
family, and they will cost the lives of hundreds more
unless the Palestinian leadership finally lives up to its
responsibilities or, failing that, Israel undertakes the
necessary defensive measures. If the Palestinian
Authority had acted to fulfil its responsibilities as
stated in the first stage of the implementation of the
road map, there would be no need for the current Israel
Defence Forces activity.

It should be emphasized: it is the Palestinians, not
Israel, that have turned civilian homes into military
targets. And it is those in the Palestinian leadership
who place a higher price on smuggling weapons than
on the welfare of the innocent resident population -
those who have abandoned all responsibility and
allowed their civilians to be at the mercy of terrorist
groups that use their homes and their bodies as
shields - who have forced us to take these steps.

The suffering of the Palestinian population is a
direct result of Palestinian terrorism aimed at innocent
civilians and the need for Israel to protect its citizens
from these abhorrent attacks. Rather than criticize
Israel for damaging private property, those truly
concerned for Palestinian welfare, including
humanitarian organizations in the area, should instead
demand that the terrorists stop using homes to shield
their illegal operations.

Israel has no war with the Palestinian people. We
have no war with the Palestinian aspiration for
statehood. The Prime Minister of Israel has stated
clearly that Israel believes in the vision of two States,
side by side, in peace and security. We have a war with
terror and with those who are determined not to create
the Palestinian State but to destroy the Jewish one. For
nearly four years, Israelis have been the victims of a
relentless and ongoing campaign by Palestinian
terrorists to spread death and destruction, condemning
our region to ongoing turmoil, killing 977 Israelis and
injuring more than 6,000.

A genuine and responsible Palestinian leadership
must be called finally and in clear terms - not in the
faltering language of this typically one-sided
resolution - to fight a war with terror. It is time that
we ask the Palestinian leadership whether inciting
terror, smuggling weapons and celebrating by dancing
with the limbs of the dead are helping the cause of their
people. It is time to make it clear that terrorism, even
in the Palestinian cities of Gaza, is always
unacceptable.

Achieving peace is simply not possible in an
atmosphere of violence and terrorism.
Characteristically, the Palestinian leadership has
accepted that in principle and then proceeded to
undertake every diversionary tactic it could conceive to
avoid fulfilling its obligations. What was true in
September 2000 remains true today: no progress is
possible in the region as long as the Palestinian
Authority continues to use its position and its resources
to encourage a campaign of violence and terrorism
against the citizens of Israel.

This resolution, regrettably, does nothing to
further peace in the Middle East. Sadly, until the
Palestinian people produce a credible and sane
leadership that truly wants peace and is willing to The Security Council has thus concluded the
dismantle the infrastructure of terror and negotiate in present stage of its consideration of the item on its
good faith, no resolution will. agenda.

