The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Guinea-Bissau in which he requests
to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item
on the Council's agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Cabral
(Guinea-Bissau) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2004/456, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on developments in Guinea-Bissau
and on the activities of the United Nations Peace-
building Support Office in that country.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council, recalling its previous
statements on Guinea-Bissau, in particular the
statement of its President of 19 June 2003
(S/PRST/2003/8), welcomes the report of the
Secretary-General dated 4 June 2004 (S/2004/456)
on developments in Guinea-Bissau and on
activities of the United Nations Peace-building
Support Office in that country (UNOGBIS).

"In this regard, the Council expresses its
satisfaction regarding progress made by national
authorities towards restoring constitutional order,
in accordance with the Transition Charter
provisions and calendar, in particular the
installation of a new National Popular Assembly
and a new Government, thus completing the first
phase of the transitional process due to end with
the holding of presidential elections by March
2005, and generating the environment for
growing international confidence and support.

"The Security Council acknowledges, with
appreciation, the manner in which the country's
principal actors and the political forces managed
to reach consensus on critical political challenges
they faced during and after the elections and
encourages them to stay the course.

"The Security Council also encourages all
parties, and the new Government established on
12 May 2004, to faithfully adhere to the
provisions of the Transition Charter in order to
achieve and consolidate national reconciliation
and to ensure the full restoration of constitutional
order. It further encourages the authorities to
continue to strengthen the rule of law and respect
for human rights and to resolve outstanding
human rights issues.

"The Security Council commends the
national authorities and the people of Guinea-
Bissau for their continued commitment and
dedication to democracy.

"The Security Council expresses,
nonetheless, its concern with the fragility of the
democratization process in Guinea-Bissau, due
mainly to the country's deep-rooted structural
problems, including the weakness of State
institutions and structures, as well as persistent
economic and social crisis.

"The Security Council further expresses its
concern about the need to improve the situation
of the military, in particular the payment of salary
arrears, which continues to be seen as a
potentially destabilizing factor. It welcomes the
Government's commitment to make all efforts
aimed at addressing the issue of salary arrears
and the reorganization of the national armed
forces and invites the international community to
fully support such efforts.

"The Security Council welcomes

improved dialogue between the Government of
Guinea-Bissau and the Bretton Woods institutions
and urges the Government to continue to
implement its commitments in the areas of fiscal
responsibility and good governance. It highlights
the importance that those efforts be matched by
the resumption of adequate levels of international
assistance.

"The Security Council acknowledges and
also welcomes the assistance provided to Guinea-
Bissau by bilateral and multilateral partners, in
particular the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) and the World Bank, and
encourages their enhanced constructive
involvement in the country.

"The Security Council underlines the
importance it attaches to the organization of a
round-table conference to take place in the last
quarter of this year, which it considers of utmost
relevance to addressing some of the most urgent
needs of Guinea-Bissau. In the interim, the
Council reiterates its appeals to the international
community to contribute financially to the
Emergency Economic Management Fund for
Guinea-Bissau, managed by the UNDP.

"The Security Council recognizes and
commends the work of UNOGBIS and the entire
United Nations country team for their outstanding
support and contribution to the process of
normalization of the political situation and
stability in Guinea-Bissau.

"The Security Council reaffirms the
importance of the regional dimension in the
solution of the problems faced by Guinea-Bissau
and, in this regard, welcomes the role being
played by the African Union, the West African
Economic and Monetary Union (UEMOA), the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and the Community of Portuguese-
Speaking Countries (CPLP) in the peace-building
process in Guinea-Bissau.

"The Security Council also commends the
efforts by the Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa of the
Security Council, the Ad Hoc Advisory Group on
Guinea-Bissau of the Economic and Social
Council and the Group of Friends of Guinea-
Bissau aimed at assisting the country to address
both its short-term post-conflict crisis and longer-
term development goals.

"The Security Council looks forward to
conclusions and recommendations of its mission
to West Africa, which includes Guinea-Bissau."


The President: This statement will be issued as a
document of the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2004/20.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.55 p.m.

