Mr. Monteiro (Portugal): My delegation concurs
with the statement just made by the European Union
Presidency.

Portugal fully supports the draft resolution before
this Council and, in particular, its objectives. The
Commission of Inquiry on arms flows in Rwanda stated
in its latest report that the problems of the Great Lakes
region must be approached from a regional perspective.
In addition, it also recognized that the problems of one
country in that region cannot be dealt with in isolation.
Indeed, long-term stability in the region will prove
impossible if the only action taken by the international
community is a policy of containment.

We believe that these are fundamental facts. But the
question remains, what is to be done next?

An important first step is to reactivate the mandate
of the Commission as adopted by resolution 1013 (1995).
As a matter of fact, Rwanda continues to face a wide
range of problems, from an unstable security situation to
the reintegration of a large number of refugees and
overcrowded prisons. The ugly scars of genocide are still
visible in Rwanda. Portugal believes that the ongoing but
fragile process of national reconciliation requires the
unequivocal support of the international community.

Another step to be taken would have broader
implications in regulating the flow of small arms in the
Great Lakes region. Of course, this is feasible only within
a more comprehensive and global framework, not
necessarily limited to that region in particular. In this
context, let me welcome the recent African initiative on
the control of light weapons. I am referring to the
proposals and actions of President Alpha Oumar Konare
of Mali. The Oslo Conference, convened by both the
Norwegian Initiative on Small Arms Transfers and by the
United Nations Development Programme, has also proven
to be a significant contribution to the solution of this
problem. My delegation firmly believes that this process
should be deepened and enlarged.

The Portuguese delegation considers that this draft
resolution, while seeking a formal reactivation of the
International Commission, also constitutes an important
signal of the interest and concern on the part of the
United Nations towards the region. The pernicious flow
of arms in the region may require from us all a careful
analysis of the root causes of the current situation if we
wish to find real solutions to those problems. In this
regard, we also see the reactivation of the Commission as

 

designed to impress on those forces intent on undermining
peace in the region that their actions will not be tolerated.

Finally, let me also underline the importance Portugal
attaches to the call upon all States in the Great Lakes
region to ensure that their territory is not used as a base for
armed groups to launch attacks against any other State, in
Violation of the relevant provisions of international law. We
believe that regional instability cannot be solved through
military solutions. There is no alternative to genuine
processes of national reconciliation.

