Mr. Fernandez de Soto (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I would like first of all to convey my
condolences to and express the solidarity of the
Government of Colombia with the Government and the
people of the United States for the regrettable event
that took place today.

We would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on the outstanding role being played by Jamaica in
conducting the work of the Security Council for this
month of November. We would also like to pay tribute
to you for your wisdom in proposing this ministerial
meeting of the Council, convened to discuss a crucial
item on our agenda. This will certainly provide an
exceptional opportunity to follow up on the measures
taken by the Council in this field and to give political
impetus to their implementation.

Since the Council first discussed this problem
after the terrorist acts of 11 September, Colombia has,
without hesitation, supported the decisions adopted by
Council members. We have reaffirmed our belief that
the struggle against international terrorism is the
responsibility of all countries, without exception. In
this regard, the success that we achieve will depend on
the extent to which we can make the principle of
shared responsibility effective.

Colombia fully supports the approach that the
Council has taken to this problem, in particular, its
emphasis on the financing of acts of international
terrorism. It is essential to take control of and
dismantle such sources of financing. As the President
of Colombia stated in plenary meeting in the General
Assembly on Saturday, lax control of financial
institutions and the existence of tax and banking
havens are like giving criminals a letter of marque to
continue to accumulate unlawful resources to finance
death.

In this context, we must not lose sight of the
harmful role played by the world market in illicit drugs
as a factor in the financing of violence and terror. Most
of the huge sums of money generated by this activity
remains in the financial markets of the consuming
countries, and a large portion of it goes to the purchase
of weapons and, specifically, to the financing of
terrorism. That is why, during our presidency of the
Council in August, we initiated consideration of the
question of the traffick in small arms and light
weapons, which concluded with the issuance of an
important presidential statement.

Colombia has taken significant steps to
implement resolution 1373 (2001). To this end, we
have embarked upon an inter-institutional endeavour
involving the relevant State entities. We have
introduced far-reaching criminal legislation to tackle
and punish acts of terrorism, which are clearly defined
and identified in our legal codes.

On 30 October, we signed the International
Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of
Terrorism. We hope in the near future to accede to five
further conventions. Colombia will then be a State
party to 10 of the 12 Conventions of which the
Secretary-General is the depositary.

We will continue to make an active contribution
to the Counter-Terrorism Committee set up in
accordance with resolution 1373 (2001), of which we
hold one of the vice-chairmanships. We will also
continue to make a resolute contribution through our
chairmanship of the sanctions Committee on
Afghanistan, a post that we have held since January of
this year.

At the regional level, we have taken an active part
in the initiatives of the Organization of American
States, and in that context we will shortly begin
discussions on an inter-American convention against
terrorism. In this same area, Colombia holds the
chairmanship of the working group on financial
controls recently set up by the Inter-American
Committee against Terrorism.

Acting in its capacity as a country member of the
Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance,
Colombia took part in the decision by ministers for
foreign affairs within the framework of that Treaty,
which classified the attacks of 11 September as an
attack on all members of the Treaty. That declaration
was duly conveyed to the Secretary-General of the
United Nations.

As a member of the Rio Group, we have worked
to promote the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001). Last week, that Group held a meeting of legal
experts from member countries in order to consider its
implementation. During that meeting we noted that the
recent acts of terrorism have tested existing legal
structures, at the same time recognizing that the
struggle against this scourge should be carried out with
full respect for the rule of law, international law and
human rights.

Colombia would like once again to reaffirm its
categorical rejection of all acts of international
terrorism, whatever their origin or motivation. We
would also like to join in the political commitment
required to advance the implementation of resolution
1373 (2001) and other measures adopted by the
Security Council on this issue.

My country will continue to do its utmost in this
struggle.

