Mr. McNee (Canada): I would like to thank the
mission of France for organizing this important debate
on peacekeeping and for inviting Canada to speak in
the light of Canada's role in the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations. I would also like to thank
Under-Secretaries-General Le Roy and Malcorra and
Special Representative Annabi for their thoughtful and,
indeed, thought-provoking presentations this morning.

The fundamental commitment to peace and
improving the lives of others remains a cornerstone of
Canada's foreign policy. As part of this commitment,
Canada is proud to support a wide variety of United
Nations-mandated peace operations, including
supporting Afghanistan, including through extensive
civilian and military personnel; the provision of vital
equipment to African Union forces in the Sudan and
over $285 million in voluntary contributions to the
African Union Mission in Sudan and then to the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur; the provision of 100 police experts and more
than $100 million in support of security, development
and stabilization in Haiti this year. In addition to our
military and police contributions and our efforts in
terms of capacity building, Canada provides support to
all areas of United Nations missions' mandates,
including through the deployment of Canadian
correctional, judicial and development experts.

As the Under-Secretaries-General made clear
today, United Nations peacekeeping is under increasing
strain - heavily deployed, heavily mandated and too
often under-resourced. At the same time, the global
demand for United Nations peace operations continues
to rise. The combination of existing overstretch and
increasing demand for new or expanded missions
represents a fundamental strategic challenge for the
United Nations and its Member States.
09-21747

While the underlying causes of the overstretch
challenge are complex, they can nonetheless be broken
down into a number of constituent parts, many of
which were first highlighted by the landmark report of
the Brahimi Panel (S/2000/809). Those underlying
issues represent unfinished business from the Brahimi
Panel and include the need for clear, credible and
achievable mandates, the necessary resources to
implement mandates and improved mission leadership
and doctrine.

Since the Brahimi report, the international
community has seen the deepening of some of those
challenges and the emergence of others. In Canada's
view, five stand out as meriting particular attention. In
the interest of time, I shall only list them. The full text
of my statement is being circulated. The first challenge
is peacekeeping financing and support; second, United
Nations partnerships with regional and other
organization; third, delivering on the imperative of
protecting civilians; fourth, harnessing the preventive
capacity of the Council, and fifth, developing the
political dimensions of peace operations.

(spoke in French)

Canada strongly endorses the efforts of France
and the United Kingdom to re-assess and further
implement the Brahimi principles as a means of better
managing the Council's heavy workload. The Council
bears special responsibility for peacekeeping
operations. It is both timely and appropriate to take a
hard look at how the Council mandates, prepares for,
plans and monitors peace operations. It is important
that the mandate of a United Nations peace operation
does not create expectations that cannot be met.

All of us have a stake in the success of the
collective security system. As we explore future
challenges, it is vital that the voices of all Member
States be heard. We must also ensure that the entire
membership can participate in the dialogue regarding
the difficulties to be overcome and potential solutions
to resolve them. In that connection, we would like to
emphasize the importance of closer cooperation among
the Council, troop-contributing countries and the
Secretariat.

In that regard, I am pleased to announce Canada's
intention to launch, in cooperation with the New York
University Center on International Cooperation, an
informal series of thematic debates on effective peace
operations. That effort aims at facilitating dialogue
09-21747
outside formal United Nations structures regarding the
full range of issues confronting the peacekeeping
agenda in the years ahead. We are pleased to invite all
Member States to participate in that process of
reflection and dialogue.

Meanwhile, we continue to be prepared to work
with you, Mr. President, the members of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations and the
Secretariat to ensure that both current and future
challenges receive the requisite attention in United
Nations bodies.

