Ms. Carabali Rodallega (spoke in Spanish): I would like to extend a greeting full of peace and goodwill to the diplomatic representatives of the various Governments participating in today's important gathering, to the members of the United Nations system and to all those who have made our participation in this meeting possible, especially the Permanent Representative of Germany, who is presiding over this meeting. I am Clemencia Carabali Rodallega, from Buenos Aires municipality, in Cauca, Colombia. I am a survivor of an attack carried out by armed actors on 4 May 2019, which also threatened the lives of 25 other men and women leaders, all of whom are activists working for the defence of the ethnic and territorial rights of our communities in Colombia. Since the Spanish invasion over 500 years ago, which led to the enslavement, dispossession and death of the peoples of our America, the ethnocide in Colombia, we must say, has not stopped. Every day we wake up to the news that a black or indigenous person has been killed, that a member of the Indigenous Guard or the Cimarrona Guard has been threatened, that a woman - a girl or an adult - has been raped, or that the deaths of leaders and human rights defenders persist. These situations have increased exponentially due to the coronavirus disease in Colombia. Since the signing of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace between the Colombian State and the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP), 686 leaders and human rights defenders have been murdered in Colombia, 120 of them this year alone. These include the assassination, on 1 September 2019, of Ms. Karina Garcia, candidate for mayor of Suarez municipality, and five other people who supported her in her electoral campaign and in the exercise of politics; the assassination, on 29 October 2019, of Cristina Bautista, Governor of the Nasa indigenous community, and four members of the Indigenous Guard who were with her; the dismemberment, this past 5 July, of Paola del Carmen Mena Ortiz, a member of the Renacer Afro-Colombian Community Council from Cafion del Micay. These examples are all proof of how communities, and women in particular, are enduring a profound violation of our right to life as a consequence of the persistence of the armed conflict in our territories, the absence of the civil presence of the State, and the national Government's militaristically focused intervention as a response, which has increased the threats to our survival in our territories, as it has put us in the middle of the crossfire and provoked confinement, displacement and acts of violence against women and girls. In many territories around the country, illegal and organized armed groups have reconfigured and entered territories previously controlled by the former FARC- EP. Added to this situation are tensions generated by multiple other conflicts, such as the presence of economic elites with extractive interests, illegal economies, including crops for illicit use, corruption and illegal mining. Despite the peace agreement signed in 2016, there is still no genuine, stable and lasting peace for our people in Colombia. Those who suffer most from the consequences of armed confrontation are the civilian population, the ethnic communities, our youth, girls and women. As women who are committed to peacebuilding and who resist all acts of violence in our territories and against our bodies, we value the support of the international community, United Nations agencies and the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia. We are especially grateful to Sweden and Norway as defenders of women's alliances and to the United Nations multi-partner trust fund for sustaining peace in Colombia, which, through its support to civil society, has contributed to creating conditions for the participation and empowerment of Afro-descendent and indigenous women for the implementation of the peace agreement and the exercise of our rights. Considering Colombia's important constitutional, legal and public policy framework, we demand the following from President Ivan Duque Marquez. First, the normative frameworks, particularly the Comprehensive Programme of Safeguards for Women Leaders and Human Rights Defenders, and the comprehensive programmes on security and protection measures for communities and organizations in the territories must be fully implemented. Secondly, there must be compliance with the implementation of the peace agreement in a comprehensive manner, including the entirety of the peace agreement's chapter on ethnic issues and its provisions on gender. Thirdly, the material and intellectual authors of violations of human rights and ethnic and territorial rights that persist in the country must be effectively investigated and prosecuted as a measure to prevent the impunity that covers these crimes. Fourthly, progress must be made in_ the implementation of collective protection measures with differential gender and ethnic approaches, as well as cases 004 and 005 of 2009 and case 092 of 2008, inter alia, to reduce the enormous risks generated by practices of dispossession. The structural transformation of rural Colombia should integrate the regions, contribute to eradicating poverty, promote equality and ensure the full enjoyment of the rights of all citizens. Fifthly, we call on the national Government to guarantee our rights, protect our lives and make peace a priority in the country's public agenda. As women who want peace and as the winner of the National Award for the Defence of Human Rights in Colombia, we ask the international community, first, to encourage the armed actors who operate in our territories to agree on a humanitarian agreement that will make it possible to promote measures to guarantee life, respect for human rights and international humanitarian law, as well as our territorial autonomy and forms of self- governance in our communities; secondly, to protect our communities and visit our territories, as the Security Council did last year in the municipality of Caldono; and thirdly, to assist our peacebuilding initiatives, not only through technical and economic support, but also with political commitment as guarantors in order to help move the implementation of the peace agreement forward in a sustained and comprehensive manner. We are grateful for the visits to our territories by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Colombia, Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu. Similarly, we cordially invite him to meet with us, the Afro- descendent and indigenous peoples of Colombia, as members of the Ethnic Commission for Peace and the Defence of Territorial Rights, together with the Special Adviser of the Secretary-General on the Prevention of Genocide, Mr. Adama Dieng, to consider the critical situation of the survival of our communities in the midst of the ethnic cleansing and systematic atrocity crimes that are being perpetrated against us. This is urgent. We also call on the international community to promote the implementation of the provisions of resolution 1325 (2000) and its related national action plan in Colombia, in order to strengthen the participation, protection and leadership of women and youth in building and maintaining peace and integrating a focus on gender and the rights of children and women in our territories. I thank you very much, Mr. President, for allowing our voice be heard here. lam because we are.
