Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his briefing. The
United States would also like to thank Special
Representative Djinnit for his continued leadership in
the United Nations Office for West Africa and in the
Sahel region. We greatly appreciate the work that went
into the United Nations inter-agency mission to the
Sahel and its subsequent report (see S/2012/42).

The report provides a significant number of
recommendations for our collective consideration, and
while they are all worthy of deliberation, today I will
focus specifically on those that relate to arms
proliferation and terrorism, the humanitarian situation
and food insecurity.

While there have been measured successes, we
remain concerned about the threats posed by the illicit
trafficking of arms and by terrorism, and we welcome
the recommendations on those challenges put forth in
the report of the assessment mission. We concur that
we must address the situation at the national, regional
and international levels through an overarching
framework that includes all of the affected countries.
The United Nations, along with the African Union and
other relevant organizations, could play a greater role
in coordinating those efforts.

We will continue to promote improved regional
efforts to combat arms proliferation and terrorism, and
we will tailor our assistance to facilitate that process.
For example, we are fully committed to working
actively in the Global Counter-terrorism Forum Sahel
regional capacity-building working group, which we
co-chair. Additionally, we are engaged in capacity-
building efforts to fight terrorism through the Trans
Sahara Counter-Terrorism Partnership, which is
designed to support partner efforts to contain and
marginalize terrorist organizations.

Terrorist operators in the Sahel region, such as
Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM), continue to
concern us. AQIM. has demonstrated its ability to carry
out criminal activities and attacks against soft targets
across significant distances. AQIM. has also solidified
camps in isolated areas in northern Mali. We are also
deeply concerned about violence attributed to Boko
Haram.

Sahelian countries are making progress in their
counter-terrorism capabilities. Algeria, Mali, Mauritania
and Niger have increased pressure on AQIM. and
developed more effective regional responses to deal
with the threat. Additionally, Chad has increased
efforts to disrupt AQIM. attempts to transit its territory.

We recognize that the Libyan crisis has brought a
new set of cross-border challenges relating to security,
including increased illicit weapons trafficking, that
pose a threat to the stability of the region and must be
addressed. We are concerned about the porous nature
of the border between Chad, Niger and Libya, and the
risk of weapons - including man-portable air defence
systems (MANPADS) - moving across those borders.
Those weapons in the hands of terrorists could further
destabilize already fragile areas of the Sahel and
surrounding regions.

My Government, in cooperation with the United
Kingdom, the Netherlands, Canada, France, Italy and
Germany, is currently expanding assistance efforts for
weapons security, which will help to survey and
inventory all known weapons and ammunition storage
sites in Libya and destroy MANPADS and other

weapons and munitions, as approved by the Libyan
authorities. We urge regional Governments to support
the Government of Libya's efforts to identify, secure
and destroy loose MANPADS and other light weapons,
which are at risk of being smuggled across the Libyan
border into the Sahel region. Furthermore, we fully
support the efforts of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya to engage on this issue, including its
critical work with Libyan and other relevant officials
on border security.

The report of the assessment mission cites a
growing concern regarding the humanitarian and
economic impacts the crisis has had on the Sahel
region. The impacts are serious and demand the
continued attention of the international community. We
are interested in hearing ideas for how the United
Nations and regional organizations can strengthen their
efforts to alleviate these challenges and prevent further
humanitarian crises from emerging.

The United States has worked to facilitate the
return of African migrants from Libya. Last year we
provided more than $27 million through the
International Organization for Migration (IOM) for
returnees from Libya. We note that the report
recommends support for lOM's continued efforts to
assist Governments of the region with the reintegration
of their citizens, and we urge Governments to help in
this time of need.

Regarding food insecurity, we agree with the
report's recommendation that greater steps need to be
taken to address the deteriorating food situation in the
region in both the short and long terms. UNICEF is
warning that more than 1 million children across the
Sahel may face severe malnutrition in 2012. We
recognize that the return of individuals from Libya into
the Sahel only exacerbates the issue. Families now
have more months to feed in a situation where food
security is becoming more problematic and remittances
have decreased.

The United States is mobilizing resources to
address the food shortfalls. Last year, we provided over
$23 million in humanitarian assistance to affected
communities in the Sahel for agriculture and food
security, economic recovery and nutrition programmes.
In addition, we provide close to $77 million a year for
food assistance, economic recovery and livelihood
support in the Sahel. At the end of last year, the United
States made an additional $58 million pledge to the
World Food Programme (WFP) in Chad and a
$7.5 million contribution to WFP in Niger, as well as
over $2 million to Catholic Relief Services in Mali, to
meet the emergency food needs of more than half a
million people in the region.

We must all keep in mind the potential
humanitarian crises that could emerge should the region
become destabilized and terrorists able to operate with
impunity. My Government is working with the leaders
of the Sahel countries to address that challenge through
a number of political, social and economic reform
efforts, including managing successful democratic
transitions and countering terrorism, and we look
forward to the Council's continued vigilance on these
complex issues.

