Mr. Minah (Sierra Leone): Let me thank the
Council for giving us this opportunity to once again
reiterate the need for urgent action in our response to
the Ebola virus disease.

Sierra Leone welcomes the efforts of the
Council and of the General Assembly and their
swift action - the move from formal and informal
deliberations to unprecedented resolutions - in the
context of the response of this House.

Our gratitude also goes to Assistant Secretary-
General Banbury, Under-Secretary-General Herve
Ladsous, Mr. Nabarro, Mr. Fukuda, Ms. Margaret Chan
and all those United Nations officials who continue, day
in and day out, to battle at the forefront of this disease.

It is evident to all of us now that what we face is a
global situation - a global calamity, if you will. What
started offas a medical emergency has now metastasized
into a truly frightening economic and security scourge
that we all must address. We are grateful for the efforts
that have been made to date to set up the Mission.
We urge that the Mission and all those involved in its
planning ensure that its vital work of coordination and
collaboration be carried out as swiftly as possible. The
deployment of staff, essential supplies and logistical
chains must take place as rapidly as possible.

Our gratitude goes to all the members of the
Council, who, in their various ways, have contributed
logistics, personnel, ideas and other support so as to
meet this scourge. Now more than ever we must live
up to the promise of the Organization and act truly as
one - act truly united.

Sierra Leone, Guinea and Liberia find themselves at
the epicentre ofthis scourge, and, despite the best efforts
of their public-health systems, public administrations
and Governments, they have been overwhelmed. We
look to the outside world, to this community of nations,
to help.

Some may say that the call or the response was
delayed, but now is not the time for us to look back;
now is not the time for an audit of what has been done
individually, regionally or nationally. Now is the time
for increased and deepening action.

To all those who have contributed and have done
what they could, we are grateful, but we ask those who
can do more to do more. We ask all of those who have
pledged contributions to turn those pledges swiftly into
contributions. Now more than ever, this is the time for

us to make and accelerate the transition from resolution
to action.

On the ground, the numbers are truly horrifying.
The number of infections, the number of deaths, the
level of misery - all tax our collective imagination and
all tax our collective efforts. Now, however, is not the
time to retreat into a fear born of ignorance but to move
to actions born of knowledge. The greater the media
presence around this scourge, the more it appears that
medical fiction seems to be taking over from medical
fact. Let us be guided by the best medical minds and the
best medical advice that we can rely on. Let us not give
in to ignorance, fear or emotion, which would paralyse
us into inaction.

A Sudanese United Nations official recently passed
away in Leipzig despite all the efforts made to airlift him,
medevac him and give him the best treatment available.
We have seen that countries with the strongest, or
perhaps stronger, public-health systems are also being
challenged. There is a nurse in Dallas, Texas, who is in
isolation. A Liberian gentleman, Thomas Eric Duncan,
has passed away. A Spanish priest has fallen victim to
this scourge, and a Spanish nurse is in quarantine.
We must not fear Ebola, because Ebola can be
defeated. The best medical protocols and the best
medical minds tell us so. What simply needs to be done
is to identify, contain, control and eradicate. To that
end, supplies, logistics and human resources must go to
the places where they are most needed. We are grateful
to those on the front lines, who, day in and day out,
hour after hour, risk making the ultimate sacrifice to
act in the finest tradition of the medical profession to
help others.

The Mission that has been deployed - the first
of its kind - is indeed best described as a public-
health Mission. It is not a special political mission. It
is not a transitional administration. It is not a classic
peacekeeping mission. It is quite simply a mission
designed to save lives. It is a mission of health keepers.

As we express sympathy for the families of
the deceased, let us also celebrate those who have
survived. Let us also provide them with the relevant
support so they can be reintegrated into their respective
communities, and let us also explore the promise that
the plasma in their blood holds for others.

We, as an Organization and a community of nations,
have to act in concert because quite simply what six
months ago was considered a West African problem
is now truly a global problem. The trust fund that is
being set up is woefully underfunded. MS. Chan has
also spoken about a twenty-fold increase in support and
resources that are needed. We ask that those members
of the Chamber who have joined the fight and shown
leadership continue to be resolute and continue to show
leadership.

What is perhaps most striking about this disease
is that it strips the caregiver of the most basic power
that he or she has - the power of touch. It turns that
very gift into a potential transmitter of the disease. It
seeks to strip us of our basic humanity - the ability to
care for one another, the ability of a mother to hug and
comfort an ailing child, the ability of a father to hug
and comfort a grandfather or a grandmother.

As affected countries, we not only face the grim
reality of day-to-day survival; the grim reality of
corpses not being able to be burried in time, of patients
not being able to be received in time in treatment and
isolation centres. We also face daily indignities or
growing indignities, which I think this Chamber should
be aware of. The national football team of Sierra Leone
recently went to meet another team to play a scheduled
match. They were isolated in the area of the hotel where
they were staying. The bus that took them to and from
the field was the subject of insults f people crying
"Ebola! Ebola! Ebola!" Young children ran away from
them and they were treated in a manner that would test
the resilience of the strongest of us all.

We ask that we move and act not out of discrimination
or ignorance, but out of facts and the fact that we face a
common threat. Extraordinary measures are called for,
and Sierra Leone, through the leadership of Mr. Ernest
Bai Koroma, recently instituted what has been called
a lockdown and a temporary shutdown in order to
educate and seek to establish the number of cases in
the capital and beyond. That act, while criticized and
misunderstood by some, has proven to be a success and
has been praised as such by qualified medical minds.

We, together, as the three most affected countries,
act in unison because we fully realize that eradicating
Ebola in Liberia will nto solve it in Guinea or solve it in
Sierra Leone. Similarly, eradicating it in Sierra Leone
or taking action in Sierra Leone, will not help Guinea
or Liberia.

We are grateful for the leadership shown by the
Mano River Union, under the chairmanship of President
Alpha Conde and Secretary-General Daraba. We are
grateful for the leadership shown by the African Union
(AU) and other regional and continental organizations
that have all stepped into the fight. We are truly grateful
for international organizations, such as the European
Union, the World Health Organization (WHO) and all
the members of the United Nations family that have
joined the fight.

But we do ask most sincerely and most humbly
for a deepening of action and support. We are grateful
for the leadership shown to date, but leadership alone
cannot win the fight. All ofus individually, collectively,
regionally and continentally must do all we can to
join the fight. What threatens a subregion today, what
threatens a continent tomorrow, has the possiblity of
engulfing the whole world. To the ambassadors of
the three most affected States, Ebola is no longer an
abstract issue, as all of us have relatives, family and
fellow citizens who face varying degrees of hardship,
varying degrees of fear from this scourge.

The President, in a recent televised statement to
the World Bank, indicated the critical needs that are
required in Sierra Leone to fight this fight. We are in a
position to provide details on those needs. The task plan
devised in conjunction with WHO - with Margaret
Chan and her team, the Mano River Union and the
AU - is available and can be shared with all. However,
what we have learned is that there is a deepening crisis.
All that has been prepared over the past three to six
months is fast becoming irrelevant in terms of supplies,
resources and the deployment of personnel. The
World Bank has indicated quite clearly the economic
repercussions of Ebola and the impact it will have on
the associated economic development of those nations.

Not long ago we gathered in this Chamber to
celebrate the transition of Sierra Leone from a State
in conflict to a post-conflict State, and to celebrate
its fragile but substantive achievements. It is with a
measure of sadness that we appear in the Chamber again
for the second time to talk not of continued progress,
but of a deepening crisis. Above all, what we require
is a sense of hope, a sense that the United Nations and
the community of nations that it represents will not
abandon the fight, will not fail us and will not relent
until the scourge of Ebola has been removed.

What emanated from West Africa has now become a
cause for concern and worry in the United States, Spain
and other countries of Europe, and other countries far
beyond. We ask that all possible actions that are being
considered be taken on the basis of medical facts.

Quarantines at airports and the isolation of countries
simply do not work. That is not what I believe or what
the three most affected nations believe; it is what the
best medical minds tell us. There must be a dedicated
air bridge in and out of the region to ensure that relevant
supplies go in. We therefore urge our neighbours, both
near and far, to facilitate those efforts.

We also are grateful to the private sector and
non-governmental organizations, the finest of which is
Medecins Sans Frontieres (MSF). What MSF has shown
us is that we, as nations and Members of the United
Nations, must do more because if one non-governmental
organization can do all that MSF has done, it puts us to
shame if we cannot match its efforts and increase our
participation.

As the representatives of the three most affected
nations, it is our task to maintain the momentum and
focus on this deadly scourge. But as I said before, the
fight - the challenge - is not for us alone. It is truly
a global challenge. Let me just end with this thought.
The depth of fear and emotion that has been expended
to date concerning Ebola must be matched by the
resolute will of all of us to beat the scourge and meet
the challenge.

We, as representatives of the three most-affected
countries, are available to answer all questions, respond
to all queries and make any clarifications necessary
regarding the actions of our Governments. We simply
ask that, in the reporting of what is being done on the
ground and on the front line, we be consulted and asked
to state our views so as to avoid unnecessary panic,
misinformation or misrepresentation of the true facts.
Above all, what we do here and what we say here must
make a difference for those who are on the front line.
Promises of action, pledges and contributions, financial
or otherwise, must translate into effective and much-
needed supplies on the ground as soon as possible.

