Mr. Bennouna (Morocco) (spoke in French):
Despite the lateness of the hour, Sir, I cannot deprive
myself of the pleasure of telling you how pleased the
Moroccan delegation is to see you presiding over the
work of the Security Council for the month of
December. This is surely the crowning event of a two-
year membership of the Council in the course of which
we have all witnessed your readiness to act and your
good judgement.

We listened with interest to the statement made
this morning by my friend Mr. Ibrahima Fall, who has
from the outset shepherded the plan to establish the
Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for West Africa. I am sure that he is as pleased
as we are to see that plan coming to fruition.

You have kept your word to all African
delegations, Mr. President, and have made December a
month in which African issues have frequently been on
the Council's agenda and are being given the attention
they deserve.

I cannot fail to congratulate Ambassador
Mignonette Patricia Durrant of Jamaica on the manner
in which she guided the work of the Security Council
last month.

Today, the Council's debate focuses on West
Africa, a subregion to which, throughout its history,
Morocco has been linked in many ways - human,
economic, political and cultural - and with which we
have developed a very rich network of relations. That
is why the Kingdom of Morocco wished to address the
Security Council in this debate: as we always have, we
share the legitimate aspiration of West Africa and its
peoples to a better life. We believe that the convening
of this Security Council meeting under the presidency
of Mali is auspicious; it will do much to impel these
plans.

We take note of the report of the inter-agency
mission to West Africa (S/2001/434) which visited the
subregion in March this year. The report is of high
quality and reflects a new United Nations approach to
subregional problems in Africa. The mission made a
complete and accurate diagnosis of the situation in the
subregion and identified the underlying causes of the
conflicts afflicting West Africa, with all their social,
economic and humanitarian consequences. This grave
situation can jeopardize the development prospects and
the future of the peoples of the region. It requires that
the international community develop a strategy
encompassing all the regional factors involved and
resulting in substantial material and financial support.

We are convinced that such a strategy would help
avoid the exacerbation of the situation and the spread
of insecurity and instability. It would also help the
States concerned to implement the measures necessary
to bolster peace and stability and to improve the
functioning of their institutions and their methods of
governance. Historical, ethnic and economic realities
require urgent measures to prevent a conflagration
throughout this subregion, and especially around the
countries of the Mano River Union.

During the inter-agency mission, heads of State
or Government unanimously emphasized the
prevention and settlement of conflicts in a regional
rather than a national or State-by-State framework.
They stressed the urgency of tackling the underlying
causes of conflict. The preventive measures that have
been proposed involve the cessation of the activities of
mercenaries, of small-arms traffickers and of dealers in
raw materials - materials which, as we now know, are
aimed at fuelling violence and confrontation. The
measures would also encourage the process of
reintegration with a View to enhancing the appeal of
ongoing disarmament and demobilization programmes.
Experience has shown that the lack of adequate
resources for such programmes has, unfortunately,
contributed to the resumption of tension and of
conflict. Those measures would also include efforts by
the international community to promote the economic
development of the countries of the region through
feasible projects that take into account the need for
broadened markets.

The humanitarian disasters caused by the
recruitment of children for war and the image of an
entire generation of young people injured and
traumatized forever demand that we all do everything
possible to set up monitoring mechanisms so that these
horrors will never recur.

It is of the utmost importance that those
responsible for serious crimes against the peace and
security of mankind be held accountable before justice
for their crimes - with, of course, due process. In that
context, Morocco supports the establishment of the
Special Court for Sierra Leone, and hopes that it can
promptly begin its work, with the resources it needs.

Clearly, it is ever more difficult to break the cycle
of violence and underdevelopment in that part of
Africa without a broad regional approach that takes
into consideration all the dimensions of current
problems and addresses them in a coordinated manner.
And who can better deal with those problems in a
coordinated manner, with the highest level of
credibility and with the greatest chance of success than
the United Nations - together, of course, with the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS).

We entirely support the establishment at Dakar of
the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for West Africa. The Kingdom of
Morocco will lend the Office its active support at the
appropriate time. The Office can be an observation post
recording in real time the facts and developments in the
area, and can be a clearing house for the various bodies
of the United Nations system that will have to
intervene to prevent conflict and establish the
conditions for a stable West Africa for the benefit of all
its peoples.

We are convinced that this experiment in the field
will also be a test for the United Nations in the
development of appropriate means of conflict
prevention. We wish it every success so that it can be a
model for further action in Africa and elsewhere.

Everyone knows that Africa is the continent that
has suffered the most from upheavals on the
international scene over the past decade. It is therefore
high time that concrete action be undertaken so that
that continent, which has become a virtual disaster
area, can become an active participant in globalization
and finally feel some of its positive effects.

Africa has made a substantial contribution to the
universal heritage, if only through its inestimable
contribution to the renewal of, for example,
contemporary art, from which all of humankind
benefits. At this time of dialogue among civilizations,
therefore, it is up to the international community to
help Africa to progress towards greater stability and
prosperity by strengthening existing States and curbing
separatism, so as to prevent outbreaks of violence and
related terrorism.
