Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the United Nations Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, for his comprehensive
briefing. We also thank the American delegation for
convening today's event. However, we would like to
express our categorical disagreement with the attempt
to tailor this meeting to the domestic American context
and exclusively to American foreign policy objectives.
For example, in the concept note (S/2017/3 05, annex)
prepared for this meeting, whose topic has traditionally
read, "The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question", our American colleagues have
remained silent on the Palestinian issue. Moreover, in
the document prepared by the United States delegation
we do not find any reflection of the threat posed by the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham, J abhat Al-Nusra and
other extremists and terrorist groups of all kinds, nor of
the fact that civilians in Syria, Iraq and Libya continue
to suffer from the excesses committed by those groups.
The terrorist acts that they have carried out cause death
far beyond the borders of the region.

Perhaps the authors of the concept note do not have
any objections to that phenomenon. Indeed, we are
invited to label those who are fighting those groups
in Syria as terrorists. The authors advise the Security
Council to think about "who are the regional players
that most benefit from the chaos in the region?" But we
have a question as well: Should we not search for such
players beyond the region?

In point of fact, one should proceed from the
premise that the Palestinian-Israeli problem and f in
a broader context - the Arab-Israeli settlement should
remain at the centre of the regional agenda and of the
international community's attention. Without a solution
to that long-standing conflict, a long-term and stable
stabilization of the entire Middle East is impossible.
Despite the fact that other fierce and destructive wars
are aflame in the region, the situation demands that the
Security Council not lose sight of the need to search for
ways to establish a formula to ensure the peaceful and
safe coexistence in the region of two States - Israel
and Palestine. We must not forget the lamentable plight
of the Palestinians and the high level of violence in
Israel and on the occupied Palestinian territories.

The current situation with regard to the Palestinian-
Israeli question remains extremely complex. Various
incidents in the West Bank and Jerusalem, as well as
periodic tensions around the Gaza Strip, show that the
risks ofthe escalation ofthe conflict remain high. One of
the reasons for the growth of extremist feelings among
Palestinians has been the unilateral actions by Israel.
Those actions have sought to create irreversible facts
on the ground, including the expansion of settlements
in the occupied territories.

In that regard, we would like to recall that
Russia voted in favour of resolution 2334 (2016).
In so doing, we assumed that its content would be
based on tried and tested formulae. We think that
that resolution sends a clear signal that unilateral
actions are unacceptable - either by Israel or by the
Palestinians - as would be any actions that pre-empt
the outcome of the peace negotiations. It also states that
it is important that we preserve the prospects for a two-
State solution.

Together, we must look for a way to intensify the
work on the Palestinian-Israeli peace process. We
support the coordination of international efforts on
the Middle East settlement, based on tried and tested
mechanisms and those approved by Security Council
resolutions, primarily the Middle East Quartet of
international mediators. Our initiative to organize
a personal meeting in Moscow between Mahmoud
Abbas and Benjamin Netanyahu remains on the table.
We hope that, despite the possible domestic political
considerations, the leaders of Israel and Palestine will
demonstrate commitment to a peaceful settlement and
will start direct Palestinian-Israeli negotiations.

On 6 April, the Russian Ministry of Foreign
Affairs issued an official statement in support of the
two-State solution, stressing the imperative of creating
a Palestinian State within the 1967 borders. We
recognize East Jerusalem as the capital of that State. At
the same time, the Russian leadership took a decision
to recognize West Jerusalem as the capital of the State
of Israel. We think that that step is consistent with the
well-known international legal basis for a Middle East
settlement. In practical terms, our recognition of West
Jerusalem will not, however, change anything until the
parties agree on all final status issues, including the
future of Jerusalem. We intend to keep our Embassy in
Tel Aviv.

A most serious problem in the Middle East is
that of terrorism, which has assumed unprecedented
dimensions. It is spreading towards Africa, Asia and
Europe. Unilateral actions are futile, something that
we have already seen on numerous occasions. We must
solve such problems together within the United Nations.
Unfortunately, owing to the numerous violations and
disregard for the fundamental principles of the Charter
of the United Nations, such as the independence and the
sovereign equality of States, non-intervention in their
internal affairs and the peaceful settlement of disputes,
the situation in many previously stable countries of
the Middle East has become horrifying. For instance,
the consequences of the occupation of Iraq, which was
initiated under what was clearly a false pretext, continue
to impose a heavy burden on the people of that country.
We have also seen the heavy-handed manipulation
of Security Council mandates, which has resulted in
the destruction and unrelenting chaos in Libya, the
methodical incitement of the internecine war in Syria,
and the connivance in escalating the spiral of violence
and mutual hostility in Yemen. All of those unhealed
scars will long remind us of the perniciousness of the
ideology of exclusiveness and of the drive to decide the
fate of other States and peoples.

In conclusion, I would like to draw the Council's
attention to the fact that the destabilization of the
situations in the Middle East and North Africa is
having a very serious effect on Christians and other
religious minorities who live in those areas. Extremists
are using violence against those religious minorities
so as to incite sectarian strife, which contributes to
filling the ranks of the extremists and allows them to
benefit from the persisting conflicts in the region. For
our part, we will continue our efforts to prevent attacks
on Christians and breakdowns in the relations between
civilizations and religions.

In that context, we should consider the joint
statement made by Patriarch of Moscow and all Russia
Cyril and Pope Francis to take immediate steps to stop
the mass exodus of Christians from the Middle East.
There was also a meeting in Tashkent on 7 April, at
which a joint declaration was adopted by the Foreign
Ministers of the countries of the Commonwealth of
Independent States, condemning discrimination and
intolerance directed against Christians, Muslims and
members of other faiths. We hope that we can serve as
an example for other United Nations Member States.

