Mr. Medrano: On behalf of the Executive
Director of the World Food Programme (WFP), Josette
Sheeran, I would like to start by expressing our sincere
gratitude to the Security Council for inviting the World
Food Programme to share its views on the challenges
and opportunities that the current situation in Haiti is
posing to the United Nations family and the
international community.

The WFP is convinced that the current levels of
poverty, deprivation and suffering, as described in the
recent report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
(S/2009/ 129), are clearly incompatible with the goal of
long-term stability. Even without further adverse
weather threats, the current state of health and
sanitation infrastructure and the continued food
insecurity represent tremendous challenges.

As the Council is well aware, approximately 70
per cent of the population has no access to basic health
services or sanitary facilities. Half of the population
has no access to potable water. Before the most recent
series of hurricanes, agricultural production met only
30 to 50 per cent of needs, with most farmers
producing enough food for only six to eight months of
the year.

The global financial crisis brings the risk of
further deterioration due to a decrease in remittances.
Recent reports indicate that remittances to Haiti began
dropping in January 2009 and that they have now
dropped by 10 per cent compared to last year. They
also indicate that, on average, 77 per cent of
remittances are spent on the basic daily expenses of
food, housing, utilities, clothing and medicine. The
impact of this downturn in remittances is likely to
offset the current decrease in imported food prices,
with serious implications for household vulnerability,
poverty and hunger.

In 2008, in response to high food prices, natural
disasters and extreme poverty, the World Food
Programme raised over $100 million to ensure food
assistance for more than 2.5 million people in Haiti. As
of now, the number has risen to 2.8 million, who face
continued malnutrition and threats to their livelihoods
as they remain cut off from roads, markets and access
to basic services.

The World Food Programme is restoring key
community assets and infrastructure in both rural and
urban populations by providing protective nutrition and
social and educational interventions for women,
children and the most food-insecure. We regard these
as safety net measures, which improve nutritional and
health status while enhancing access to education and
providing livelihood protection for the most
vulnerable.

I think that it is very important to highlight the
fact that, in order to foster livelihood opportunities in
rural areas, the World Food Programme is determined
to work with partners to address the many challenges
currently limiting the possibility of purchasing the food
that is needed for its programmes from local Haitian
small farmers.

The upcoming Haiti summit to be held in
Washington, D.C., represents a major opportunity to
forge a new paradigm in terms of economic and social
security. The World Food Programme is committed to
the socio-economic stabilization and development of
Haiti, within the framework of the poverty reduction
strategy paper, the post-disaster needs assessment and
the plan that the Government of Haiti will present at
the Washington conference.

The World Food Programme, like other United
Nations agencies and donors, advocates strongly for a
strategy that focuses on ensuring access to jobs and to
basic social services in health, nutrition, food and
education for the poorest population strata, while
creating infrastructure, incomes, food security and
environmental sustainability. This strategy is based on
a firm engagement to support governance and
leadership by the Haitian authorities of the critical
socio-economic development process they are engaged
in. We strongly feel and hope not only that these
measures will reduce the risk of further civil unrest,
but that they will also represent the best investment for
the future of the country.

There is no doubt that, while the security
situation in Haiti has improved since the Mission's
initial deployment in 2004, Haitian people need more
tangible improvements in their daily lives. A poor,
hungry and desperate population is simply not
compatible with stability.

