The President (spoke in French): The representative
of the Syrian Arab Republic has asked for the floor to
make a further statement. I give him the floor.

Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic) I would like to clarify first that I spoke about
Nazi Germany during the Second World War. I did not
talk about Germany today. I spoke about Nazi Germany
during the Second World War. I addressed my colleague,
the representative of Germany, and spoke about his
comments. I did not speak about Germany. I spoke
about the comments of my colleague, the representative
of Germany. That is what I would like to clarify to Her
Excellency the representative of Britain.

With regard to the statement of the representative
of Israel, first, the majority of representatives in this
Chamber, with the exception of the United States
representative, did not absolutely acknowledge the
United States action, which proves that this action
violates resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and
497 (1981). That is an important lesson which the
representative of Israel must understand. He should
grasp the lessons learned and the wisdom of what
happened today. Fourteen out of fifteen members told
him and all those who protect him that this thoughtless
behaviour is wrong. Annexing land by force is wrong
and illegal and violates the Charter of the United
Nations and Security Council resolutions. We are not
reinventing the wheel in that regard. The Israelis would
like to reinvent the wheel. That is my first point.

Secondly, there has never been and will never
be a Member of the United Nations that makes
the Organization work as hard as Israel makes it
work because of the occupation. It would take a
mathematician or a computer specialist to calculate
how many millions of hours have been spent by this
international Organization and by tens of thousands of
diplomats from all over the world working on the Israeli
occupation of Arab territories since 1948? How many
millions of hours of work and how many billions of
dollars have been spent on that issue? Israeli politicians,
prime ministers, ministers, ambassadors and military
officers continue to deny the great truth that there
is an Israeli occupation of Arab territories and that
occupation should not be there. It is very simple. That
is the law. There should be no occupation.

Thirdly, every time Israelis are cornered,
Americans come to save them, and when Americans
find themselves cornered, just like the Israelis, a
Hollywood spectacle begins. Israelis are well known
for that. Council members have heard and seen the
cheap show that the Israeli Ambassador performed. He
strangely used the word "shame", as if he, his country,
his authorities and his politicians know what shame even
means. The majority of the United Nations Member
States have been saying "Shame on you, Israel", since
1948. Out of 193 Members, at least 150 have said,

(spoke in English)

"Shame on you, Israel" and "Shame on you, Israeli
Ambassador", at least 100 times at each session of
the General Assembly. They do not get it.

(spoke in Arabic)

Fourthly, Syria has been participating in a peace
process. Today, the Israeli Ambassador is saying that
the annexation and occupation of the Golan are a
security necessity for Israel, as if he does not know the
history of the political talks between Syria and Israel.
His former Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin sent us a
written letter in which he acknowledged that the Golan
is a Syrian territory across the borders of 4 June 1967.
Warren Christopher, the former United States Secretary
of State, acknowledged it, because he received the letter
and transferred it to us. Of course, a Jewish Israeli
extremist assassinated former Prime Minister Rabin in
Tel Aviv. Israel is governed by extremists. Israel does
not seek peace. If Israel genuinely sought peace, we
would have achieved peace back in the days of former
Secretary of State Warren Christopher and former
President Bill Clinton. Back then, the time was right
for peace.

Sixthly, it is not in Israel's interest to avoid peace,
because in the absence of law the only alternative is
reclaiming the Golan by force. I say that here and now
in the Council and to the Representative of Israel in
order to convey the message to his Government. There
must be law in the world or everyone will adhere to
the law of the jungle. The Golan is a Syrian territory,
whether Israel likes it or not and whether or not it is
protected by the United States. The United States can
protect it for 5, 10 or 15 years, but what then? Things
will change. Not acknowledging our right will lead to
war. If Israelis want to live in peace they must do so
within recognized borders based onjustice, the land for
peace principle and the return of occupied territories
to the Palestinian, Syrian and Lebanese people. Not
acknowledging our right will lead to war. That is not in
the best interest of Israel.

There are those today who try to weaken and hurt
Syria but that phase will end - be it tomorrow or the
day after, it will end. Only then will Israel see how we
will liberate and recover the Golan if it does not heed
the international law. Israel's American partner issued
a licence to Genie Energy, a company owned by Dick
Cheney, the former Vice-President of the United States,
to start oil exploration in the Golan. A United States
company is exploring for oil in the Golan. There is also
another project under way using giant fans for solar
energy. Israel has seized tens of thousands of acres
from Syrian farmers in the Golan to launch its solar
power project.

Despite all of those violations, we hear that
Germany has provided Israel with Dolphin-class
submarines capable of carrying nuclear weapons.
Why? Does Israel need submarines to carry nuclear
weapons? Who is threatening Israel with nuclear
weapons? Who has nuclear weapons to threaten Israel?
Israel is the only State that is not a party to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. It
refuses to subject its nuclear facilities to the IAEA. All
Council members know that. Israel is being supplied
with submarines, F-35 and F-16 aircraft and advanced
maritime weapons. Who is threatening Israel? It is
Israel that threatens its neighbours. Israel poses a threat
to international peace and security.

I apologize for taking up so much time.

The President (spoke in French): The
representative of Israel has requested the floor to make
a further statement.


