We welcome your participation, Foreign Minister Maas, as well as that of all Foreign Ministers and representatives of the international follow-up committee on Libya and neighbouring countries, in today's meeting. My delegation also thanks Secretary-General Guterres for his insightful briefing. It is heart-wrenching that since 2011 Libya has continued to be plagued by instability and insecurity. The protracted crisis has spiralled out of control, as is evident from the recent escalation of violence, and this, coupled with the dismal humanitarian situation, exacerbated by the coronavirus disease, means that Libya is clearly on the edge of the precipice. Accordingly, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines strongly urges the warring parties to commit to a permanent ceasefire. We call on the international community to redouble its efforts to assist in resolving the crisis. If not, Libya may soon fall into an abyss of desolation, and the repercussions will be detrimental to all Libyans, including future generations, neighbouring countries, the wider African continent and Europe. Indeed, national reconciliation is possible within the framework of a Libyan- led and Libyan-owned political process, under the auspices of the United Nations. We reaffirm our support for the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) and renew our call for the appointment of a new Special Representative of the Secretary-General. We further commend the complementary efforts of the African Union, the League of Arab States and all other actors and reiterate our support for the convening of an African Union-led, inter-Libyan reconciliation conference. In order for the approach taken by the United Nations to yield positive results, we must deepen our resolve and respond to Libya's complex challenges in a concerted manner. To that end, the parties must comply with their international obligations, commencing with respecting the arms embargo and all relevant resolutions on Libya as well as international humanitarian law. Additionally, interference by external actors aimed at advancing narrow interests undermine constructive efforts and initiatives. We urge external actors to refrain from taking actions that compromise ongoing negotiations. We also emphasize the need to respect Libya's sovereignty and territorial integrity. In the midst of existing challenges, the Libyan people, especially those groups made most vulnerable, continue to be adversely affected. The incessant violence and countless deaths, as well as the challenges facing migrants and refugees, including torture, sexual violence, forced disappearances and the trafficking and sale of migrants, are appalling. We therefore welcome the creation of the international fact- finding mission to Libya of the Human Rights Council to investigate atrocity crimes and ensure accountability. We also appeal to the Libyan authorities to facilitate safe humanitarian access. The exigencies of our time require us to do more for the Libyan people. We must be vigilant and consistent in addressing the current challenges, no matter their complexity, and put our efforts towards a pacific settlement of Libya's ongoing crisis. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines will continue to work with the international community in finding a political solution to the crisis. We remain in solidarity with our Libyan brothers and sisters.
