Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): Ambassador
Rugunda has given a good account of our discussions
with the African Union (AU). As the co-leader of that
leg, I should like to add two thoughts.

First of all, the substance of our discussions with
the African Union, in particular on the situations in the
Sudan and Somalia, demonstrated the depth of the
09-35198

relationship between the United Nations and the
African Union and the ways in which it is becoming
more substantive. We are seeing the United Nations
and the AU working together to tackle the crises in
Darfur, where we have the first joint United Nations-
AU hybrid peacekeeping operation - which has its
problems, of which we are aware, but which shows the
United Nations and the AU working together - and in
Somalia, where the United Nations is funding logistical
support for the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM). Those issues are some of the most
pressing on the Council's agenda. As Ambassador
Rugunda has said, it is important that we reflect on the
nature of our consultative exchanges with the African
Union Peace and Security Council, in order that we get
the most out of them, that the African Union partners
get the most out of them and that we can make the best
and most effective use of our joint operations and
policies and our work together.

We travelled to Rwanda following our meetings
in Ethiopia. Along with our visit to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, about which Ambassador
Ripert will report, I think that was the tenth visit of the
Security Council to the Great Lakes. That reflects the
level of attention that the Council gives to resolving
the ongoing problems in that region. It was, as ever,
invaluable to see at first hand the situations we are
dealing with.

There have of course been substantial changes
since the Council was in the region in June 2008. There
was relative calm at that time, a year ago. But that gave
way, in the early autumn, to a crisis in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, which continued
until the end of the year. It was the decision in early
2009 by the Governments of both Rwanda and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to work together to
address the shared problem of the Forces
democratiques de liberation du Rwanda (FDLR) and
the presence of other armed groups in the region that
helped to reshape the political landscape. Our visit
afforded us an opportunity to encourage both
Governments to continue to reinforce their
cooperation, as well as to see the effects of that
improved regional dynamic on the ground.

We were all moved by our visit to the Kigali
Genocide Museum, which gave us some sense of the
continued resonance of the horrific events of 1994 on
events today. We also made a brief but encouraging
visit to the Mutobo rehabilitation camp, where we met
3
several hundred former FDLR combatants, many of
whom had returned to Rwanda as a result of the joint
operations between the Governments of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Rwanda. The ex-
combatants gave the impression of being relieved to be
back home in Rwanda. Their stories of the
misinformation circulating in the Congolese bush and
their pleasant surprise at how positive their treatment
was underlined the need for renewed focus on our
efforts aimed at the demobilization and disarmament of
rebel groups.

The highlight of our time in Rwanda was the
frank and wide-ranging discussion with President
Kagame. The Council set out its strong support for the
rapprochement between his Government and that of
President Kabila. We also encouraged President
Kagame to further deepen the relationship, as we also
did later with President Kabila.

President Kagame was encouraged by the
progress made in the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo in the past six months, and he hoped that the
political, military and economic cooperation with the
Democratic Republic of the Congo would continue. In
President Kagame's view, the joint operations that they
had carried out had had an impact on the root causes of
the problems in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo. He supported that being maintained by regional
actors and the international community, although he
was not entirely confident that the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC) would be able to play the sort of
partnership role with the armed forces of that country
that the Rwandan forces had played.

Nonetheless, we came away optimistic that the
progress made in the normalization of relations
between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Rwanda could be sustained. We now need to ensure
that the transformative potential of genuine
cooperation can be realized and that it can provide a
peace dividend for civilians across the region.

