Mr. Apakan (Turkey): Let me begin by
thanking Under-Secretary-General Herve Ladsous
for his comprehensive briefing on the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan
(S/2012/462). I would also like to thank the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime Executive Director
Yuri Fedotov for his briefing and Ambassador Tanin for
his insightful statement.

Afghanistan has come a long way. We have seen
with satisfaction the Afghan National Security Forces
growing stronger to assume the security responsibility
for almost 75 per cent of the population. The Afghan
National Security Forces have improved in terms of
capacity and professionalism. They have proved able
to maintain security in those areas where they have
assumed the lead. By mid-2013, they will be providing the
lead for security across the country. That will mark the
shift of the primary focus of the International Security
Assistance Force from combat operations to training,
advising and assisting. That clearly demonstrates that
Afghanistan is on its way to sustainable self-reliance
in the security sector. In Chicago, we gave the Afghan
people the clear message of commitment that we would
stand by them as they took the full lead for their security.

In our shared determination for a stable and
secure Afghanistan, we have relentlessly supported the
Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace and reconciliation
process. We therefore welcome the appointment of
Mr. Rabbani as Chair of the High Peace Council, and
we strongly support his emphasis on a broad-based and
inclusive peace process at the central and local levels. We
are confident that, under his able leadership, the High
Peace Council will successfully lead a comprehensive
and genuinely inclusive peace process.

There are many dimensions of our cooperation
in Afghanistan that we could discuss. Indeed, today,
many speakers touched upon various issues. However,
I would like to limit my intervention to the regional
dimension of our joint endeavours.

Since last November, Afghanistan's immediate and
more distant regional partners have embarked upon
positive and constructive regional cooperation, with
a view to ensuring a secure, prosperous and peaceful
Afghanistan. Combined Afghan leadership and regional
ownership are key drivers of the Istanbul process. We
are indeed encouraged by our region's commitment to
engaging in sincere and results-oriented cooperation
for a peaceful and stable Afghanistan.

Two weeks ago, the Kabul ministerial conference
on the Istanbul process was a clear testimony to our
collective resolution in that regard. Our region is
bound in its destiny. We will enjoy peace, security and
prosperity only if Afghanistan, which plays a crucial
role as the land bridge in the heart of Asia, enjoys peace
and stability. As such, we believe that the positive
energy mobilized through the Istanbul process will
enhance existing efforts for a stable and prosperous
region.

The Istanbul process has three main elements
that we believe are important to emphasize. The first
element is to enhance political dialogue among the
region. Recognizing that regular political consultations
at a high level is the most effective way of ensuring
continuous dialogue, the Istanbul process participants
committed themselves to meeting once a year for
political consultations at the ministerial level. Such
political momentum will be further enhanced through
regular meetings of our senior officials, as well as our
Kabul-based representatives.

The second element is to implement the
confidence-building measures. Seven such measures,
which are prioritized on common challenges such
as disasters, terrorism, illicit drugs, impediments
to trade and economic growth, and illiteracy, will
be incrementally implemented by the participant
countries. Within that framework, we are encouraged
that a meeting will be held in New Delhi tomorrow to
bring together regional and international investors in
Afghanistan. That will be an opportunity for investors
in all sectors to exchange views on Afghanistan's
economic potential.

The third element is to build synergy among
regional organizations. From the very beginning of
the Istanbul process, we made clear our keen interest
in developing greater coherence and in creating a
better synergy with the existing regional cooperation
processes pertaining to Afghanistan. In that respect,
we are pleased that a significant number of those
organizations were represented at the highest level
in Kabul. We will continue to collaborate with them
within that framework.

We would also like to commend the significant and
constructive support and contribution that the United
Nations has provided to the Istanbul process. Together,
we have demonstrated our firm resolve for a successful
future in Afghanistan.

Afghans have a clear vision for their future - a
sovereign, secure and peaceful State that is economically
self-sufficient. That vision is also very much related to
Afghanistan's crucial role and regional and historical
position in promoting connectivity and cooperation
across its wider region. As Afghanistan's regional and
international partners, we should continue to support
Afghans in achieving their vision. To that end, Afghan
ownership and leadership will be at the centre of our
collective efforts.

Looking ahead, the upcoming Tokyo conference,
which will be graciously hosted by Japan, will be an
important opportunity for the Afghan Government to
share its development strategy beyond the transition
period. In Tokyo, the international community should
reaffirm its continued support to Afghanistan's
sustainable economic development.

Lastly, I would like to acknowledge our strong
support for the significant role played by the United
Nations in Afghanistan. The United Nations should
continue to be a strong partner for Afghanistan in the
Afghan-led peace and transition processes. I would like
to take this opportunity to express our sincere gratitude
to Special Representative of the Secretary-General Jan
Kubis and his team for their dedicated efforts.

