Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I would like to express my thanks to the United
Kingdom for taking the initiative to organize this open
debate on post-conflict peacebuilding. This open
debate provides a forum for the international
community to undertake a focused discussion on ways
and means to provide more effective assistance for
post-conflict peacebuilding and to strengthen mutual
cooperation in that regard. That is of great significance
for the maintenance of international peace and security.

Peacebuilding is a common challenge facing
humankind and a major issue that the United Nations
and the international community need to address
urgently. In today's world, where the fates of the
peoples of all countries are closely interconnected,
doing a goodjob in peacebuilding is not only helpful in
ensuring lasting peace and sustained development in
post-conflict countries, but also conducive to the
enhancement of the current collective security system
and to the common development of mankind. The
international community should attach great
importance to this issue and should examine it from a
global strategic perspective.

How can we ensure that conflicts do not re-erupt?
How can we enable populations to enjoy the dividends
of peace? How can we transition from a fragile peace
to a harmonious society governed by the people and for
the people? What role can the countries concerned play
in peacebuilding? How can the international
community, and the United Nations in particular,
provide effective and timely assistance? We do not
have ready answers to those questions; nor do we have
much experience to rely on. It is my hope that more
ideas will come out of this meeting. I would like to
make a few observations on behalf of China
concerning the questions I have posed.

First, the country concerned bears the primary
responsibility for peacebuilding. The ultimate purpose
of peacebuilding is to build a modern State that is
peaceful and stable, with economic development,
respect for human rights and the rule of law. The local
people are the foundation of peacebuilding efforts and
the biggest beneficiaries of the results of
peacebuilding. Without the active participation of the
Government concerned and the enthusiastic support of
the local population, a lasting peace is hard to imagine.
Therefore, we should trust the local people and rely on
the local Government and should encourage them to
use their talents and ingenuity to lay down a sound
reconstruction plan so that they can truly own and fully
engage in the peacebuilding process.

Secondly, the international community has the
important mission of assisting the countries concerned
to realize peacebuilding. As a brand new task,
peacebuilding requires that the countries concerned,
the United Nations system, Member States, regional
organizations and civil society make concerted efforts
to address problems in a variety of areas, such as
security, development, human rights and the rule of
law, in an integrated manner. In practice, what the
countries concerned lack is often not political will, but
the capacity necessary for peacebuilding. Here, the
international community can use its advantage in areas
such as finance and technology to provide constructive
assistance to the countries concerned.

We have taken note of the relevant ideas in the
concept paper prepared by the United Kingdom
(S/2008/29l, annex), including enhancing international
coordination, ensuring flexibility in financing and
establishing a civilian rapid deployment force. I wish
to particularly stress that the envisaged corps of
civilian experts should have expertise in a variety of
areas, from security and rule of law to human rights
and development, and that if conditions permit, it
should help the countries concerned to build local
expertise. We encourage Member States and the
relevant organizations to assume the principal
responsibility in that connection and we believe that
the United Nations can play an active role in that
regard.

Thirdly, the African continent should be accorded
priority attention with respect to peacebuilding. As one
of the most turbulent continents of our world and the
region where optimism about achieving the
Millennium Development Goals is at its lowest ebb,
Africa faces such multiple challenges as frequent
conflicts, economic backwardness, severe natural
disasters, food crises and so on. We must recognize the
fact that, without stability and development in Africa,
there will be no world peace or prosperity. By helping
Africa, we are helping ourselves. Currently, peace in
many African countries is extremely fragile and
urgently needs our special attention and careful
nurturing.

The agenda of the Peacebuilding Commission is
currently dominated by the situation in African
countries, demonstrating the universal agreement of the
international community concerning the special needs
of Africa. In the future, the international community
should continue to increase its contribution to the cause
of peacebuilding in Africa.

As the organ entrusted with the sacred mission of
maintaining international peace and security, the
Security Council should play a crucial role in
peacebuilding. We should work together with other
United Nations organs - such as the Peacebuilding
Commission, the General Assembly and the Economic

and Social Council - rely on the membership of the
United Nations, enhance coordination with regional
organizations, continuously promote the idea of
peacebuilding, and continue to nurture the cause of
peacebuilding.

