Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): Allow
me, first of all, to congratulate Ukraine on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of February and for scheduling this open debate on the
protection of critical infrastructure against terrorist
attacks. The relevance and timing of the issue are
testimony to its importance.

Although since the beginning of its existence
humankind has sought to create, innovate and build
for its own well-being and that of future generations,
terrorist groups - on the contrary - have chosen
the path of destruction, anarchy, and nothingness.
The terrorist threat has continued to grow and
spread. Terrorist groups such as Da'esh, Al-Qaieda,
the Taliban, Boko Haram and others, as well as their
affiliates, are constantly developing new methods of
destruction. They miss no opportunity to perpetrate
attacks against sensitive and easily accessible elements
of infrastructure, including airports, metro stations,
trains, buses, hospitals, banks, markets, schools,
universities and institutes. The attacks perpetrated
against the airports in Brussels and Istanbul, as well
as against the train stations of London and Madrid,
access to bank data, State establishments are all acts
that illustrate the readiness of terrorist groups to
attack any part of infrastructure, and to exploit the
slightest vulnerabilities in security and monitoring.
Even places of worship - mosques, synagogues and
churches - have not escaped their macabre acts,
despite the fact that they are places the faithful go
to in search of peace, tranquility and spirituality.
Moreover, nuclear and chemical facilities, storehouses
for radioactive material, electricity systems and dams
are very sensitive sites and are vulnerable to terrorist
acts in the absence of adequate security. They could be
turned into weapons of mass destruction.

The terrorist threat has been exacerbated by the
phenomenon of the return of foreign terrorist fighters
to their countries of origin or third countries. In the
most recent report (S/2016/ 92) of the Secretary-General
on the threat posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (Da'esh) to international peace and security
and the range of United Nations efforts in support of
Member States in countering the threat, elaborated
in accordance with the resolution 2253 (2015), the
Secretary-General warns of the phenomenon of the
return of foreign terrorist fighters following the military
defeats of Da'esh in several theatres of war. The report
estimates the number of foreign terrorist fighters in
Iraq and in Syria to be 40,000 individuals from more
than 100 countries. As such, the return of those foreign
terrorist fighters, well trained in guerrilla tactics and
the manufacture of explosives, constitutes a threat
to society and sensitive infrastructure. They can act
individually as lone wolves, which led the Secretary-
General to point out that terrorist organizations have a
great capacity for adaptation. He indicated that the threat
to civil aviation also remains quite high. That is why
the responsibility for protecting sensitive infrastruce
lies primarily with States, which must integrate such
protection in their national strategies, as well as their
strategies to combat terrorism and violent extremism.
The State must ensure the implementation of effective
means of protection and security, including through
the adoption of the necessary legislation in accordance
with international standards and requirements.

Morocco has adopted a comprehensive, coherent
approach oriented to prevention and action. We believe
that terrorism is a global phenomenon that requires and
calls for a global response paired with and supported
by robust cooperation at the regional, subregional
and international levels. Morocco attaches particular
attention to international cooperation, strengthened
border security, information exchange and sharing,
the use of the INTERPOL database and the roll out
of deradicalization and re-integration to ensure that
terrorist plans fail.

At the regional and subregional levels Morocco
engages in the exchange of information, expertise
and experience both in the framework of South-South
cooperation as well as with African countries, with
countries in the Mediterranean basin, including in the
framework of the 5+5, and other regional partners.
Morocco hosted conferences in 2013 and 2015 on border
security in the Maghreb and the Sahel and participated
in the 2015 Madrid meeting. Morocco also took part
in the Nuclear Security Summit held in Washington,
DC, the final communique of which called for greater
efforts to prevent non-State actors from obtaining
nuclear or radioactive materials for malicious purposes
or attacks against sensitive infrastructure.

Finally, conscious of the importance of combating
nuclear terrorism, Morocco has actively participated
in the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism
since its launch in 2006. Morocco participated in all
relevant meetings and conferences and even organized
several meetings and awareness-raising workshops for
its African peers. The experience of Morocco in that
area was shared just last week in New Delhi during a
meeting of the working group to assess the strategy.

