Mr. anald (Norway): Norway is pleased to see
you, Sir, presiding over the deliberations on this very
important item.

Norway is deeply concerned about the continuous
reports of the killing and maiming of children, the
recruitment and use of child soldiers, as well as rape
and other forms of sexual Violence against children in
conflict situations. This year's report of the Secretary-
General on children and armed conflict sheds further
light on the widespread and unacceptable pattern of
grave Violations against children in conflict situations
worldwide.

We welcome the proposed action plan for the
establishment of a monitoring, reporting and
compliance mechanism, which, we understand, is
based on extensive consultations with stakeholders.
The mechanism should be established as soon as
possible.

Furthermore, the Security Council should
consider including child protection officers in the
mandates of all peacekeeping missions. We have
previously called for an assessment of best practices
and lessons learned as a basis for ensuring more
effective interventions. Best practices should be
institutionalized in the Department for Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO) of the United Nations Secretariat.
There should be a focal point in the Department for
dealing with the issues concerning children in armed
conflict. In that regard it is important that the
Department cooperate closely with UNICEF, since that
agency plays a leading role in the field with regard to
the protection of children's rights.

In addition to child soldier recruitment, the action
plan specifies five other flagrant violations of
children's rights that improved monitoring efforts
should focus on. We welcome that proposal and
consider it particularly important that rape and other
types of grave sexual violence are also included. It is
our firm belief that grave forms of gender-based
violence in situations of armed conflict deserve
particular attention.

The practice of listing parties to armed conflict
that recruit or use children in situations of armed
conflict is without doubt a major and politically
significant contribution to raising awareness about the
plight of these children. It also demonstrates that the
international community is no longer willing to close
its eyes to the tragedies of children today.

We are deeply dismayed to learn about the
significant increase in allegations of sexual misconduct
against United Nations peacekeeping personnel.
All allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse
involving United Nations personnel must be
thoroughly investigated and followed up, and
preventive measures must be put in place. We welcome
the report published in early January by the Office of
Internal Oversight Services of the United Nations
Secretariat, and the other investigations that are being
carried out. We would, however, like to see a
comprehensive report setting out recommendations on
the issue of sexual exploitation and abuse by United
Nations peacekeepers and humanitarian personnel. We
consider it essential to introduce rigorous pre-
deployment training programmes, for military and
civilian personnel, in human rights, including the issue
of sexual abuse.

Norway supports the consideration of targeted
measures to end atrocities against children and
impunity for violators. For measures to be effective it
is important that they be tailored to the individual
situation in order not to unnecessarily impede efforts to
end an armed conflict, which is the single most
important measure that could protect the rights of the
child.

We acknowledge the crucial work done by non-
governmental organizations and civil society
organizations with regard to advocacy, protection and
rehabilitation, and developing and strengthening the
monitoring and reporting regime for children and
armed conflict. We agree that particular priority should
be given to supporting and strengthening national and
civil society institutions that protect and rehabilitate
children in conflict and post-conflict situations. In that
regard it is important that community reintegration
activities for children be supported. We should not
forget that the reintegration process takes time and
requires long-term support.

We are aware that the Security Council is
currently negotiating a new resolution as a follow-up to
last year's Security Council resolution 1539 (2004).
We sincerely hope that the Security Council will take
further steps towards bridging the current gap between
existing international norms and standards and the
daily life of thousands of girls and boys in situations of
armed conflict.

