Mr. Michon (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I wish to thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix and
Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga for their briefings.

I would like to begin by commending the bilateral
rapprochement between the Sudan and South Sudan,
particularly President Salva Kiir Mayardit's leading
role in launching the Sudanese peace talks that took
place last week. We are also pleased that, during their
meeting in Juba on 12 September, Prime Minister
Hamdok and President Kiir decided to strengthen
their bilateral relations, especially with regard to their
shared border. The will of the Sudanese Prime Minister
to restore relations between the border populations is
very encouraging. This new situation inspires hope that
the Abyei issue will finally be addressed with a view
to achieving a political solution negotiated between the
two Governments, which is the only way to prevent this
dispute from becoming an endless frozen conflict. The
holding of a meeting of the Joint Political and Security
Mechanism on 2 October constitutes a step forward
in that direction. We hope that both countries will
continue along that path.

We call upon the Special Envoy for the Horn of
Africa to fully support the resumption of the political
dialogue on Abyei and the demarcation of the border.
We also encourage the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel for Sudan to throw its full weight
behind convincing the parties to move forward.

In this encouraging context, it is essential that the
decisions of the Security Council regarding the mandate
of the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
(UNISFA) finally be implemented. France encourages
the Sudanese authorities to authorize, as soon as
possible, the deployment of police contingents, as
decided by the Council last year. The new police forces
should enable UNISFA to curb crime, particularly in
the Amiet common market, and prevent the escalation
of intercommunal tensions that we have witnessed,
which are often linked to cattle raiding. It is also
important that South Sudan cooperate in good faith
in the joint establishment of the Abyei police service
and that the two countries convene a meeting of the
Joint Committee.

Finally, we support the strengthening of the civilian
component of the mission. We support the Secretary-
General's recommendation to deploy a political section
within UNISFA. That is essential to allow the mission
to actively support the dialogue between the parties,
particularly at the local level. It would also enable the
mission to better prevent local conflicts and enhance
cooperation with the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel. We also ask that the Sudan, in
the same spirit, accept the appointment of a civilian
deputy head of mission, as decided by the Council
in May.

With regard to a broader UNISFA mandate, we
understand the rationale suggested by the Secretariat,
which advocates giving the mission and the Sudanese
authorities more time to implement UNISFA's
reconfiguration, which was decided last year. We are
ready to positively consider that recommendation with
the other members of the Security Council.

In conclusion, I would like to commend, as did my
American colleague, the work of the Ethiopian troops
that stabilize the situation in Abyei and along the border
between the Sudan and South Sudan on a daily basis.

