Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by warmly thanking Assistant Secretary-
General Oscar Fernandez-Taranco, African Union
Commissioner Smai'l Chergui and Ambassador Jiirg
Lauber for their important briefings.

I shall be brief, in keeping with the President's
request so that we have enough time for consultations. I
would like to highlight three points: Burundi remains at
a crossroads one year out from the elections; the region's
mobilization is crucial; and the United Nations must
remain fully committed to supporting regional efforts.

First, Burundi will be able to restore stability only
through the holding of free and inclusive elections in
2020, as has been mentioned. The elections are in one
year's time, which is practically tomorrow. It is crucial
that Burundi move forward and ensure that those
deadlines are prepared for in the best possible way. We
welcome President Nkurunziza's commitment not to
stand for re-election and the recognition of the main
opposition party in February. Further action is needed,
including ensuring free access to Burundian territory
for all parties and respecting the rights of opponents.
France calls on the Burundian authorities to fully
respect their international human rights commitments
and will continue to monitor the humanitarian and
human rights situation with great attention.

Secondly, the mobilization of the region is crucial.
The statement delivered by the Commissioner for Peace
and Security of the African Union before the Council
is especially welcome. I would like to commend the
African Union's efforts and encourage it to continue its
commitment in that direction, with a view to supporting
Burundi and the efforts of the East African Community
(EAC). Through the mediation entrusted to the EAC,
the States of the region have supported the quest for
a lasting solution to the political crisis that broke out
2015. In that regard, I welcome the commitment of the
mediator, President Museveni, and the contribution of
the facilitator, former President Mkapa. The Presidents
of Kenya and Tanzania were invited by their peers to
also contribute to the process. Today it is important to
assess the work being done in the region. Let us therefore
all remain engaged - the Community of East African
States, the African Union and the guarantors of the
Arusha Peace and Reconciliation Agreement - in order
to support Burundi on its path towards stabilization.

Thirdly, it is important in that regard for the United
Nations to remain fully committed to supporting
regional efforts. One year prior to the elections,
given that certain balances envisioned in the Arusha
Agreement are being reconsidered and that concerns
are being raised by the presence of hotbeds of tension
in the region, the Security Council cannot become
disengaged on the situation in Burundi. Moreover, the
work of Mr. Kafando and his teams is more necessary
than ever. It enables support for the mediation efforts
of the Community of East African States and to work
with all stakeholders to develop confidence-building
measures in order to create a climate conducive
to political dialogue and facilitate an inclusive
reconciliation process. I thank Mr. Kafando for his
efforts and encourage him to continue his consultations,
in order to quickly present options on the role that the
United Nations could play in support of regional efforts
to move towards the normalization of the situation
in Burundi.

