Mr. ngowe (Botswana): The Security Council
unanimously adopted resolution 1039 (1996) on 29
January 1996. That resolution extended the mandate of
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
for a further period of six months. This was yet another
demonstration of the commitment of the international
community to the restoration of peace and normalcy in
Lebanon. It had been our hope that the signing of the
Declaration of Principles between Israel and the Palestine
Liberation Organization in 1993, the conclusion of the
Israel-Jordan Agreement and the talks between Israel and
Syria would have a positive impact on the relations
between Israel and Lebanon.

Our hopes were shattered by the horrendous pictures
which have appeared on our television screens during the
last few days. We are gravely appalled by the
indiscriminate killings of innocent Lebanese civilians, the
destruction of their villages and towns and the
bombardment of power plants, none of which have been
proved to have had anything to do with Hezbollah. The
current destruction and mayhem caused by the Israeli
military forces has resulted in the displacement of over
400,000 people, thus creating a serious humanitarian
catastrophe. This situation does not augur well for peace
in the area. It can only have an effect opposite to that
which Israel expects: a groundswell of support for
Hezbollah and bitter resentment and hatred for Israel.

The horrid activities of Hezbollah cannot and must
not be used as a pretext for the annihilation of the people
of Lebanon, for whatever reason. Not every Lebanese is
a member or supporter of Hezbollah.

The Israeli military attacks against the people of
Lebanon must cease immediately.

Yet we are acutely aware that Israel cannot be
expected to watch impassively when Hezbollah continues
to rain bombs into its territory, causing turmoil and

 

unmitigated tragedy. It is equally true that Hezbollah will
continue to carry out attacks against Israel in an effort to
dislodge the latter from southern Lebanon, which it
occupies in violation of Security Council resolution
425 (1978). One thing leads to the other: Hezbollah attacks
invite massive Israeli retaliatory strikes, in most cases
against civilian targets.

This seesaw of attacks and massive reprisals is a
dangerous game which, unfortunately, involves human
lives, and it should not be allowed to continue indefinitely
in a region as volatile as the Middle East. The current
carnage unleashed against the people of Lebanon, like the
assassination of Prime Minister Rabin and the suicide
attacks against the innocent civilian population of Israel,
serves as a constant reminder of the reality that the Middle
East still remains a cauldron of conflict and bloodshed.

The sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon are
today being violated with reckless abandon by Israel, and
the long-term consequences of the Israeli actions are
difficult to predict. National security is often cited as the
reason for these attacks, but everyone, including Hezbollah,
should by now have realized that the politics of mutual
destruction cannot enhance the security of anyone in the
region. They have been playing this dangerous game for far
too long. They must today realize that there is an
alternative to war and destruction.

The only sensible and realistic solution to the Middle
East problem is for the parties to engage in purposeful
negotiations aimed at the attainment of a just and lasting
peace. In this regard, we strongly support the commendable
efforts of the Governments of the United States and the
Russian Federation in encouraging the parties to the Middle
East conflict to negotiate a comprehensive political
settlement. The bombardment of Lebanon is a major
setback to these peace efforts, but everything that can be
done must be done to ensure that the peace initiatives are
not frustrated. The alternative to the peace efforts can only
be more conflict and bloodshed, war and destruction. And
we do not think that they are in the interests of any nation
or organization in the region.
