Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): On behalf of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, allow me to give a brief
overview of developments in the work of the Committee
and its Executive Directorate, as requested in paragraph
26 of resolution 2178 (2014).

The Committee, with the support of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED),
has identified 67 States most affected by the threat of
foreign terrorist fighters. They represent a wide range
of countries in terms of size and capacity, drawn from
all regions of the world. They include all four categories
of States: origin, transit, destination and neighbouring.
Using tools developed by the Committee to facilitate
its dialogue with States on the implementation of
resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005), as well as
new tools dedicated to analysing measures specific
to resolution 2178 (2014), CTED, in support of the
Committee, has analysed an initial batch of 21 States,
looking at how they implement those resolutions, the
gaps that they might individually or collectively need to
address, and the good practices that they already deploy.
The relevant report was submitted to the Council on
13 May.

These evidence-based and risk-based conclusions
will be further used to develop detailed, concrete
recommendations for the facilitation of technical
assistance in the coming months. More reports, to be
delivered in July and September, will expand the scope
of enquiry to all 67 affected States. Future reports will
discuss ways to address recruitment, the challenges
posed by terrorists' use of Internet and communications
technologies, the disruption of terrorist financing and
support networks, and the special challenges associated
with returning foreign terrorist fighters, including the
monitoring of returnees, bringing returning foreign
terrorist fighters to justice, the use and effectiveness
of rehabilitation programmes, and how to manage their
eventual reintegration into society.

In the coming months, therefore, these reports will
provide a detailed road map of concrete measures to
assist in the building of capacity to resist the threat of
foreign terrorist fighters. These reports will continue to
draw on threat analysis provided in the course of CTED's
dialogue with its partners, including the Monitoring
Team of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities, INTERPOL, the
Council of Europe, the Financial Action Task Force
(FATF), the International Civil Aviation Organization,
the International Organization for Migration, the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the
World Customs Organization.

According to the first report, the comprehensive
criminalization of various offences related to foreign
terrorist fighters, as required by resolution 2178
(2014), remains a high priority. Only 5 of the 21 States
reviewed had introduced legislation to criminalize
preparatory or accessory acts conducted in a State with
the aim of committing terrorist acts outside that State's
territory. Furthermore, many of the 21 States had not
yet introduced criminal laws to allow the prosecution
of individuals who travel or attempt to travel to a State
other than their States of residence or nationality for
the purpose of the perpetration, planning or preparation
of or participation in terrorist acts, or the provision or
receipt of terrorist training.

Resolution 2178 (2014) also calls on all States
to require airlines operating in their territories to
provide advance passenger information as a means of
detecting the travel of certain foreign terrorist fighters.
Only 5 of the 21 States we surveyed in the report
required advance passenger information or passenger
name records. In fact, a dedicated report on advance
passenger information that was submitted to the
Council on 26 May shows that only 51 States globally
currently utilize advance passenger information
systems at varying levels of effectiveness. CTED and
the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force are
requested to jointly develop initiatives with relevant
international organizations, aimed at assisting with
the implementation of advance passenger information
systems, with a particular focus on States affected by
the phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters.

On measures to disrupt financing networks and to
bring tojustice those who finance and support facilitation
networks, most of the 21 States can apply to foreign
terrorist fighters the mechanisms that they already have
in place to disrupt and prevent the provision of financial
support to terrorists. There remain concerns about
States' capacity to freeze terrorist assets in accordance
with resolution 1373 (2001). CTED is currently working
closely with FATF to develop concrete tools to address
these issues, including a set of red-flag indicators that
can be used operationally by financial institutions and
others to spot suspicious activity that may be linked to
support for foreign terrorist fighters.

Other priorities identified in the report of 21 affected
States include the centralized and coordinated
exchange of law enforcement information at the
national level; the breaking-down of silo thinking
among law enforcement agencies; and the urgent need
for an operational 24/7 alert system that would enable
users to share information immediately with front-line
officers, including immigration officials and customs
authorities.

There is also good news, however. We are finding
good practices already implemented by many of the
affected States. Nearly all have taken steps to prohibit
by law incitement to commit a terrorist act under
their criminal laws, as called for in resolution 1624
(2005). These measures can contribute significantly to
stemming the flow of foreign terrorist fighters, who are
often spurred to action by calls to terrorist violence made
by others, whether in person or through the Internet or
social media. The Committee is also providing guidance
designed to assist in capacity-building on specific
issues. On 18 February, the Committee submitted to
the Council a report that analyses, in practical terms,
the prosecutorial challenges States face in bringing
Foreign terrorist fighters to justice.

Meanwhile, the Committee has undertaken activities
to reinforce its direct support to States threatened by
terrorism. In my role as Chair of the Committee, I
conducted, from 2 to 6 February, a high-level political
mission to Mali and the Niger, together with CTED's
Executive Director. The Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for the Sahel and the Special Representative
of the Chairperson of the African Union for Counter-
Terrorism Cooperation also participated. This served
to convey a single message that the international
community is united in its determination to assist
countries in their counter-terrorism efforts.

Over the coming months, the Committee will
continue to fulfil the mandates conferred by the Council,
including through the preparation of a special meeting
on stemming the flow of Foreign terrorist fighters, to
be held in Madrid in July; continued Committee visits
to States, particularly those affected by foreign terrorist
fighters; and further interaction with civil society, the
private sector and academic institutions, particularly
in facilitating the use of new technologies in building
the capacity of high-risk, low-capacity States to prevent
terrorism in accordance with international law, in

particular international human rights law, international
refugee law and international humanitarian law.

The Committee and CTED will also continue
to arrange open briefings on regional and thematic
counter-terrorism issues for the wider United Nations
membership, with a View to further enhancing
transparency and strengthening cooperation in the
fight against terrorism.

