Mr. Vale de Almeida: I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its 28
member States. Ten other countries align themselves
with this statement: the candidate countries Turkey, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro,
Serbia and Albania; the country of the Stabilization and
Association process and potential candidates Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine, the Republic of
Moldova, Armenia and Georgia.

I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing this debate ahead the upcoming anniversary
review of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy and following on the Plan of Action to Prevent
Violent Extremism presented by the Secretary-General.
I would like to thank the Secretary General for that and
for his briefing.

Horrific terrorist attacks around the globe remind

us of the need to join forces and give a comprehensive
response. Terrorism cannot be defeated with security
measures alone; we need to act together and we need
to strengthen our preventive dimension to respond to
radicalization and recruitment in a holistic manner.
All these measures should uphold the rule of law and
respect for human rights, international humanitarian
law and international refugee law.

The European Union has a long-standing and
comprehensive engagement in countering terrorism and
preventing radicalization and recruitment. Yet there is
long way to go. Our foreign affairs Ministers recently
renewed their commitment to comprehensive counter-
terrorist measures with enhanced and more coordinated
action. We have strengthened our approach at the
internal and external levels with non-EU member states
and others. We have presented our renewed vision in a
European Agenda on Security.

Terrorist organizations, as well as individual
terrorists, need financing to maintain their networks,
to recruit and supply, and to commit terrorist acts.
Cutting off their sources of financing is imperative yet
increasingly challenging, due to the new trends that
have emerged with Da'esh and the returning terrorist
fighters, such as trafficking in resources and cultural
heritage artefacts. These need to be addressed through
modernized legislation, better multilateral and bilateral
cooperation, and exchange of key information.

When it comes to detecting the movement of
funds, tracking systems such as the Terrorist Financing
Tracking Programme are key tools; nevertheless, there
is a need to also focus on low-cost terrorist operations
that can still have a devastating effect and that use
new modalities of payment, which are difficult to
track. In response, the European Union has already
taken important steps. Following the adoption of
the resolution 2199 (2015), we started the review of
our legislative framework in order to meet enhanced
requirements for the criminalization ofthe financing of
terrorism. The European Commission has proposed a
draft directive on combating terrorism that is expected
to be adopted by the end this year. The European
Council, our leaders, is currently preparing a decision
to amend the listing criteria in line with the resolutions
2253 (2015) and 2178 (2014); it will be complemented
by a Council regulation to determine the specific
restrictive measures to be applied to those persons and
entities listed.
The European Commission has also issued an action
plan to strengthen the fight against terrorist financing,
identifying short- and medium-term measures aimed
at, first, tackling the abuse of our financial system for
terrorist purposes and, secondly, at targeting the sources
of funding, including by considering a wider response
to illicit trafficking in cultural goods and wildlife. This
set of measures is also linked to our engagement at the
external level, where we have increased our support to
partner countries for capacity-building and compliance
with the legal requirements of Security Council
resolutions and the recommendations of the Financial
Action Task Force.

Stemming the flow of foreign terrorist fighters
and tackling their return is another complex challenge
where international cooperation is needed. We strongly
support action under resolution 2178 (2014) and the
recommendations for its implementation contained in
the guiding principles adopted in Madrid in July 2015,
as well as efforts to bolster international action to
prevent violent extremism.

As the top tier of terrorists is removed or brought
to justice, it is increasingly important that we increase
preventive actions to ensure that they are not replaced
by new recruits who are younger and more technically
sophisticated. From the criminal justice perspective,
we are in the process of ratifying the Additional
Protocol to the Council of Europe Convention on the
Prevention of Terrorism. We are currently negotiating
comprehensive criminal law provisions in the draft
European directives on combating terrorism and on
passenger name record data. In addition, ongoing
efforts are also being undertaken in order to support
knowledge-sharing within the European Union. Some
2,000 European practitioners - such as teachers, health-
care workers, social and youth workers, prison officers
and non-governmental organizations - exchange good
practices on the prevention of radicalization. This
approach is based on understanding root causes and the
goal is to proposed practical tools and recommendations
to both practitioners and policymakers. We are ready to
share our expertise in the United Nations framework.

Externally, we are an active member of various
initiatives, such as the Global Counter-Terrorism
Forum (GCTF) and its working groups, where members
and non-members exchange good practices on a variety
of subjects related to the implementation of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and the
Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism. Such

subjects include detention, reintegration, the rule of law
and criminal justice efforts that are needed, preventing
violent extremism, foreign terrorist fighters. We are
also actively supporting the three GCTF inspired
institutes: the Hedayah Centre, the Global Community
Engagement and Resilience Fund in Switzerland, and
the International Institute on Justice and the Rule of
Law in Malta.

Education, youth participation, interfaith and
intercultural dialogue, as well as offering employment
possibilities and promoting social inclusion, are key
to preventing radicalization by promoting common
values, fostering social inclusion, building resilience
and enhancing mutual understanding and tolerance.
In support of EU member States, the European
Commission is developing a series of concrete actions.
At the external level, we also address root causes by
continuing to provide material support and capacity-
building to developing countries, aimed at poverty
reduction, ensuring sustainable economic, social and
environmental development, democracy, the rule of
law, good governance and human rights. These are
critical pieces of the anti-radicalization challenge.

As you, Sir, rightly identify in the concept note
(S/2016/2016, annex) prepared for this debate, misuse
of the Internet and social media by terrorists in order
to target our youngest, most vulnerable citizens with
messages of violence is another complex challenge that
we need to tackle while simultaneously upholding the
fundamental human rights of freedom of expression
and freedom of information. We have launched an EU
Internet Forum, which serves as a platform for relevant
stakeholders, such as ministries, law enforcement
agencies, Internet companies and civil society, to work
together to identify common tools, best practices,
innovative and new solutions to tackle all IT-related
issues of terrorism. Main priorities in that domain
should be to reduce the accessibility of terrorist content
online, empower civil society partners to increase the
volume of effective narratives that are more attractive
to young people than terrorist content. We have also
set up a referral mechanism with the European Police
Office to help EU countries and Internet companies to
identify terrorist material online, Initial results have
been very positive and we are again ready to share our
experience with the United Nations on that initiative.

We are also active in developing strategic
communications outside the EU. We have set up a task
force on strategic communications working with Middle
Eastern and North African countries to identify shared
values and develop concrete communication actions.

In conclusion, terrorism and violent extremism are
global challenges, and the United Nations has a central
role in supporting Member States in this endeavour.
Only together can we pool the sufficient resources and
expertise required to address them. A joint approach
based on our shared values is a sine qua non.

