Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in French): I would like to thank Ms. DiCarlo and Mr. Lacroix for their very comprehensive briefings. France's priority is to support the transition that began more than a year ago. The progress made in recent months is encouraging, particularly with regard to the momentum of the peace negotiations, which the Government has prioritized. We will be highly vigilant with regard to the implementation of those agreements. We also call on the parties that remain outside that process to assume responsibility by returning to the peace talks and draw lessons from the new political situation in the Sudan. We remain concerned about the ongoing violence in Darfur, both between communities and within armed groups, which continues to result in numerous civilian casualties, including among. displaced persons, in violation of international humanitarian law. The deployment of 1,500 troops of the Sudanese Armed Forces, announced at the end of July, is very encouraging and demonstrates a clear willingness to address such challenges. That must be translated into the effective protection of, and the reduction of threats to, the civilian population. That is critical to creating the conditions for the withdrawal of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), which is anticipated by the Sudanese Government by the end of December. It will be up to the Council to take a decision by that date based on an assessment of the situation on the ground drawn up by the Secretary-General. In that context, the structure of UNITAMS proposed by the Secretary-General provides an adequate framework. The Mission must be provided with the necessary human and financial resources in order to take shape. That is especially important with regard to the mandate to protect civilians, in particular women, children and humanitarian and medical workers. In that regard, let me underline the primary responsibility of the Sudanese authorities, which goes without saying. The Mission has a broad mandate in that area in order to support their efforts, particularly in terms of human rights and police capacity-building. In that respect, I welcome the cooperation between the Sudanese Armed Forces and UNAMID forces to deal with the clashes last July, which is a step in the right direction. In the coming months, it is also crucial to fully leverage the synergies between UNAMID and UNITAMS without exception. There is no doubt that mobilizing UNAMID's capacities and footprint can help to expedite the transition to UNITAMS. In that context, France will continue to fully support the Sudanese Government on several fronts. In addition to security issues, the Sudanese authorities are facing significant economic challenges, with necessary structural reforms, as well as health reforms given the impact of the coronavirus disease and humanitarian challenges due to the floods that have affected more than 800,000 people in the Nile basin, from the north to the south. France expresses its condolences to the victims of the floods. We will continue to work alongside the Sudanese people through our emergency relief. Finally, we welcome the agreement reached with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to open a local office in Khartoum and regional offices, including in Darfur.
