Mrs. Taj (United Republic of Tanzania): We join
in thanking the Under-Secretary-General, Mr. Gambari,
for his briefing on the situation in Palestine. We are
also grateful to the Secretary-General for his report on
the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006)
(S/2006/670).

We welcome the fact that Lebanon has moved
troops across the Litani river to the south and that
Israel has begun the gradual withdrawal of its forces.
We believe that the rapid deployment of a strengthened
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
will assist in hastening the Israeli withdrawal. We
further welcome the announcement by the Lebanese
Defence Minister discouraging the firing of rockets at
Israel. We join the Secretary-General in warning
against such actions and in urging both parties to
display responsibility in implementing resolution 1701
(2006), including the utmost respect for the arms
embargo.

We note that Hizbollah has supported the
resolution and has brought hostilities to an end.
Notwithstanding the unfortunate incidents over the
weekend, we hope that the ceasefire agreement can be
translated into peace on the ground. It is thus
imperative to ensure that the ceasefire continues to
hold and that its implementation is verified. We
welcome the Secretary-General's decision to dispatch a
high-level mission to talk to the parties involved so as
to secure full implementation of the resolution. We
look forward to a report from that team after the
completion of their mission.

We are encouraged by the positive response made
by countries willing to contribute to a reinforced
UNIFIL by providing both troops and equipment to
make it more robust and give it a multilateral character.
Indeed, we expect its rapid deployment in southern
Lebanon, following clarification of the remaining
sensitive issues pertaining to the concept of operations,
the rules of engagement and the specific mandate of
the new force. Tanzania will continue to render its full
support to all efforts towards a lasting ceasefire.

In the humanitarian area, we commend the swift
action taken to ensure that assistance reaches those in
dire need as soon as possible. To enhance humanitarian
operations and as a matter of urgency, the air and sea
blockade over Lebanon must be lifted, so as to make
available urgently needed items, in particular fuel. We
appeal to all those helping returnees to increase their
efforts, so as to prevent further human suffering. We
have noted with satisfaction that their safety is being
taken into account, in particular as regards the handling
of unexploded ordnance and land mines.

With regard to the question of Palestine, we are
very concerned about the deteriorating humanitarian
situation there and the continued suffering of the
Palestinian people, as described by the Under-
Secretary-General. Constructive measures must be
deployed to resolve the unrest in Gaza. A number of
United Nations resolutions and other agreements
provide a basis for a just and viable solution to the
Middle East conflict, including the question of
Palestine. As a long-term strategy, those resolutions
should be revisited and implemented, which should
include the withdrawal of Israel from all occupied
territory. The resumption of negotiations based on the
Quartet's Road Map is key to a lasting solution.

In the short and immediate term, Hamas and
Hizbollah should free the captured Israeli soldiers. For
its part, Israel must settle the problem of Lebanese and
Palestinian prisoners in its jails. Israel needs partners,
rather than adversaries, to resolve the Middle East
conflict. However slow and rocky the road may be, in
the end diplomacy is a wiser and cheaper choice than
war. The one-month confrontation between Israel and
Hizbollah, which has resulted in enormous destruction
and loss of life, has proven that point beyond any
doubt.

