Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I wish to thank the United
States presidency for organizing today's meeting. Let
me also join my colleagues and thank Stephen O'Brien
for his briefing and his devoted position.

Syria continues to suffer from a terrible six-year-
long war which has left unhealing scars on the Syrian
people and has presented an immense challenge to the
entire world. It is clear from the Secretary-General's
report (S/2017/339) and Stephen O'Brien's briefing
that negative trends in the humanitarian domain are
increasing. Though March was a somewhat better
month in terms of United Nations humanitarian access,
we need to bear in mind that progress is limited mostly
to the hard-to-reach areas, while the besieged ones,
where more than 600,000 people live, need assistance
the most.

The Council has stated time and again that the
sieges must be lifted and that access must be granted
and maintained in a sustainable manner. Yet, here
we are with practically no progress to report. The
reason is simple enough. Continuing the sieges is a
deliberate tactic of the Al-Assad regime and his allies
that supplements and feeds his military strategy. The
essence of this tactic is starve or surrender. When
people surrender, they put them on the bus and send
them to Idlib, where they continue to bomb them again
and again.

We are dismayed by recent reports of Syrian or
Russian air strikes on a hospital in a rebel-held Idlib
province two days ago that killed more than a dozen
people, including patients. The recent terrorist attack
against evacuees who were being carried by buses from
the besieged towns in Syria, which led to the death of
more than 100 people, including children, is another
terrible crime and a demonstration of shameless
disregard for human life, which we have seen so many
times throughout the conflict. We strongly condemn
the continuing violence against the civilian population
in Syria, which has suffered immensely during this
brutal war.

The situation in eastern Ghouta, where approximately
400,000 people are besieged in a number of towns and
surrounding rural areas, is particularly worrisome.
Of the 3 public hospitals and 17 health-care centres in
eastern Ghouta, not one is functioning. Hitting medical
facilities and schools is also part of the aforementioned
deliberate tactics of the Al-Assad regime and his allies.
In March alone, the United Nations received credible
reports of 19 attacks against medical facilities. Such a
reckless and deliberate strategy carries fundamental
risks for the long-term stability not only of Syria
and the Levant, but also of the entire Middle East
and North Africa region. The six-year war keeps
1.75 million children out of school, with 7,000 schools
completely destroyed and 85 per cent of Syrians living
in poverty. As long as there is no progress on this and
other humanitarian issues, we can rest assured that the
Al-Assad regime is in no mood to seriously engage in
political talks.

Against that backdrop, there is still an active and
aggressive recruitment campaign being carried out in
Syria by Al-Qaida and the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant. Leaving Syrians without hope any longer
will create a long-term terrorist safe heaven in the very
heart of the region. The stakes are really high. There is
no more time for lip service or subversive strategies.
Serious and responsible political engagement in Geneva
and immediate humanitarian relief efforts are long past
due. The Council should finally react to the numerous
desperate calls of Stephen O'Brien and his colleagues.

