Mr. Own (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): In grave defiance of the United Nations
Charter, international law and custom, and all relevant
conventions, agreements and international resolutions,
the Zionists - under the direct leadership of the
terrorist Sharon - are pursuing their criminal and
heinous behaviour, compounding their bloody past of
which all are well aware.

In the space of one month since the murder of
Sheikh Ahmed Yassin, yet another crime has been
committed. In killing Abdel Aziz Al-Rantisi and a
number of his associates, Israel has ignobly committed
an extrajudicial execution at a time when the victims
were merely defending their legitimate right to a State,
a nation and their holy places, expressed by their
political stance within the framework of the Hamas
movement. This was an abominable act carried out by
the occupying Power, reasserting and consecrating the
practices of State terrorism conducted by the Zionists
and the terrorist Sharon, with the support of the current
United States Administration.

In stressing the suffering so long endured by the
defenceless Palestinian people at the hands of the
shameless Zionist occupier, my delegation calls on the
international community and the Security Council to
condemn that barbaric, inhuman and criminal act. We
urge the Council to act immediately to provide the
necessary protection to the children of the defenceless
Palestinian people, daily crushed by Israeli tanks and
bulldozers and targeted by modern aircraft equipped
with the most sophisticated American technology. The
international community must fully support that
people, assist it in recovering all its legitimate national
rights, and put an end to the injustice, inequality and
suffering. The international community has remained
silent for over five decades in that regard.

The international community's ongoing disregard
for the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people,
stipulated in international agreements - including the
road map, which calls for Israel's withdrawal from all
the occupied territories and for the creation of a
Palestinian State - will be a source of frustration and
despair for Palestinians and only serve to fuel violence
throughout the region. On the other hand, should
support be given for the unilateral measures announced
by the Israeli Government, aimed at definitively
preserving the Israeli settlements in the West Bank
pending the return of the Palestinian refugees, and
should the separation wall continue to be built, it will
signal a reversal of the relevant decisions adopted by
the Security Council and the General Assembly. That
will preclude a peaceful solution to the problem
through the emergence of a Palestinian State. Indeed, it
will pave the way for further acts of violence likely to
overspill the borders of the Middle East.

If Israel is honest in its desire for peace, it must
withdraw from the occupied Palestinian territories,
restore the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people
and allow them to build their independent State. The
pursuit of its current policies and unilateral designs
will not lead to peace - far from it. Violence and
instability will prevail more than ever before. The
international community in general, and the Security
Council in particular, must therefore shoulder their full
responsibility by pressuring Israel, the occupying
Power, to cease such practices in the occupied
Palestinian territories, to implement the relevant
international resolutions and to withdraw from the
occupied territories. This must be done if security and
stability are to become realities in that region, which
has long and continuously suffered from instability.

