Mr. El Hadj Ali (Algeria) (spoke in French):
First, I should like to join in thanking the High
Representative, Lord Ashdown, for his report
(S/2005/706, annex), as well as for his praiseworthy
efforts in his mission to follow up on the
implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

It is undeniable in the light of information
provided in the briefing that we have just heard that the
stabilization and normalization process, which has
been under way for 10 years in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, has been able to achieve some
encouraging results in terms of mobilizing the
international community for the implementation of the
Peace Agreement in the region. Here, we are pleased to
note the efforts made by the Bosnian authorities in the
areas of institutional and administrative reforms, in
promoting a State based on the rule of law and good
governance as well as the establishment of a single
economic space.

Such changes, made in depth in a number of areas
of public life in Bosnia and Herzegovina, demonstrate
the significant advances made in harmonizing
standards set with a view to the launching of
negotiations with the European Union on concluding a
stabilization and association agreement and
negotiations on participation in the NATO Partnership
for Peace Programme. The prospect of opening
negotiations on association with the European Union
has prompted the establishment of a single economic
space throughout the territory of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as well as significant progress in terms of
macroeconomic stability. However, the economic
reforms undertaken in this area have far from
succeeded in meeting the expectations of the local
population, which deserve full attention and assistance
from the international community in general, and from
the European Union in particular.
We are also of the View that strengthening the
legal framework by establishing new bodies in that
sphere and by improving the operation and the
effectiveness of the judicial system are also
encouraging results, which are helping to entrench the
rule of law and combat the threats of major and
organized crime and of terrorism.

But the progress made in judicial system reform
must not conceal the shortcomings that remain in terms
of relations with the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia, or in terms of the arrest of
those who have been accused of war crimes. Full and
complete cooperation with that international judicial
body and the bringing of all perpetrators of war crimes
to justice would, in our View, help promote
reconciliation and harmony -among all the citizens of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, would help implement a
tolerant, multi-ethnic society and would aid in
integrating the country into its regional environment.

We are pleased to note the significant progress
made in reunifying the city of Mostar, which
symbolizes, in more ways than one, the values of
tolerance and peaceful coexistence, values which must
underpin the entire peace process in the region.

