Mr. Ward (Jamaica): First, I extend my
congratulations to you, Sir, to Ambassador Valdivieso,
your delegation and to Colombia for the excellent
manner in which the affairs of the Security Council
were conducted during the month of August. I also
thank Ambassador Valdivieso for providing guidelines
for today's wrap-up session.

In keeping with your request, I will restrict my
comments to the issues mooted in your paper. First, on
the meeting at the Princeton Club on regional
approaches to conflict management in Africa, I will say
that meetings such as this one afford members of the
Security Council an opportunity to expansively discuss
issues of great importance to the Council, while
benefiting from the perspective of outside expertise.
The Council's knowledge base is increased by these
experiences.

Perhaps there are two ways to increase the benefit
from these meetings. One would be for Council
members to be accompanied at these meetings by their
experts on the subject matter. A second would be for a
substantive report on the meeting to be prepared and
distributed to members shortly following the meeting.

My second point is on friends groups. At the
wrap-up session at the end of June, the delegation of
Singapore raised questions concerning the modus
operandi of the so-called friends groups. Singapore's
call for a discussion of this issue was supported by
Ireland and Jamaica. The concerns remain, and two
months have passed without a substantive discussion of
this issue. If there are valid reasons to retain the current
practice, then it is incumbent on the proponents to be
prepared to explain those reasons to the Council.

Regarding the Secretariat's briefing notes, I will
note that members of the Council have in the past
requested the Secretariat to make available the briefing
notes for consultations of the whole. The Secretariat's
response has been the circulation of background notes,
which have proven quite useful but which lack the
analysis provided during the briefings. We maintain
that it would be worthwhile to renew our request to the
Secretariat for notes that contain analysis.

On the question of cooperation between
presidencies, while to the outside world the operations
of the Security Council seem a continuous process,
there is indeed a hiatus between presidencies, except
when there is an urgent need for a meeting in the first
few days of the month. The culture of the Security
Council is for each delegation to seek to leave an
impression on the work of the Council. Each
presidency, for the most part, controls to a large extent
the programme of work and sets its own objective. This
may be in the form of a thematic issue: promoting
transparency, reforming the practices and procedures of
the Council, focusing attention on a particular conflict
or region, a combination of these, or simply
maintaining the status quo.

We have seen, however, cooperation from one
presidency to the next in the planning for Security
Council missions or special meetings. We have also
seen carryover negotiations of outcome documents. For
example, the Bangladesh presidency held a meeting on
the prevention of armed conflict, subsequently
introduced a draft resolution, and led the negotiations
on a text and its adoption two presidencies later. We
also have the cooperation currently taking place
between the future presidencies of France and Ireland
on the proposed meeting of the Council with the
Lusaka political committee. These and similar
initiatives should be encouraged.

The next item we would like to comment on is the
threat or use of the veto. The data will show that the
veto is not often used in the Security Council. That
data, however, belies the fact that the mere presence of
the threat of the veto or its possible use more often than
not determines the way the Council conducts its
business. The mere threat of the veto can be used for
narrow political interests, to the detriment of the
Council in carrying out its responsibilities to the
international community. We should seek to avoid this.

My delegation holds the veto to be undemocratic.
It is even more so when the mere threat of its use
stymies even a serious discussion of possible action to
be taken on an issue. As recently as last week, due to
the mere threat of the veto, the Council failed to
consider meaningful action on the issue of the occupied
Palestinian territories. As elected members of the
Council, we must ask ourselves whether we surrender
to such threatened use of the veto or if we pursue our
objectives without fear of its use. Should we allow
others to hide behind the threatened use of the veto to
lock the Council into non-action? It is my View that, at
a minimum, the permanent members of the Council
have an obligation to require full discussion of the
substance of any issue on which another permanent
member has threatened a veto before the issue is
appropriately discussed.

Finally, the value of the wrap-up session we are
having today will be greatly enhanced by the
President's decision to prepare a summary of the
discussions for distribution to Council members. I trust
it will be available to all Members of the United
Nations. It is my hope that the Council will set aside
time for meaningful discussions of some of the issues
raised today and that solutions will be found for the
problems identified. For example, a meeting such as
the one at the Princeton Club may be a useful format
for dealing with some of these issues in the future.

