Mr. Milanovic' (Serbia): First, allow me to thank
you, Madam President, for convening this very
important meeting.

My country aligns itself with the statement
delivered by observer of the European Union (EU). I
would like, however, to take this opportunity to inform
the Council briefly about some of Serbia's activities in
the field of preventing, combating and eradicating the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons (SALW) in
all its aspects.

Serbia is a State party to major international
instruments in this field, including the United Nations
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons
in All Its Aspects, the Firearms Protocol and the
International Tracing Instrument. It has also adopted the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) Document on Small Arms and Light Weapons,
as well as OSCE decisions in this area, notably on the
storage of conventional arms, standard elements of end-
user certificates, verification procedures and brokering
control. Serbia also signed and ratified the Arms Trade
Treaty and has taken extensive legislative, regulatory
and practical measures at the national level for the
implementation of the obligations it has assumed.

In May 2010, the Government of Serbia adopted its
national strategy on the control of small arms and light
weapons for the period 2010-2015. The strategy, a major
accomplishment of the Serbian institutions in their
efforts to formulate a holistic approach towards SALW
control on the basis of the best international practices,
provides a framework for the activities of relevant
governmental and non-governmental actors to prevent
and combat the unlawful production, possession and
trade in SALW. Its overall goal is to establish a national
system of effective control of SALW, thereby ensuring
the reduction of weapons in illegal possession as well
as the number of abuses of legal weapons.

The Strategy has also provided a basis for setting up
a council for SALW as an ad hoc working body headed
by the SALW National Coordinator and comprised
of the representatives of the competent governmental
institutions with the relevant professional knowledge
in the field. The Council, established in December
2011, was mandated to propose measures for the
implementation and coordination of the Strategy. It
developed an action plan for the implementation of
the Strategy on SALW control, which was adopted
by the Government in 2013. The action plan regulates
the coordination of the activities and allocation of
necessary resources, ensures the harmonization of
national legislation with United Nations, OSCE and EU
regulations and standards, coordinates the work of the
relevant agencies in preparing reports under Serbia's
international obligations, submits periodic reports to
the Government on the progress made in the fulfilment
of the objectives of the strategy and the action plan
and initiates and contributes to the establishment of a
unique national SALW tracing database.

As for arms exports control, all the criteria of the
EU code of conduct are incorporated in Serbia's new
law on the export and import of arms and military
equipment. Adopted by the Serbian National Assembly
in October 2014, the law is fully in line with the relevant
EU and OSCE standards and, together with enhanced
border and customs control measures, plays a pivotal
role in strengthening surveillance and combating the
illicit arms trade. It is also an indispensable instrument
for preventing the destabilizing accumulation of SALW
and reducing the ability of unauthorized non-State
actors to acquire exported arms illegally.

On 24 February, the Assembly of the Republic of
Serbia adopted a new law on arms and ammunition.
Fully harmonized with EU rules and regulations,
the law entered into force on 4 March and its
implementation - except for article 51, providing for
arms legalization f is expected to begin on 4 March
2016. Currently, a campaign is under way in Serbia
to legalize arms and ammunition. Begun on 4 March,
it will last until 4 June. According to the data of the
Ministry of the Interior ofthe Republic of Serbia, 2,251
pieces of weapons were diverted from illegal to legal
flows in the first 2 months ending on 4 May.

My country attaches great importance to the
Programme of Action and remains strongly committed
to its full implementation. In addition to the necessary
political will, effective implementation of the
Programme of Action requires appropriate capacities.
Bearing that in mind, Serbia recognizes the important
role of international cooperation and assistance in the
area of capacity-building. There is no doubt that the
sharing of relevant information, national experiences
and lessons learned, as well as appropriate international
financial, expert and technical assistance, can vitally
contribute to the consolidation and strengthening of
institutional capacities and practices for the suppression
and eradication of the illicit trade in SALW.

International, regional and subregional organizations
and civil society can make a significant contribution
in that regard as well, for example, through developing
model legislation, practical guidelines and coherent
regional implementation standards, assisting States in
assessing their needs or conducting training, regional
meetings and similar activities. In that context, let me
mention that the South Eastern and Eastern Europe
Clearinghouse for the Control of the Small Arms and
Light Weapons, the regional organization mandated by
the United Nations Development Programme and the
Regional Cooperation Council, is headquartered in
Belgrade.

Although we have witnessed some important
developments in this field, much remains to be done
if we are to address the challenges we face in a
comprehensive and effective way. It is Serbia's strong
conviction that international cooperation is the key to
achieving progress in resolving the issues of the illicit
trade in small arms and light weapons. Occurring in all
parts of the globe, it sparks and fuels armed conflicts,
violence and organized crime, causing death to civilians
and hindering rebuilding and development.

Serbia supports the activities conducted by the
United Nations in this field and uses its current OSCE
Chairmanship-in-Office to highlight the importance
of the issue. It will intensify its efforts at national,
regional and international levels and stands ready to
further engage in all initiatives aimed at preventing and
stopping this plague of the modern-day world.

