Mr. Thayeb (Indonesia): Sir, I would like to
express my delegation's congratulations to you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of April and our appreciation for the
convening of this open debate to renew the Council's
consideration of the agenda item before us.

While welcoming the Secretary-General's report,
my delegation realizes that during this brief
intervention it may not be possible to fully express our
views concerning its contents. The report contains a
cogent analysis and recommendations that deserve
further consideration. In these endeavours, it is of
paramount importance that the principles of territorial
integrity and the sovereign equality of all States, the
provisions of the Charter, and other relevant
international declarations and resolutions be faithfully
and strictly observed.
We agree with the Secretary-General's view
regarding the complexities involved in the protection
of civilians in armed conflict, especially when the
nature of such conflicts becomes somewhat convoluted
and multidimensional. In this regard, a careful and
comprehensive assessment of an armed conflict should
be conducted before any action is taken.

Specifically, the United Nations system can and
should be of assistance by complementing the efforts of
Governments in extending humanitarian aid and in
post-conflict peace-building in areas such as
rehabilitation, reconstruction, resettlement, voluntary
return of refugees to their homes, and reconciliation
efforts.

While the responsibility for the protection of
civilians rests with Governments, we cannot forget that
irregular armed civilians have often intentionally
targeted civilians or exploited them as human shields to
elicit condemnation against Governments. Council
resolution 1296 (2000) recognizes that civilians
account for the vast majority of casualties inflicted by
armed elements. It is therefore incumbent upon the
international community to send an unmistakable
message on a culture of protection to irregular
combatants, who are similarly accountable for their
unlawful and destructive actions. States, for their part,
have to overcome these burdensome challenges, often
under unique circumstances, in order to open channels
of communication based on dialogue and cooperation
with all segments of society.

The report also makes clear that there are often
so-called part-time combatants, who make it almost
impossible to differentiate between those who are
genuine civilians and those who are armed criminals in
disguise. No society can tolerate such disruptions to
law and order. Hence, it is the responsibility of
Governments to take the necessary measures to
maintain security and stability within their respective
territories, which requires the full support of the
international community.

With respect to enhancing the protection of
civilians in and around refugee camps, my delegation
takes note of the idea of separating armed civilians
from internally displaced persons and refugees.
However, we share the view expressed by delegations
which spoke this morning that such a separation is not
an easy task and is replete with complexities.

We are saddened by the fact that humanitarian
agencies often become targets themselves in a conflict
situation. My delegation believes that there is a need to
protect personnel involved in humanitarian assistance
and that it is imperative that those agencies should
continue to work in a neutral and impartial way.
Furthermore, cooperation, on an equal basis, between
national and international non-governmental
organizations is essential in making the maximum use
of such assistance.

As regards fact-finding missions, my delegation
is of the view that the conduct of such missions should
be based on the consent of the countries concerned.
External involvement may not necessarily facilitate the
finding of durable solutions and could even create
some unintended complications. For this reason, the
recommendation on this issue calls for careful study
and scrutiny.

In developing regional approaches, as
recommended in the report, regular consultations
should be held with various regional organizations.
Inputs from those organizations have proved valuable
and have the potential to be more contextual and
viable. We support the Secretary-General's
recommendation on the need for intensified
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations and arrangements, with a view to
ensuring informed decision-making, the integration of
resources and the use of their comparative advantages.

The role of the media and of information in
conflict situations is double-edged. One the one hand,
they can provide a better picture of the conflict
situation, allowing the deployment of peace operations
or humanitarian assistance to be viably designed and
also contributing to the promotion of inter-communal
unity and preparing the way for national reconciliation.
On the other hand, information can also be misleading,
exacerbate situations and be dangerous, especially
when its contents are partial, incomplete or one-sided.
While we acknowledge the positive role of the media,
we believe that efforts should be made to provide
information that is comprehensive and balanced, not
based on hearsay or partial sources.

Finally, it is important to emphasize the
integration of the Security Council's efforts for the
protection of civilians in armed conflict with those of
other relevant agencies or bodies of the United
Nations. Such a strengthening of cooperation will
undoubtedly facilitate the development of more
effective and better-coordinated action for the
protection of civilians in armed conflict.

