Mr. Khalilzad (United States of America): It is
my pleasure to report to the Council today on behalf of
the Multinational Forces in Iraq (MNF-I), as requested
by Security Council resolutions 1546 (2004), 1637
(2005), 1723 (2006) and 1790 (2007). I would also like
to thank the Secretary-General for the submission of
his report on the progress made by the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) (S/2008/266) as
08-3196]

well as Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his
briefing to the Council. The United States expresses its
appreciation to Special Representative Staffan de
Mistura and all the staff of UNAMI for their
courageous efforts, dedication and hard work.

The United States shares with the people of Iraq
the goal of achieving a secure, unified and democratic
Iraq that can govern, defend and sustain itself. In early
2007, President Bush and the Government of Iraq
approved increases in the numbers of coalition and
Iraqi forces to ensure the security of Iraqi communities
and to promote reconciliation at the local and national
levels.

The overall security environment in Iraq
continues to improve, and there have been some gains
on the political, economic and diplomatic fronts as
well. Nevertheless, progress has been uneven in certain
areas, and many challenges remain.

The average weekly number of security incidents
has decreased since my last report, and the level of
violence nationwide continues to be significantly lower
than the levels seen in late summer 2007. Although
there was a brief rise in security incidents in recent
weeks as a result of the violence in Baghdad and Basra,
the level of incidents is going down once again. The
number of civilian deaths due to violence has fallen by
more than 72 per cent since July 2007 and continues to
be below the levels seen in February 2006, prior to the
Samarra mosque bombing. Coalition deaths have
dropped by more than 70 per cent since last summer as
well.

Another important trend is the decrease in the
number of deaths attributed to ethno-sectarian violence
by 94 per cent nationwide and by 97 per cent in
Baghdad security districts from January 2007 to
January 2008. This steady decline in ethno-sectarian
violence is due both to the increased presence of Iraqi
and coalition forces along sectarian fault lines and to
the decreased capacity of the enemy to reignite the
cycle of ethno-sectarian violence.

Attacks per week involving improvised explosive
devices (IEDs) are down by more than 50 per cent
since last summer, and coalition deaths resulting from
IED incidents have fallen to their lowest levels since
July 2006. This drop in casualties is attributed to the
significant disruption of insurgent networks, the
effectiveness of physical security barriers and the
increasing proportion of IEDs that are now found and
5
cleared before they can explode. The rate at which
IEDs have been found and cleared recently exceeded
55 per cent - the highest in nearly four years. The
level of high-profile attacks, such as car bombs and
suicide attacks, remains far below its height a year ago,
although there has been a small increase in the number
of such attacks over the past few months. Nevertheless,
their effectiveness is declining, owing to improvements
in security.

During the reporting period, Iranian-backed
groups launched numerous attacks on Iraqi civilians
and Iraqi and multinational forces. The recent clashes
between criminal and militia elements and Iraqi
Government forces in Basra and Baghdad have
highlighted Iran's destabilizing influence and actions.
The Iranian Revolutionary Guard Corps Quds force
continues to arm, train and fund illegal armed groups
in Iraq. The bulk of the weapons used by these groups,
including mortars, rockets and explosively formed
penetrators (EFPs) are made in Iran and supplied by
Iran. This illegal aid poses a significant threat to Iraqi
and multinational forces and to the stability and
sovereignty of Iraq. It also undermines the efforts of
the Government of Iraq to rebuild the nation. These
transfers of arms and related materials are
fundamentally inconsistent with the restrictions on
such transfers to Iraq adopted by the Council under its
Chapter VII authority.

Iraq's border with Syria is another source of
concern, as estimates suggest that Syria is the entry
point for 90 per cent of all known foreign terrorists in
Iraq. Syria continues to allow foreign fighters to transit
Syria en route to conducting attacks in Iraq, and we
know that Al-Qaida terrorist facilitators continue to
operate inside Syria. Iran and Syria must stop the flow
of weapons and foreign fighters into Iraq and their
malign interference in Iraq.

Thirty-three countries currently play an
indispensable role in supporting security in Iraq, either
by participating in the coalition or by contributing to
UNAMI operations. Coalition members other than the
United States in Iraq contribute some 10,000 personnel
to the coalition and another 450 personnel to support
UNAMI. Specific contributions range from that of El
Salvador, which has deployed nine contingents since
2003 and has completed more than 300 reconstruction
projects, to that of Estonia, which has combat forces
conducting counterinsurgency operations. These forces
6
play an essential role in helping the Iraqi people
achieve success.

The Iraqi Security Forces continue to make
progress and to develop increased capability and
proficiency. More than 540,000 individuals now serve
in the Iraqi Security Forces - an increase of 24,000
since I last reported to the Council, in January. As of
1 February 2008, 123 Iraqi army combat battalions are
conducting operations - an increase of 6 battalions
since the last quarter. Of these combat battalions, 112
are capable of taking the lead in operations.

During recent operations, some Iraqi units were
found wanting, but overall the Iraqi Security Forces are
quite capable, and their performance is solid. Looking
forward, we expect an additional 50,000 Iraqi soldiers
and 16 army and special operations battalions to be
trained before the end of the year, as well as more than
23,000 police and 8 national police battalions.

Local citizens, both Arab Sunni and Arab Shia,
are also continuing to aid in the fight against
extremists. These 91,000 volunteers, known as the
Sons of Iraq, are fostering bottom-up reconciliation by
providing Iraqi and coalition forces with information
on insurgents, securing critical local infrastructure and
aiding in the discovery of improvised explosive
devices and weapons caches. We are working closely
with the Iraqi Government to integrate many of these
volunteers into vocational training programmes for the
Iraqi Security Forces and other Government jobs.

The coalition continues to transfer responsibility
for security to the Government of Iraq, which currently
has primary security responsibility for 9 of the
country's 18 provinces. Many of these provinces have
transitioned smoothly, and, although challenges have
arisen in others, we expect the process to move
forward, with Anbar and Qadisiyah provinces
transitioning later this year.

Turning now to economic issues, the ability of
the Government of Iraq to spend its resources, to
provide essential services and to promote economic
development is progressing. The Iraqi Ministries of
Defence and Interior are steadily improving their
ability to execute their budgets. In 2007 and 2006, both
ministries spent more on their forces than the United
States provided through the Iraqi Security Forces Fund.
We anticipate that Iraq will spend more than $9 billion
on security this year and $11 billion next year.
08-3196]

The International Monetary Fund (IMF) projects

that Iraq's gross domestic product will grow by 7 per

cent in real terms this year. Food inflation for 2007 was

approximately 12 per cent, compared to more than

32 per cent in 2006. The Iraqi dinar remains strong,

and the Iraqi central bank has begun to bring down
interest rates.

At the same time, as mentioned by Mr. Pascoe,
there has been some political progress as well. The
passage of the Accountability and Justice Law, which
provides for de-baathification reform, the Amnesty
Law and the Provincial Powers Law, which calls for
provincial elections by 1 October 2008, were major
steps forward. Much will depend, however, upon their
successful implementation. Politically, Iraq's leaders
must continue to cooperate with each other and place
national interests above parochial ones.

Steps have also been taken to integrate Iraq into
the international community, and specifically into
regional affairs. On 21 April, the Foreign Ministers of
the States Members of the Gulf Cooperation Council
(GCC) and of Egypt, Jordan and the United States of
America met in Bahrain and were joined by the Iraqi
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Hoshyar Zebari. We
welcome the group's decision to make Iraq a regular
participant in such meetings.

In closing, I would like to thank UNAMI for its
work in helping to resolve disputed internal
boundaries, dealing with the humanitarian issues facing
the Iraqi people, co-chairing the International Compact
with Iraq and preparing for provincial elections. The
United Nations continues to play an important role in
regional dialogue, and UNAMI's contribution to the
expanded neighbours support mechanism will help
ensure that that process will remain a valuable regional
forum. In the weeks and the months ahead, we look
forward to UNAMI's continued involvement in
promoting national reconciliation, constitutional
review, economic reform and capacity-building. We
also encourage UNAMI to consider expanding its
presence to other areas of Iraq.

The MNF-I and UNAMI must work to sustain the
momentum achieved by the recent improvements in
Iraq's security. The leaders and the people of Iraq must
capitalize upon these hard-won gains against
insurgents, extremists and criminals by assuming
responsibility for achieving the objectives that Iraq has
set for itself as an independent and sovereign State. I
look forward to an enhanced commitment by all parties
to take concrete steps towards assisting the
Government of Iraq in achieving these goals.

