Mr. Thomson (United Kingdom): We thank Mr.
Guehenno for his briefing, which made clear, first, that
the parties are continuing down the military path and,
secondly, that there are severe human rights abuses
associated with that. We are also most grateful to Mr.
Vieira de Mello for his briefing, which provided the
Council with useful additional perspectives on the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
which is complex. We find it very helpful indeed that
when the Council addresses complex country situations
we can hear from the full spectrum of United Nations
expertise and can draw on its advice in reaching
Council decisions.

Like others, we condemn the atrocities carried out
in Ituri, along with all other abuses of human rights and
international humanitarian law throughout the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. And, like other
speakers, we call on the parties to investigate all such
abuses and bring the perpetrators to justice. We shall
need to continue to focus on the cases mentioned by
the High Commissioner for Human Rights.

We must condemn the failure by the parties to
give up the military path. The peaceful political way
forward is already clear. Continuing military activities
and the provision of military support from inside or
outside the country are totally unacceptable. It is time
for all parties to start meeting their responsibilities
towards the people of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. That means halting all military activity,
certainly; moving ahead with implementation of the
Pretoria global accord, certainly; but also protecting
the human rights, security and well-being of all those
in the areas under their control. We think that it must
be by those standards and not by military strength that
the international community - and not just the
Congolese people - will judge the claims of those
looking to play a role in the future Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

I would like to recall the Council's continuing
focus on the protection of civilians - not least, women
and children - in armed conflict. Work must begin
now on breaking down mistrust and building the
foundations of a unified Democratic Republic of the
Congo. And the first step must be reaching agreement
on the three issues outstanding from Pretoria,
especially the issue of security for the transitional
administration.

As Mr. Guehenno said, any conflict in this area
has major regional implications, so regional players too
must exert their influence on the Congolese parties to
move forward, and they themselves must refrain from
any action that could increase tension. That is crucial.
We therefore welcome President Museveni's
announcement that forces of the Uganda People's
Defence Force (UPDF) will be withdrawn from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo by 20 March, and
we urge the Government of Uganda to carry out that
commitment. We also urge the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to remove its forces
from Ituri, and the Government of Rwanda to stop
arming the Union des patriotes congolais (UPC). The
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) should
be prepared to provide increased security in Ituri
through a strong military observer presence.

The verification role that MONUC performs and
the third-party verification mechanism are also crucial.
In particular, investigation of allegations must be as
thorough, factual and even-handed as possible. That
requires the full and immediate cooperation of all the
parties.

We have two questions relating to human rights,
and I hope that they complement rather than repeat
questions put forward by others. As both Mr.
Guehenno's and Mr. Vieira de Mello's briefings made
clear, human rights is an area where effective
interaction between the civil and the military sides of
MONUC is essential, especially given access problems
in some of the worst-affected areas. We would be
grateful for views on how this is working and on
whether it could be strengthened.

My second question relates to the issue of child
soldiers, where it is important that we translate the
Council's thematic discussions into practical action in
specific cases. Early disarmament, demobilization and
rehabilitation of all child soldiers must be a priority.
We would be grateful to know how this is being
integrated into MONUC's activities with respect to
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation or resettlement.

In conclusion, we would agree with Mr.
Guehenno and Mr. Vieira de Mello that the Council
needs to consider further how human rights can be
fully respected in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

