Mr. Fedotov: I thank you, Sir, for this opportunity
to brief the Security Council on what the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) is doing
to support Afghanistan to promote peace, security, the
rule of law and sustainable development.

The situation in the country as related to drug
production and drug trafficking, as well as transnational
organized crime, remains complex. Insurgents and
other non-State actors control areas under opium poppy
cultivation and are raising hundreds of millions of
dollars. The persisting challenges posed by illicit drugs,
economic and financial crime, corruption, money
laundering and the financing of terrorism continue to
undermine the stability of the country. Such crimes
have a profoundly negative impact on the Government's
macroeconomic objectives of financial inclusion, job
creation, robust private sector-led growth and stable
domestic revenues.

Nevertheless, we can also report some good
news. UNODC is currently working with the Afghan
Government to finalize the Afghanistan Opium Survey
2019, which will be released in October. We do not
yet have the results but we expect that the area under
opium poppy cultivation will decrease from the record
high levels in 2017 and 2018. That may be due to a
combination of factors, including saturation of the
market, weather conditions, shifting consumption
trends and so forth. However, we must also acknowledge
the efforts of the Government of Afghanistan and other
countries in the region, supported by the international
community. UNODC, including through our Office
in Kabul, provides enhanced technical assistance and
capacity-building to enable Afghanistan to pursue
balanced health- and rights-centred responses to
the drug supply and demand, in line with the 2019
ministerial declaration adopted by Member States at
the Commission on Narcotic Drugs in March.

Mobile detection teams and precursor control units,
which were established with the support of UNODC,
last year seized approximately 800 kilos ofheroin, more
than 1.2 tons of opium and nearly 9 tons of hashish.
They also seized more than 7,500 litres of precursor
acetic anhydride. That is a huge amount, sufficient to
produce more than 3 tons of heroin.

Alongside building national capacities, UNODC
is committed to strengthening regional cooperation,
including by linking initiatives and platforms for
regional and subregional cooperation to address the
trafficking in illicit drugs and precursor chemicals.
Important operational mechanisms include the
Triangular Initiative and its joint planning cell, the
Afghanistan-Kyrgyzstan-Tajikistan initiative and the
Central Asia Regional Information and Coordination
Centre, which is considering expanding its membership
to include Afghanistan.

In view of those regional responses, it is worth
noting that this year's World Drug Report showed a
decline in opiate trafficking from Afghanistan along
the northern route through Central Asia towards
Russia. UNODC is also promoting coordination with
other regional initiatives and mechanisms, including
the Heart of Asia Process, the Paris Pact Initiative,
the Afghan Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board
and others.

Furthermore, alternative development to enable
farmers to free themselves from illicit opium cultivation,
as well as evidence-based drug use prevention and
treatment, remain crucial to other components of
UNODC's support. Particularly through our alternative
development work, more than 8,500 jobs were created
and more than $4 million of income was generated last
year. I am pleased to note that nearly 4,200 women and
girls are among those employed. More than 4,800 social
contracts were signed with individual beneficiaries and
26 such contract with communities, all of which agreed
to refrain from opium poppy cultivation, production,
processing and trafficking.

Alongside those efforts, UNODC is also scaling
up its support to the Government in order to address
vulnerabilities to human trafficking resulting from
conflict, in line with resolutions 2331 (2016) and 2388
(2017). Only last week, we launched in Afghanistan the
Global Action to Prevent and Address Trafficking in
Persons and the Smuggling of Migrants, which will be
funded by the European Union and implemented with
the International Organization for Migration.

Disrupting terrorist financing and linkages to drug
trafficking and other forms of organized crime remains
a priority element of UNODC's work with Afghanistan.
The Government's efforts demonstrate the continued
high-level political commitment to countering money
laundering and the financing of terrorism.
UNODC is supporting those efforts and, at the
Government's request, is concentrating on the areas of
greatest risk. Our assistance focuses on investigating
and disrupting the financing networks of terrorist and
organized-crime groups, as well as money laundering,
corruption and other economic crimes. It also includes
combating the illegal flow of cash out of and into the
country, and improving the supervision of banks and
money or value transfer services.

The international community recently marked
Afghanistan's 100 years of independence. That
occasion for joyful celebration was tragically marred
by terrorist attacks on innocent people. I welcome
Afghanistan's determination to stop such despicable
attacks and commend the Government for establishing
and co-chairing, with Spain, the Group of Friends of
Victims of Terrorism.

UNODC is working closely with Afghanistan
and other partners to better understand the challenges
faced by victims and provide assistance through
victim-centred criminaljustice approaches. The Office
remains strongly committed to supporting Afghanistan
in addressing the interlinked challenges of drugs, crime,
corruption and terrorism, and we rely on the assistance
of the international community to help us carry out this
essential work.

