Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): We should like to thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this very important meeting. My
delegation also thanks Mr. Hedi Annabi, Assistant
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, for his
comprehensive briefing on the most recent
developments in the situation in Kosovo.

My delegation strongly condemns the heinous
crime committed a few days ago, on 4 June, in
Kosovo - in which the perpetrators murdered a family
consisting of an 80-year-old man, his wife and his son
and burned their home, having threatened the elderly
man several times before murdering him - as an event
that threatens security in Kosovo in general. My
delegation supports the efforts of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
to arrest the perpetrators of that crime and to bring
them to justice.

We also support the gradual transfer of authority
to the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government in
Kosovo. We should like to stress, first of all, the need
to accord high priority to the situation and to prevent
such crimes from occurring later on, because that
would negatively affect the return of refugees and
internally displaced persons to their homes and their
active participation in rebuilding the province of
Kosovo. More than ever before, Kosovo sorely needs
participation by all ethnic groups in its economic,
social and political life. In that connection, we must
promote dialogue among the various ethnic groups and
factions in Kosovo in order to end the violence and to
rebuild a safe and secure society in which all ethnic
groups live together in harmony.

Secondly, my delegation would like to emphasize
the importance of dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina so that the Provisional Institutions will assist
UNMIK in beginning a dialogue with neighbouring
countries on practical issues. We should also like to
stress the importance of ensuring freedom of
movement throughout Kosovo for all ethnic groups in a
way that guarantees their security and safety and brings
stability to all areas of life in Kosovo.

Finally, my delegation would like to thank the
Secretary-General and especially Mr. Steiner and
UNMIK for their efforts to achieve security,
reconciliation and stability in this very important part
of the world. Mr. Steiner and his Mission deserve the
full support of the Security Council in order to ensure
the Mission's success.

