Mr. Ruiz (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this open debate
to address the serious tragedy caused by the Ebola
outbreak, which the World Health Organization
has characterized as an international public health
emergency.

I also want to take the opportunity to offer the
most sincere condolences of the Colombian people and
Government to all the victims of this serious tragedy,
their family members and their respective Governments.

Colombia is aware that the national authorities
of the affected States have made enormous efforts.
However, while they had the best intentions, they have

been overwhelmed by the magnitude and virulence ofa
disease that has not been given sufficient attention and
research. The human dimension ofthe crisis, the impact
on affected countries and the potential for the disease
to spread beyond West Africa mean that we must give
all our support and commit to international initiatives
aimed at addressing it.

As the Secretary-General mentioned, we will
not solve the crisis by erecting barriers to the
movement of people, cancelling flights or isolating
those countries. The solution lies in education and
cooperation, in a strategic orientation that makes
possible a comprehensive response to the disease, in
the re-establishment of health services and in taking
structural measures conducive to long-term economic
and social development.

Colombia, in consideration of its solidarity with the
States and peoples of the region, will provide support
in the amount of $100,000 to the international efforts
to respond to the crisis and will provide medical teams.

Colombia welcomes the Secretary-General's
appointment of Dr. David Nabarro as United Nations
System Senior Coordinator for Ebola Virus Disease.
We assure him of our strong support and encourage him
to work closely with the States of the region, the World
Health Organization and other United Nations system
agencies.

If we are to succeed in containing the Ebola
outbreak, treating infected people, ensuring the
provision of health services, preserving stability and
preventing new outbreaks, we must make a coordinated
effort that respects the national ownership and
leadership of the affected States in the response to the
crisis and in defining their needs, and we must establish
a clear division of labour and avoid a duplication of
efforts. To address this situation, we must focus on
building and strengthening the capacities of national
health institutions as part of a plan aimed at long-term
economic and social development.

Let me say that while the Ebola outbreak in
West Africa has the potential to erode stability and
social cohesion in some of the countries concerned,
the situation cannot be characterized as a threat
to international peace and security in general. As
noted by the Secretary-General, in the light of the
fact that public health issues require the cooperation
and decisive political commitment of the entire
international community, Colombia believes that the
General Assembly should also move forward in the
study of the issue.

