Mr. Vilovic' (Croatia): First of all, allow me to
thank the United Kingdom presidency for convening
this important debate on one of the most important
issues for the United Nations and this Council - the
question of United Nations peacekeeping. Allow me to
also use this opportunity to thank Under-Secretaries-
General Le Roy and Malcorra for their interventions,
as well as Force Commander General Martin Luther
Agwai of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur for his candid overview from the
perspective of peacekeeping force commanders
working in the field.

Croatia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later by the representative of Sweden, so
allow me to just raise several points of interest.

While it is true that the traditional peacekeeping
of past decades has slowly given way to the more
robust, multidimensional and integrative peacekeeping
of today, when addressing the question of
peacekeeping we must not lose sight of the fact that it
is probably one of the most important tools available to
the United Nations in general, and to the Security
Council in particular - a symbiotic relationship that
has existed from the time of the establishment of this
Organization.

The question before us, however, is not about the
worth of peacekeeping operations as a concept, but
instead is a deliberation on the possible measures or
recommendations before us for streamlining the work
of peacekeepers in the field and on how to improve
cooperation, not only within the United Nations system
itself, but also between the Secretariat and the Security
Council and, inversely, between the United Nations,
the Security Council and the general membership,
including troop-contributing countries and especially
affected States. In short, what are we doing to improve
the quality and effectiveness of United Nations
peacekeeping and cooperation between and within all
its constituent parts?

The Brahimi report (S/2000/809), the New
Horizon non-paper and the United Kingdom/France
initiative give us numerous good ideas. We also note
with great interest the strategic paper of the new
Department of Field Support. We commend the work
of the Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations,
and support many of the suggested guidelines provided
in those documents for one primary reason - they
stress that the United Nations acts under the premise
that conflict cannot and should be resolved not first
and foremost by military means, but rather by
addressing problems at their root causes. Time and
again in our debates, we have heard a call to the parties
to a conflict to resolve their differences through
political dialogue, with the United Nations, including
its peacekeeping missions, acting as an intermediary in
achieving this goal.

These reports also stress that each United Nations
peacekeeping mission needs to be tailored according to
concrete conditions on the ground and the political
realities prevailing at the time of their establishment. A
clear political strategy and integrated mission planning
are, to this end, extremely important and should
include the provision of a precisely defined mandate
with clear and achievable benchmarks and goals and a
clear exit strategy. In refining ideas on how best to go
about this, we agree that the Council can improve
peacekeeping effectiveness through stricter monitoring
and oversight of its mandated tasks, including through
the establishment of and reporting on benchmarks.

That being said, we would like to stress that, in
multidimensional peacekeeping, reporting on
benchmarks should address not only issues of
immediate security or military concern, but also long-
term issues such as the protection of civilians, the
strengthening of civil society, security sector reform,
including the strengthening of police and judicial
forces, and economic revitalization and development.
Development is especially important since, unless a
host country is assisted in returning to self-
sustainability, recourse to violence can and quite often

09-4428}

does happen, as has been demonstrated by returning
peacekeeping operations to countries in West Africa,
for example.

The new robust way of approaching peacekeeping
also brings together a plethora of United Nations and
other international or regional actors, often with
similar or overlapping goals. I believe that no one
questions the benefit of burden-sharing when it comes
to peacekeeping, with strengthened cooperation with
regional and subregional organizations or among
various United Nations and international agencies
operating in-country, with the United Nations and the
Security Council taking on the primary role.
Streamlining their operations in-country is the
overriding goal, essentially so as not to waste or
duplicate much needed resources - a task that can
most effectively be provided by the United Nations and
its peacekeepers.

Croatia particularly supports all proposals aimed
at greater coordination and strengthening of relations
among the Secretariat, the Security Council and troop-
and police-contributing countries. As mentioned in the
New Horizon non-paper, the Secretariat alone cannot
structure missions without intense cooperation with
Member States, while Member States similarly draw
upon the experience of the United Nations in
strengthening their national capacities. We reiterate
that it is clearly counterproductive to plan a
peacekeeping operation without the unambiguous
support of a core number of nations willing to provide
troops for a proposed mission. For that reason, we
believe that outreach to potential and actual troop-
contributing countries must be a high priority.
Before I finish, allow me to highlight once again
an issue that we deem exceptionally important,
especially in the light of the ever-increasing burden,
both financial and logistical, being placed on United
Nations peacekeeping and its troop contributors.
Croatia firmly believes that, in weighing the full range
of responses to threats to international peace and
security, the Security Council can and should pose
itself the question of whether the preventative
deployment of a small number of peacekeeping troops
can stem the outbreak of wider conflict at its genesis.
Such a decision not only has the potential to save
scores of lives, but can also lessen later financial and
logistical burdens on the United Nations and its
Member States. For us, the value of such a response is
self-evident.
In conclusion, let me express our gratitude to you
personally, Mr. President, and your delegation for
preparing the draft presidential statement, which we
fully support.

