Mr. Cunningham (United States of America):
The United States cast this vote with great regret. It
should not have been necessary, and this draft should
not have been put to the vote. We wanted to support an
action in the Council that advanced the cause of peace.
For us, this is a matter of deeply held principle. But
sadly, that is not what was offered.
We would ask, why was the decision to force a
vote taken now, when it was clear to all that our
deliberations had yet to produce a consensus, a
consensus that we collectively, as members of the
Council, repeatedly supported over the past week. The
cause of peace would have been better served by
additional deliberations, no matter how difficult or
protracted.

The Secretary-General is in Amman to attend the
Arab summit and to continue his mission of good
offices in a troubled region. We support him, but this
draft resolution sought to prescribe to the Secretary-
General, and through him to the parties themselves, the
way forward in the search for peace in the Middle East.
The draft has, in doing so, demonstrated an unrealistic
approach to this complex conflict by ignoring the most
basic precept of peacemaking: the need to encourage
the parties to find and implement their own lasting
solutions and then to stand ready to help in their
implementation. Sadly, the opportunity to play such a
constructive and encouraging role was missed today.

The United States opposed this draft resolution
because it is unbalanced and unworkable and hence
unwise. It is more responsive to political theatre than
political reality. In this draft resolution, some
pretended that the Council could impose a solution,
including a protection mechanism for civilians, in the
absence of an agreement between the parties. Instead,
the Security Council, acting on behalf of the
international community, should have called on the
parties to end all violence, to protect civilians and to
resume negotiations, so that all civilians on both sides
would be safe. The United States wanted, and would
have supported, a draft resolution making such a call.

The Council could have, and should have, called
on both parties to take the steps necessary to restore
confidence, such as ending incitement and violence and
resuming contacts at all levels to implement their
reciprocal commitments, including the understandings
reached at the summit at Sharm el-Sheikh. The United
States wanted, and would have supported, a draft
resolution making such a call.

Regrettably, the Palestinian Authority has never
fulfilled its commitment, made at Sharm el-Sheikh, to
speak out unequivocally, in Arabic, against violence.

Most important, the Council should have
expressed its readiness to assist the parties in the
implementation of any agreements they reach. The
United States would have supported, and indeed
promoted, such a call.
Last December, a similar draft resolution failed to
receive the nine affirmative votes required for
adoption, sending a message that the road to the just
and lasting peace we all seek in the Middle East does
not begin in this Council. That road begins in the
region, and the parties themselves must make the
difficult choices required. The Council can and should
support them in that effort.

The seven Council members that abstained last
December, including the United States, were able to
defer a premature and impractical call to establish a
United Nations observer force. By acting together,
however, we were able to preserve the concept of an
international presence for reconsideration at a future
time.

We acted out of similar motives tonight. We
support much of the substance we have been discussing
in the past week, but, as we repeatedly made clear to
other Council members, we cannot allow the Council
to adopt a draft resolution that simultaneously risks
damage both to the prospects for peace and to the
Council's own credibility. Casting this vote gives us no
pleasure at all. However, abstaining and allowing the
Council to adopt such an ill-conceived and unworkable
draft resolution would have been irresponsible.

Frankly, we are troubled that other members,
which we know recognized the glaring weaknesses and
clear danger of this draft resolution, did not join us in
opposing it. The Council was engaged in very serious,
at times intense deliberations, seeking a way forward
that recognized the legitimate roles and responsibilities
of both the Council and the parties. We worked hard
for consensus and a common approach. That process
was cut short by this vote, for reasons that have
nothing whatever to do with the search for peace.

Now that this draft resolution is behind us, we
should turn our attention to ways in which the Council
can genuinely support and encourage the search for
peace. We ask other members to join us and continue
our discussions in that very difficult but necessary
effort. This should begin today. The blessings of peace
have been denied to the people of the Middle East for
far too long.

