Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I now speak
in my capacity as Security Council Facilitator for the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).

In July 2015, the Security Council adopted
resolution 2231 (2015) (see S/PV.7488). Three months
later, the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA)
came into effect. The agreement aims to ensure that
the Iranian nuclear programme remains exclusively
peaceful. Resolution 2231 (2015) replaced previous
Security Council resolutions on the Iranian nuclear
issue and urged the full implementation of the JCPOA.
It also established specific restrictions in relation to
Iran. As Security Council Facilitator for the resolution,
I have aimed to support and improve its implementation.
I have built on the excellent work of Italy, which we
succeeded as Facilitator in the context of our split term
on the Council.

I consider three issues that we facilitate to be key
to my role and that of the format: first, talks; secondly,
transparency; and thirdly, trade.

My first point concerns talks. Our ambition
is to facilitate talks about the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015). As Facilitator, I have facilitated
communication among all parties, discussion of the
Security Council in the 2231 format and smooth
correspondence within the format. On 20 June,
the Security Council met in the 2231 format and,
during the format review, discussed the findings and
recommendations contained in the fifth report of the
Secretary-General (8/2018/602) on resolution 2231
(2015) prior to its public release. We had an open
discussion on recent developments. In her statement,
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo has just elaborated
on the findings and recommendations in the report.

During the reporting period, two Member States
sent communications to the Council alleging transfers
and activities by Iran that fall under the restrictions
of resolution 2231 (2015). Those communications are
listed in detail in my report (see S/2018/624), together
with all replies received from the Permanent Mission of
Iran, as well as a letter from the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Iran, Javad Zarif. The letter was sent in
reaction to the withdrawal of the United States from
the JCPOA and the reimposition of all United States
sanctions that had been lifted or waived in connection
with the JCPOA.

I will now turn to my second point - the facilitation
of transparency concerning the work of the 2231 format.
My report gives a comprehensive overview of the work
of the format during the past half-year, including the
monitoring of the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015). It includes the relevant communications, as well
as key aspects of the functioning of the procurement
channel. It is also my intention to give an open briefing
to the wider United Nations membership on the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) in the next
reporting period. The goal of such a briefing would be
to raise awareness among Member States of resolution
2231 (2015), particularly of the procurement channel,
as just described by the Head of Delegation of the
European Union.

That brings me to my third point - the facilitation
of trade by encouraging the use of the procurement
channel. The Channel reviews proposals by States
seeking to participate in or permit certain transfers of
nuclear and dual-use goods, technology or services to
Iran. On 27 April, the 2231 format received a briefing
from the Coordinator of the Procurement Working
Group of the Joint Commission on the procurement
channel. Since the beginning of 2016, 37 proposals for
the procurement channel have been submitted by five
Member States from three different regional groups.
Those include States that are not participants in the
JCPOA. On average, proposals were processed in fewer
than 51 calendar days. Following the withdrawal of
the United States from the JCPOA, the Council has
continued to receive proposals through the Channel,
and the review of those proposals continues.

In conclusion, the unanimous adoption of resolution
2231 (2015), which endorsed the JCPOA, marked a
fundamental shift concerning the Iranian nuclear issue.
As Security Council Facilitator for the resolution, I
have aimed to support and improve its implementation
through the facilitation of talks, transparency and
trade. In that effort, I would also like to thank the
Secretariat for its hard work in support of both myself
and the format. We commend the leadership of Under-
Secretary-General DiCarlo and Ambassador Vale de
Almeida and their cooperation.

