Mr. Aguilar Zinser (Mexico)(spoke in Spanish):
Serving on the Security Council as Permanent
Representative of my country has been an unparalleled
honour and responsibility. The Security Council is the
body which, on behalf of the United Nations and based
on the United Nations Charter, takes the most
important decisions for the preservation of peace and
security in the world. From Mexico's standpoint, and
that of my delegation, the Security Council is and must
be the body that identifies the collective interests of all
States and it is the organ that must act to preserve the
vitality of international law.

I wish to express my personal gratitude to you,
Mr. President, and to all the members of the Security
Council with whom I have worked during these nearly
two years on the many tasks that have gathered us
together, and on which we have had discussions and in
most cases agreed. In these two years we have
succeeded in fashioning an increasingly strong Security
Council.

I also want to express my gratitude to the teams
of all of the Member States of the Security Council
with whom we have had the privilege of working and
in particular, to the Secretary-General who is our
guiding light in this Organization. We thank him for the
leadership with which he has inspired our work. Our
support and love go to the United Nations and to his
team. I also want to thank Joseph Stefanides, Norma
Chan, Alek Martinovic, Shola Omoregie, Troy
Setiawan and certainly I am forgetting some names. I
want to thank everyone with whom we have worked on
a daily basis and on the two occasions when Mexico
presided over the Council during this period.

Very special thanks go to the interpreters as well,
who had to decipher our hieroglyphics on many
occasions and who helped us express our views to the
members of the Council here in this Chamber and to
understand each other's views here, as well as in the
informal meetings.

My appreciation also goes to the Security team at
the United Nations. I want to officially tell Rocky that
Mexican coffee will continue to flow into the Security
Council even though I will not be here.

During the two years I have served in the United
Nations I have had an exceptional experience. Like
many other delegates, the first thing one learns when
one arrives at the United Nations is how to criticize it.
The second thing you learn is how to defend and
cherish it. The third thing you learn is to need it. The
United Nations is, indeed, an indispensable
organization which is not only composed of its
Member nations, but is also an organization that all
citizens of the world must feel themselves to be part of.

We, the citizens of the world must be the
defenders of the United Nations and must perpetuate its
work in civil society. Mexico is a country committed to
multilateralism and committed to the United Nations,
and it will continue to be committed with the same will
and determination and with the same resolve with
which I have tried to work in representing my country.

