Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I would
like to thank Special Representative Salame and the
Ambassador of Sweden for their briefings. The United
States stands fully behind the efforts to help to bring
peace to Libya.

The Libyan people have waited more than seven
years for a better future. After rising up against one
of the world's most brutal tyrants, the promise of
Libya's revolution remains unfulfilled. The stakes
for international peace and security are high. Libya's
insecurity does not affect only Libyans. Groups such
as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant have taken
advantage ofthe conflict to put down roots. Loose arms
from Libya are fuelling violence from the Sahel to the
Sinai. Brutal militias conspire with criminal gangs to
smuggle migrants to Europe. The lawlessness in Libya
is an issue that concerns us all.

Last year, a horrific video emerged that captured
the world's attention. It showed migrants being sold
into slavery in Libya. It was sick and inhumane. There
is no place in our world for slavery. We must never
tolerate the conditions that could allow such a barbaric
practice to occur.

Sadly, human rights abuses against migrants occur
all too frequently in Libya. One desperate survivor of a
Libyan detention facility told Doctors Without Borders
recently: "I have endured two months, three weeks, one
day and 12 hours of hell." We can only imagine how
many thousands of migrants are enduring their own
hell in detention facilities right now. The crisis calls
for the immediate action of the Security Council. The
groups that are responsible for those abuses are the same
ones that are destabilizing Libya. Those who torture
migrants and refugees profit from smuggling. They use
such profits to undermine the authority of Government
institutions. Those ruthless smugglers threaten Libya's
peace and security.

This time, the Security Council is in a position
to respond and to live up to its responsibilities. The
Council is considering sanctions against six individuals
involved in migrant smuggling and human trafficking in
Libya. Those designations would be an important step
towards holding the perpetrators of abuses accountable.
We regret that the Security Council has not yet reached
consensus on such designations. Failing to move
forward with the designations would be a travesty in
the face of so much global outrage over such abuses.
There is strong regional support for the designations,
and the evidence showing the involvement of the six
people is clear. The United States therefore hopes
that the Security Council can move forward with the
sanctions designations as soon as possible in order to
deter further abuses.

In the meantime, we continue to encourage the
Government of National Accord to work closely with
international agencies so as to assist vulnerable migrants
and refugees. The International Organization for
Migration (IOM) and the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) have done
good work. They are helping to repatriate migrants in
a safe and voluntary manner from detention facilities
and to assist those with claims to protection. The IOM
and UNHCR must be able to continue those important
efforts. In the long run, of course, addressing Libya's
instability requires a political solution. That is where
Special Representative Salame's work is involved.

The United States is a firm supporter of the United
Nations dialogue. That should be the only mediation
process. Separate international initiatives will distract
from the efforts of the United Nations and will
undermine prospects for national reconciliation. While
the United Nations works on talks, all parties must
exercise restraint. There should be no unilateral action
outside the United Nations process. Political spoilers
must stop undermining the dialogue and engage with
the United Nations in good faith.

As Special Representative Salame has said, the
Libyan people are eager for elections to bring an end
to interim Governments and political transitions. We
therefore appreciate the progress that the United Nations
has made to prepare for elections. These elections
must be well prepared so that we do not end up with
any further instability. There is a strong international
consensus that for the elections to happen, there needs
to be a constitutional basis. The United States stands
behind this consensus. Libyan leaders need to commit
to both the election process and to respecting the will
of the Libyan people. Special Representative Salame
must have the space to consult with Libya's leaders on
how to move forward with the democratic and inclusive
constitutional process. We look forward to hearing
more from him on the next steps.
Since 2012, the United States has given more
than $32 million to support election preparations and
the drafting of a new constitution in Libya. We urge
other donors to step up to meet the needs of Libya's
High Commission for National Elections, so that the
Government can finish its preparations. On 2 May,
terrorists attacked the headquarters of the National
Election Commission in Tripoli. We condemn this
cowardly attack, which only deepens our commitment
to supporting free and fair elections. We recognize
the immense courage of the election officials, who
continue to report to work despite these threats. They
are working to help build a democratic Libya, and they
deserve our full backing. It is people like these whom
we need to remember in the Security Council. We
need support the Libyans who are pushing for peace
rather than those who are fighting for their own selfish
interests. Those Libyans who are holding out from the
United Nations process need to understand that they
must come to the table.

Despite all the insecurity, there is hope. One
24-year-old student named Salim, who participated
in the 2011 revolution, recently attended a workshop
on reconciliation. Reflecting on his experiences,
Salim said:

"I refuse to take part in an act of vengeance. That
is not what 2011 was all about. And if we can be
reminded that our aspiration was freedom and a
better life, we might start thinking differently".

Salim is right. It is long past time for Libya's
leaders to put aside their narrow agendas and instead
think about the aspirations of the Libyan people. It is
long past time for Libyans to come together around the
cause of a stable, unified and democratic Government.
The United States will not hesitate to use all of the tools
we have to help Libyans achieve this goal.

