Judge Mase: It is a great honour to address the
Security Council and to present the eighth annual
report of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR). This provides an opportunity, first, to
take stock of the results achieved so far; secondly, to
present the ICTR Completion Strategy, as requested by
the Council in resolution 1503 (2003); and thirdly, to
introduce the two recent requests submitted to the
Security Council concerning ad litem judges.

First, I would like to say a few words about the
results achieved so far. In 2003, three judgements,
involving four accused, were handed down. The first
judgement was delivered in February, two others
followed in May, and another four judgements,
involving eight accused, are expected by the end of the
year, or very early next year. The total number of
judgements rendered in the second mandate is,
therefore, nine, involving 14 accused. This reflects a
100 per cent increase in the number of accused who
were tried during the Tribunal's second mandate, under
the presidency of my distinguished predecessor,
President Pillay, as compared to the first mandate, from
1995 to 1999. It means that the Tribunal will soon have
rendered 15 judgements, involving 21 accused, since
the first trials started in January 1997.

The Butare and Military cases, involving six and
four accused, respectively, will continue in the third
mandate. Members of the Security Council will recall
that in resolution 1482 (2003) they decided not to prolong
the terms of office of two non-re-elected judges in respect
of those two cases. I am pleased to report that we were
able to sort out the problems and that those trials are
continuing and did not have to start de novo.

In the Butare trial, the two remaining judges
decided to continue with a substitute judge, in pursuance
of the recently amended rule 15 bis. Appeals against this
decision were dismissed. In the Military case trial, the
problems were solved by transferring the trial to
another Trial Chamber, with a totally new composition.
The parties agreed that the case should continue. This
brings the total number of accused whose trials have
been completed or are in progress to 31.

A priority at the beginning of the third mandate
has been to start new trials as soon as possible. On 27
July, Trial Chamber III commenced the Gacumbitsi
trial, involving one accused, and in the course of 15 trial
days, 14 witnesses were heard. On 1 September 2003,
Trial Chamber I started another single accused case, in
which 15 witnesses were heard during 12 trial days.
The Prosecution has closed its case in both trials. In
addition to those two single accused cases, two
voluminous trials, each involving four accused, are
scheduled to commence on 3 November this year.
Therefore, by the end of 2003, a total of 41 accused
will have had their cases completed or in progress.

The commencement of four new trials involving
10 accused during the second half of 2003 is a direct
consequence of Security Council resolution 1431
(2003), which allowed for the establishment of a pool
of 18 ad litem judges. The first ad litem judge took up
office on 1 November 2003, and we were immediately
in a position to start a shift system - a morning shift
and an afternoon shift in one Chamber. The other three
ad litem judges will arrive in Arusha in a couple of
weeks, subject to appointment by the Secretary-
General. These four ad litem judges will be sitting in
four trials. I would like to thank the Security Council
for making further progress possible.

However, much work remains, at present 22
detainees are awaiting trial. The ICTR is anxious to
commence these cases as soon as possible. The
statutory provision that the ICTR may only use four ad
litem judges at any one time seriously limits our
capacity to commence new trials. Therefore, on
29 September 2003, the ICTR requested the Security
Council to increase that number from four to nine. I
cannot stress enough the importance of this reform. If
granted, the number of permanent trial chamber sections
will increase from four to six. The ICTR will thereby
enjoy the same judicial capacity for conducting trials at
first instance, as the ICTY has had for a long time.

Our requests, which members have received,
explain the need for the nine ad litem judges and how
they will facilitate our task, both in relation to twin-
tracking and to the so-called shift system. But let me
elaborate a bit further.

Several cases will be trial-ready in 2004, but the
four big cases - Butare, Government 1, Government
11, Military - will require most of the time of the eight
permanent judges involved in those trials until 2005.
An additional number of ad litem judges will provide
the necessary flexibility to hear new trials. Three
examples may illustrate this point. First, it will be
possible to establish a trial chamber section composed
of the ninth permanent judge and two ad litem judges.
Secondly, when there is a break in one of the big trials,
it will be possible to create a trial chamber section with
one or more permanent judges from that case, sitting
with ad litem judges, to hear a smaller case. Thirdly, by
allowing one of the judges in the big case to supervise
the out-of-court work in that case, while the two other
judges sit in a small trial, the trial chamber may ensure
increased progress of the big case at the trial stage. That
may reduce the time needed for judgement writing.

These methods can be used very soon. As
members know, the General Assembly already elected
a pool of 18 judges. Many of them have indicated that
they can come to Arusha at short notice. Therefore,
additional ad litem judges can be used as soon as a
permanent judge is available.

In that context, it should be noted that the ICTR
has developed methods of disposing of single accused
cases within a limited period of time. They are now
heard in two slots - one for the Prosecution case -
usually between 15 and 20 witnesses - and one for the
Defence case, usually a similar number. Such slots can
be heard when there are breaks in the big trials.

The other request submitted by the ICTR to the
Security Council relates to the increase of the competence
of ad litem judges to do pre-trial work. Here I refer to our
letter of 8 September 2003. The reform is important, but
it should be uncontroversial in View of the identical
resolution 1481 (2003), adopted for the ICTY. I will
therefore not develop this orally here, but will refer to
the reasons given in our letter. Let me simply state that
both statutory amendments are instrumental to the
timely completion of the Tribunal's mandate.

This leads me to the completion strategy. At the
commencement of the third mandate, the ICTR has
considered it a priority to elaborate a completion
strategy. A revised version of that document was sent
to the Security Council on 29 September 2003. It takes
into account Council resolution 1503 (2003), in which
the Security Council called on the two ad hoc tribunals
to take all possible measures to complete all trial
activities at first instance by the end of 2008. In the
completion strategy, it is estimated that with four ad
litem judges, the ICTR will be in a position to finalize
all ongoing trials, together with cases involving the
remaining 22 detainees, by 2007. However, by 2008,
only about eight other accused could be brought for
trial out of the 16 indictees who are still at large and
the maximum of 26 suspects who have not been
apprehended. These projections may have to be
revised. Unforeseen circumstances may cause delays.
However, with an increase from four to nine ad litem
judges, the Tribunal will be in a better position to
finalize most trials by the target date, in spite of such
unforeseen delays.

At present, the total number of persons actually
before the ICTR is 63; that is 41 cases completed or in
progress and 22 detainees awaiting trial. With nine ad
litem judges, the ICTR will be able to hear trials of a
higher number by 2008. Much depends on the number
of indictments that will be drawn up. This falls within
the discretion of the Prosecutor. But let me say that I
consider it impossible within the target date to hear
trials involving another 42 persons, 16 indictees and 26
suspects. It will be an important task to single out the
leaders for further prosecutions by the ICTR and
transfer cases involving intermediate- and lower-rank
accused to national jurisdictions, as required by
resolution 1503 (2003).

The Security Council decided to establish a
separate Prosecutor for the ICTR. I would like to thank
the previous Prosecutor, Ms. Carla Del Ponte, for her
great contribution to the ICTR. I was also very pleased
to welcome the new Prosecutor, Mr. Hassan Jallow,
when he took up office in Arusha on 3 October 2003. I
look forward to listening to him today.

During the period under review, a number of
reforms have been implemented with a View to
accelerating the proceedings. Let me briefly mention
some of them: the establishment of a so-called new
trial committee, composed of representatives from all
three branches of the Tribunal, which facilitated the
commencement of four new trials; simultaneous
interpretation during trial from Kinyarwanda into
English and French in all three trial chambers;
amendment of rule 15 bis, which makes it possible to
continue a trial with a substitute judge where a judge
falls ill, dies or is not re-elected. As mentioned, that
provision has already been applied.

Another reform is the establishment of a
procedure to facilitate plea agreements in cases where
an accused has expressed the intention to plead guilty. 1
note the difference between the ICTR and the ICTY, in
that only three persons have pleaded guilty at the
ICTR, compared with sixteen, in the ICTY.

The setting up of a Coordination Council,
composed of the President, the Prosecutor and the
Registrar, was another important reform. It has already
served its purpose, and the Council will hold frequent
meetings in order to avoid any problems of
communication or coordination. Obviously, aspects
relating to the completion strategy will be discussed
frequently during such meetings.

Let me finally also mention that proposals from a
working group to accelerate pre-trial proceedings are
presently under consideration by the judges.

Let me now turn to the relationship with Rwanda.
As the Council knows, the ICTR experienced
difficulties over the flow of witnesses from Rwanda in
2002. I am now pleased to report that the situation has
improved. For many months, there has been a steady
flow of witnesses from Kigali to Arusha. The ICTR
wants to maintain and develop a harmonious
relationship, which will make it easier for the Tribunal
to contribute to reconciliation within Rwanda. We were
recently very pleased to receive two groups of ten
Rwandan judicial officers, each composed of judges
and prosecutors, as well as officials from the Ministry of
Justice. We hope that other representatives of Rwandan
society will soon visit the Tribunal in Arusha.

I hope that the Security Council appreciates the
results achieved so far. The ICTR will continue to
develop its working methods in order to further
increase efficiency. Let me end by thanking the
Members of the Council and the Secretary-General for
their continued support of our work.

