Mr. Jinga (Romania) (spoke in French): I thank
the Egyptian presidency for organizing this open
debate on cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union. I also welcome the adoption this
morning of presidential statement S/PRST/2016/8.

Romania fully aligns itself with the statement that
will be delivered by the observer of the European Union.
I shall deliver a statement in my national capacity.

At the outset, allow me to express my sincere
condolences to the families of the five Blue Helmets
from Chad who lost their lives in a terrorist attack on the
same day that we were paying tribute at United Nations
Headquarters to the 129 peacekeeping troops who were
killed in 2015. That impressive number reminds us once
again of our shared responsibility to act in favour of
peace and security throughout the world so that their
ultimate sacrifice will not have been in vain .

A few months ago, we marked the tenth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1631 (2005), the first on
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations. As a sponsor of that
document, Romania is pleased to note that the initiative
proved to be far-sighted, because partnerships with
regional organizations have been found to be very
useful in promoting peace and security by all the
evaluation processes carried out by the United Nations.

No other region of the world takes up so much
of the Security Council's work as Africa. More than
60 per cent of the Council's activities are related to
African issues. Africa also hosts more peacekeeping or
peace support operations than any other continent. It
is therefore rightly important to enhance cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union and
to develop partnerships between the two organizations
in many areas. Indeed, the African Union (AU) has
become a major player and has assumed its leadership
role in peacekeeping and security on the continent,
requiring ongoing efforts to institutionalize the
cooperation mechanisms between the United Nations
and the AU in all areas related to peace and security in
Africa. In that regard, deeper political, operational and
financial cooperation is necessary, including through
ongoing exchange of information and experience.

Romania is actively engaged in efforts to stabilize
countries in Africa affected by conflict. Over the course
of 25 years of continuous participation in peacekeeping
operations, Romania has deployed more than 10,000
troops under the United Nations flag. At present,
Romania is participating in 10 peacekeeping operations
and more than 90 per cent of its forces are deployed
in African countries. Furthermore, Romania is the first
country among European troop- and police-contributing
countries in United Nations missions. Our contribution
will increase in 2016 in terms of the capacity of our
military and police personnel.

Following the request of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, Romania has affirmed its
willingness to increase the number ofmilitary observers
and officers it provides and has increased the military
capacity it provides to the United Nations Missions
in Mali and the Central African Republic, which was
announced at the Summit on peacekeeping operations,
which took place last September.

I am pleased to inform the Council that the
Romanian authorities are ready to deploy an additional
17 officers to three peacekeeping missions in Africa:
the United Nations Mission in the Republic of South
Sudan, the United Nations Mission in Liberia and
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali, and a formed police unit
of 140 gendarmes has been made operational and added
to the United Nations forces. In addition, Romania has
invested in predeployment training in United Nations
missions. In terms of the training school for Romanian
gendarmes, we have developed for more than 10
years international advanced courses to train police
and gendarmerie in French. The course also provides
training for French speakers from the African continent.

In recognizing the paramount importance that the

humanitarian dimension occupies in the United Nations
efforts, Romania aligns itself with the Kigali Principles
on the Protection of Civilians in peacekeeping
operations. In this joint effort, conflict prevention must
play a key role in our response to crises. The concept of
sustaining peace, as defined in resolution 2286 (2016),
which was adopted last month by the General Assembly
(see resolution 70/262) and the Security Council, puts
prevention at the heart of our work. We are therefore
pleased that the African Peace and Security Architecture
road map for 2016-2020 identifies the prevention of
conflicts as a central priority.

In conclusion, Romania believes that African
solutions must be found to African crises. In this
perspective, we encourage closer cooperation to ensure
the harmonious implementation of the agenda 2063
adopted by the African Union's Assembly and the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1).

