Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): May I
first thank Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno for his briefing
and his analysis. We thank the United Nations Mission
of Support in East Timor (UNMISET) and Mr. Sharma
for the excellent work accomplished. I also want to
welcome the presence of Mr. Ramos-Horta, Minister
for Foreign Affairs. He is one of the emblematic
figures in the struggle of the Timorese people for
independence.

Since its accession to independence in 2002,
Timor-Leste has made remarkable achievements, as the
Secretary-General recognized in his report. In the
course of recent months, its security situation has
improved, its political institutions are being
strengthened and its relations with its neighbours are
steadily developing. Progress has been made in
bilateral relations with Indonesia, and we welcome
that, particularly the work to delimit the land borders
between the two countries. We hope that the agreement
on the international land border will soon be finalized.
We appeal to the two Governments to do further work
to promote the resettlement of East Timorese returning
from West Timor and to facilitate the return of
refugees. We hope for a definitive solution to that
problem.

In spite of these achievements, there are still
important challenges to be met, particularly with regard
to the maintenance of national security and stability
and in the promotion of economic and social
development. This is completely normal for a country
that has just recently recovered its independence. In
fact, to improve capacity in public administration, to
establish and develop a justice system and strengthen
the police and national defence forces all require long-
term efforts. That is why it is essential that the United
Nations and the international community continue to
support Timor-Leste.

As the Secretary-General indicated in his report,
following the end of the UNMISET mandate, there will
still be needs to be met in a certain number of fields. In
this regard, Algeria believes that the United Nations
should maintain a mission, with a clear mandate
approved by the Security Council, in order to help
improve the justice system and the structures of public
administration and to contribute to the development of
the national police and to the maintenance of security
and stability in Timor-Leste.

In that respect, we fully understand the concerns
of the Government of Timor-Leste with regard to
problems that could threaten the stability of the
country, and we believe that it is the duty of the
international community to continue to support that
young State during the crucial stage of the
establishment of its institutions.

In that connection, we support the
recommendations of the Secretary-General that
UNMISET's mandate be extended for a l2-month
period and that the United Nations maintain an
appropriate presence to respond to the country's
security needs, as envisaged by the Secretariat, with,
we hope, the unanimous support of the Security
Council.

The strengthening and consolidation of peace
represent a major challenge for the international
community. It is therefore important that the United
Nations see to it that peace and development take root
in a sustainable manner in Timor-Leste. In other words,
it would be neither just nor reasonable for Timor-Leste
to be penalized for having succeeded in its transition
and for the international community to disengage itself
too quickly from that country - something that it
would eventually regret.

