The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia,
Rwanda and Serbia and Montenegro, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council's agenda. In accordance with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in
the consideration, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President: I shall take it that the Security
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of
its provisional rules of procedure to Judge Fausto
Pocar, President of the International Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia
since 1991, and also Judge Erik Mose, President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan
Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such
Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring
States between 1 January and 31 December 1994, and
also to Ms. Carla Del Ponte, Prosecutor of the Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia, and to Mr. Hassan Bubacar
Jallow, Prosecutor of the Tribunal for Rwanda.

It is so decided.
I invite Judge Pocar, Judge Mose, Ms. Del Ponte
and Mr. J allow to take seats at the Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members
to photocopies of letters circulated on 2 and
6 December 2005, respectively, from the President of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
and the President of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda, which will be issued as
documents of the Security Council under the symbols
S/2005/781 and S/2005/782.

At this meeting, the Council will hear briefings
by the President and the Prosecutor of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, and the President
and Prosecutor of the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda. Following those briefings, I will give the
floor to Council members who wish to make comments
or ask questions.

As there is no list of speakers for the Council
members, I would like to invite them to indicate to the
secretariat if they wish to take the floor.

I now give the floor to Judge Pocar, President of
the International Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia.


