Mr. She Okitundu (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): First, let me congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of March. My delegation
is particularly honoured to see the United Kingdom - a
friend - steering the Council's deliberations. I would
like to thank the Council for this opportunity to speak
at today's meeting on the situation in my country, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

I would also like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute to Secretary-General Anto'nio Guterres and to
convey to him best wishes on behalf of my Government
as, like his predecessor, he discharges the noble mission
assigned to the United Nations to bring much-needed
peace to countries throughout the world, including my
own. On behalf of the Government and the people of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, I would also
like to take this opportunity to thank the Security
Council for its continued and tireless efforts over the
past several years to preserve the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of my country and ensure its peace
and stability.

My delegation takes note of the report (S/2017/206)
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO), which was presented by
Mr. Maman Sambo Sidikou, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. To clarify, I believe that it is important to
revisit a number of points in the report, in particular with
regard to the political situation, the electoral process,
the security situation, the human rights situation
and the strategic dialogue between the Government
and MONUSCO.

With the regard to the political situation, the
Congolese political class as a whole, as well as other
stakeholders in the country, have expressed a legitimate
need for an inclusive political dialogue to address the
sociopolitical crisis that my country faces. In that
regard, on 28 November 2015, His Excellency President
Joseph Kabila Kabange called for an inclusive
national political dialogue following eight months of
preliminary talks with the opposition. That dialogue
led to two agreements - one signed on 18 October 2016
at the headquarters of the African Union, following
mediation by the African Union, headed by Mr. Edem
Kodjo, and the other signed on 31 December 2016 at
the Archdiocese of Kinshasa under the auspices of the
National Episcopal Conference of the Congo (CENCO),
Although both agreements sought to explore ways and
means to organize free, democratic and transparent
elections by consensus-based management of the
pre-electoral period, the dialogue held on 18 October
2016 was considered to be non-inclusive because the
Rassemblement des forces politiques et sociales de
la Republique democratique du Congo acquises au
changement, the Front pour le Respect de la Constitution
and a section ofcivil society did not participate. CENCO
also suspended its participation.

After evaluating the two agreements, it must
be acknowledged that the same issues raised at the
headquarters of the African Union were also addressed
at the Archdiocese of Kinshasa during the signing
of the agreement on 31 December 2016, and they
received identical comments. Such issues included the
commitment of all parties to scrupulously respect the
Constitution and the country's laws; the affirmation
of the continuity of the State and its institutions; the
appointment of a Prime Minister from the opposition;
the establishment of a monitoring structure for the
agreement; the holding of presidential, legislative,
national and provincial elections, in that order; the
election calendar and the recognition of the Independent
National Electoral Commission as the organizer of the
country's elections.

The political situation is currently dominated
by the implementation of the political agreement of
31 December 2016, as well as the finalization of its
specific arrangements. At this stage, two points of
divergence remain in implementing the agreement. They
are related to the procedures for presenting candidates to
be appointed to the post ofPrime Minister and to replace
the president of the national council for the monitoring
of the agreement. The specific arrangements govern the
appointment of the Prime Minister; the setting up of the
Government; the implementation of the national council
for the monitoring of the agreement; the timetable for
implementing the agreement; the revitalization of the
Independent National Electoral Commission and the
renewal of the Conseil superieur de l'audiovisuel et de
la communication.

With regard to the appointment of the Prime
Minister, the Rassemblement is asked to present a list
of the names of at least three candidates for that post,
from among which the Head of State will appoint one,
in accordance with article 78 of the Constitution. The
President of the national council for the monitoring
of the agreement was appointed by consensus and its
new President should be appointed in the same manner.
Given that the President of the national council for the
monitoring of the agreement should be a member of the
opposition, the Government asks the opposition, and in
particular the Rassemblement, to resolve its dissension
and agree on a candidate to replace the Etienne
Tshisekedi. The Government would like to reassure the
Council that it is in no way delaying the implementation
of the agreement. The delay in the process is due to
extraneous circumstances, in particular the death of
Mr. Tshisekedi, which forced the National Episcopal
Conference of the Congo to suspend its work. We believe
that, with the resumption of negotiations on 16 March,
the parties will find a way to reach agreement on those
points of divergence.

Turning now to issue of elections, in his end-of-
year speech to the nation on 31 December 2016, the
President stated that he was determined to continue
the process of organizing elections. In that regard,
the Government is working to marshal the resources
necessary to meet the needs ofthe Independent National
Electoral Commission. Operations to revise the
election calendar that began in July 2016 are ongoing
throughout the country's various provinces. It should
be noted that of the 25 provinces, in addition to the city
of Kinshasa, work has already been carried out in 13 of
them. The Independent National Electoral Commission
has already started to provide election materials in the
13 remaining provinces. To date, nearly 20 million
voters have already been registered, of the 41 million
who are expected to be registered throughout the entire
country. It goes without saying that the significant
results achieved thus far by the Independent National
Electoral Commission are essentially due to the efforts
of the Government, which covers the various costs of
operations on its own.

With regard to support from our partners, it should
be pointed out that of the $123 million in multipartner
funds earmarked for the Proj et d'appui au cycle electoral
au Congo, only 6 per cent of the total has been funded.
In addition, according to the information we have,
that minimal funding is granted to non-governmental
organizations and churches. On 31 July, the Independent
National Electoral Commission intends to conclude
all stages and address all technical demands related
to the complete revamping of the electoral registry,
which is the precondition for the holding of elections.
As the Independent National Electoral Commission
mentioned in its report submitted to the groups of
experts of the Fifth Committee on the occasion of its
mission to the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
February - a copy of which was also submitted to the
Council - MONUSCO support faces some challenges,
which disrupts the schedule and causes delays in the
provision of election materials. To give one example, in
a province north of Bangui, of the 20 rotations planned,
MONUSCO has organized only two flights and another
private aircraft flight carrying three tons, thereby
delaying operations by several days.

The Government is committed to sparing no
effort to allow the Independent National Electoral
Commission, along with support from the entire
Congolese political class, to set the stage for a peaceful,
credible and transparent electoral process. It therefore
calls on the international community as well as all
partners to effectively engage in the mobilization
of resources to promote elections in my country by
removing all preconditions.

In the area of security, I believe that it is useful
to point out that the 148 territories that make up the
administrative subdivisions of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo are under the authority of the Congolese
State, which was not the case a few years ago. That
positive development should therefore be noted despite
occasional hotspots marked by tension.

The report under consideration highlights the
worrying situation dominating the east of my country
with the continued presence of the Allied Democratic
Forces, the Lord's Resistance Army and the Forces
democratiques de liberation du Rwanda (FDLR), as
well as several national armed groups. With regard to
that issue, I must reassure the Security Council that
our armed forces, who have made great sacrifices in
combating the negative forces, remain determined to
persevere in their noble mission until those criminals
are completely eliminated so that our people can live
sustainably in peace and contribute to the development
of their country.

To achieve that goal, our armed forces will continue
to cooperate with MONUSCO. Given the mixed results
achieved through that cooperation, however, my
Government believes that an assessment must be made
to objectively identify gaps in the implementation of
commitments so as to enable us to achieve improved
operational efficiency of the forces. It is unacceptable
that the United Nations largest peacekeeping mission
in the world, which has been in my country for
approximately 20 years, is unable, with the means at its
disposal, to end a crisis situation that has persisted for
several years.

In that regard, the renewal of MONUSCO's
mandate, which we support, must take into account
the expectations of the Congolese people, whose
most ardent wish is to see the negative forces and
the various armed groups that are teeming in the
eastern part of the country be completely eradicated.
To achieve that end, it is imperative to strengthen
the operational effectiveness of the United Nations
forces, in particular the force Intervention Brigade,
so that it can carry out the mission for which it was
established - a mission that it carried out so well at the
beginning of its mandate. Strengthening effectiveness
mustbe accompanied by: first, the addition, ifnecessary,
of a second Intervention Brigade unit; providing
adequate means and equipment to effectively combat
the asymmetric threats encountered on the ground;
and better cooperation and information-sharing with
the Forces armees de la Republique democratique du
Congo (FARDC), especially with regard to information
gathered by drones.

In March 2016, my Government informed the
Council (see S/PV.7654) of the situation concerning
the former rebels of the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23)
when it noted the disappearance of many of them from
the Bihanga military camp in Uganda in which they
were cantoned. As the Council will note, those former
rebels, who, in line with the Nairobi Declaration, had
committed to never again resorting to weapons as a
means of negotiation and to become a political party,
have largely shown their bad faith through deliberately
violating their commitments. Members of the Council
will recall that, in accordance with the Nairobi
Declaration, the President of the Republic pushed
through a vote on an amnesty law so as to facilitate the
return of those former combatants. Among the former
combatants eligible for repatriation pursuant to that
law, only a small number has agreed to be repatriated
from Uganda to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Despite all the steps that the Government has taken to
convince those who remained to return to the country,
no satisfactory results have been reached.

In the same vein, the ultimatum of 15 December
2015 ofthe International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region (ICGLR) for the unconditional repatriation of all
Congolese and non-Congolese members ofthe M-23 who
took refuge in Uganda was rejected by the leadership of
the M-23, which has taken those former rebels hostage.
My Government condemns the military activities of
the former rebels and calls on the Council to consider
sanctions against them in accordance with the decision
taken in New York on 29 September 2015 by the Heads
of States signatories to the framework agreement at
the sixth high-level meeting of the Regional Oversight
Mechanism of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region. Moreover, my country deplores the
duplicity and lack of frank cooperation on the part of
certain neighbouring countries in resolving the issue.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo is therefore
asking the Council to call upon them to respect the
commitments to which they freely subscribed under the
framework agreement, convert them into actions and
find political solutions to the obstacles preventing the
repatriation of the former rebels.

With regard to the presence of fighters from the
Sudan People's Liberation Movement/Army within
the opposition in our country, without rehashing the
details of that issue, it is important to stress that the
letters addressed to MONUSCO on 1 October 2016 and
to the Council on 9 January respectively reflect my
Government's position clearly. As specified in those
two letters, my country calls on the United Nations to
take the necessary steps to evacuate those combatants
from our territory so as to spare us from reliving a
situation similar to the one that we went through with
the FDLR.

With regard to the latter negative force, I believe
that it is important to remind the Council of the 340
FDLR combatants who voluntarily surrendered two
years ago, as well as their dependents, who remain
even today cantoned in transit camps in Kanyobagonga,
North Kivu, Walungu, South Kivu and Kisangani in
the province of Tshopo. Although we appreciate the
treatment of those former combatants by MONUSCO,
my Government renews its appeal, before the Council,
to the international community for their repatriation to
their country of origin or their resettlement to a third
country other than those of the Great Lakes region. My
Government is unable to comprehend the fact that the
international community, which has always insisted
on the eradication of that negative force, has so far not
received a favourable response to that appeal, which
could serve as an act ofencouragement to convince those
among them who have not yet laid down their weapons.

I should like to bring up the situation of the two
members of the United Nations Panel of Experts whom
we have lost track of and who have gone missing in
Kasai. My Government deplores that disturbing
disappearance and is committed to making every effort
to find out more. At present, my country's security
forces are actively carrying out investigations in
cooperation with MONUSCO to locate them.

It would be remiss of me to conclude without saying
a word about the situation concerning the tensions that
have been felt in certain parts of the country. With
regard to the members of the Kamuina Nsapu militia,
an agreement was reached with family members of
the Customary Chief of that group. Following that
agreement, on 19 March 2017, the members of the
militia agreed in Kananga to lay down their weapons.
In Tanganyika, the Government's efforts have led to an
amicable settlement of the conflict between the Luba
and the ethnic Twa, or pygmy, communities. In Kongo
Central and Kinshasa, calm has returned among the
followers of Bundu dia Kongo with the arrest of Ne
Muanda Nsemi.

With regard to the issue of the strategic dialogue, it
should be recalled that that meeting was held from 9 to
19 March 2016 in Kinshasa between the Government and
MONUSCO and yielded the following agreements that
were signed onto by both parties. In all areas concerned,
including North and South Kivu, reduction of the force
is justified. In other areas such as the provinces of
Tshopo, Tanganyika and Haut-Uele, the presence of the
force is not justified with the exception of the civilian
protection unit. Concerning the majority of the residual
security challenges, the MONUSCO force, with the
exception of the Brigade Intervention, is no longer
the answer. Almost all the actions to be undertaken
are ultimately and essentially the responsibility of the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The Government therefore calls on the Security
Council to formally recognize the conclusions of the
Joint Working Group signed by both parties and recall
the need to organize the second phase of the strategic
dialogue so as to set the timetable for the orderly
and definitive withdrawal of MONUSCO from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

With regard to the actual reduction of the force,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo calls for an
assessment to be conducted with the Government and
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations with the
participation of the partners in the region, including
the Southern African Development Community and the
ICGLR, to reconcile the requirements of the reduction
of the force with the imperatives of robustness
and effectiveness.

With regard to the issue of human rights, the
situation concerning fundamental freedoms in
the Democratic Republic in no way feeds into a
deliberate policy of violations of human rights.
Accordingly, that falls within the scope of individual
responsibilities, the derogation of which in all cases
cannot go unpunished. In that regard, ad hoc bodies
have the task of complementing the Government in
improving the promotion and protection of human
rights in a constructive partnership, and not in a useless
confrontational struggle. The presence of the Joint
United Nations Office on Human Rights attests to the
fact that my country has accepted that that structure
can represent the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights within its territory
and that the Government is cooperating with it to the
best of its ability.

However, the credibility of the reports produced
by that entity poses a problem, as often they are not
supported by evidence. I would like to recall that the
Democratic Republic of the Congo remains among
the countries that cooperate with the international
community in the promotion of human rights. In
July and August 2016, the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the Chairperson
of the African Commission on Human and Peoples'
Rights visited the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and clearly recognized at the end of the mission that
significant progress had been made by the Government
in this area.

In order to avoid the sad experience of the events
of 19 and 20 September 2016, as a result of excesses
of some opposition supporters who attacked people
and property, public political demonstrations were
temporarily suspended on an exceptional basis. With
regard to freedom of public protest, the Constitution and
the law on public protest establish only an intelligence
system in order allow the administrative authorities
to supervise demonstrators in accordance with the
indicated itinerary and schedule. Nonetheless, public
authorities remain primarily responsible for public
order and security. In this respect, they may take the
protective measures necessary in a democratic society
to safeguard public order and avoid irreparable damage.

The material damage resulting from the events
in Kinshasa on 19 and 20 September 2016 has been
well documented by the Ministry of the Interior. The
Prosecutor General opened investigations in order to
identify and punish perpetrators. Of the 172 alleged
perpetrators brought before the competent courts,
73 have been acquitted, 83 were sentenced to between
1 month and 20 years of prison, and about 20 minors
were brought before juvenile courts. Public disorder
accompanied by serious violations of citizens' rights,
which was recently orchestrated by the followers of the
Bundu dia Kongo movements, in the Kongo Central and
Kamwena Nsapu in Kasai, are to be condemned. With
regard to this last point, a video disseminated on social
networks was the subject of investigations carried out by
a team of senior magistrates of the Prosecutor's Office.

At this stage of the investigation, the Military
Prosecutor announced, at a press conference on
Saturday, 18 March in Kinshasa, that seven suspects, all
elements of the FARDC, including two majors serving
as Commander and Deputy Commander of Operations,
were arrested. The operations and field investigations
resulted in the arrest of the alleged suspects for the
following offenses: war crimes by murder, war crimes
by maiming, war crimes by cruel and inhuman and
degrading treatment, and refusal to report crimes
committed by persons subject to military jurisdiction.

Similarly, concerning the malicious destruction in
February 2017 of the Catholic Church property in both
Kinshasa and Lubumbashi, the court has been tireless
in its efforts to identify and punish the perpetrators.

In terms of sexual violence, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo is now on the path to consolidating the
progress made in its policy to combat this scourge
in all its forms. Since 2013, the Secretary-General's
preliminary report on conflict-related violence reveals
a decline in cases of sexual violence in my country. This
noticeable decline is the result of systematic work to
combat impunity carried out by the judiciary in general
and, specifically, by the military judiciary.
In the light of those considerations, my Government
believes it is now necessary for a far-reaching dialogue
with the United Nations to remove the Democratic
Republic of the Congo from the list of countries with high
levels of rape. Along the same lines, the Government
has been active in the fight against child recruitment
in our armed forces. These efforts were reflected in an
audit carried out in 2015 by an independent Swedish
firm - MO Consulting - in collaboration with
UNICEF, which confirmed the absence of children
in our armed forces. In view of those results, my
Government also requests the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to be removed from the list of countries
whose armies recruit and use children.

With regard to the disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration, resettlement and repatriation programme,
a budget of $85 million had been agreed to fund the
various activities of the programme over four years by
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and its partners.
In accordance with that budget, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo committed $10 million,
MONUSCO committed $8 million and the World Bank
and other partners are to provide $67 million. Besides
my country and MONUSCO, which have disbursed
their share, only the World Bank and Sweden have
pledged and disbursed $21.5 million. A significant gap
of about $50 million remains unfunded.

Despite this situation, of the 12,205 ex-combatants
from the different armed groups active in the east of
the country, to date 4,812 have been reintegrated and
demobilized, 3,763 have been demobilized and returned
to their respective communities for reintegration
after completing a vocational training programme,
529 ex-combatants of M-23 have been demobilized
and returned to their communities, and 25 foreign
combatants were handed over to MONUSCO for
repatriation to their countries of origin.

The wish of the Congolese people and that of my
Government is that the next extension of the MONUSCO
mandate brings us peace once and for all by putting
an end to the daily tragedy that the people of in the
eastern part of my country have been experiencing for
many years.

In conclusion, I wish to express my Government's
thanks to Mr. Maman Sidikou, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, and Mr. Said Djinnit, Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region of
Africa, for their commitment and dedication to the
cause of my country and to the Great Lakes region.

