Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): Mr. President, we
owe you a debt of gratitude for providing us this
opportunity to share our Views with you on the work of
the ad hoc Working Group chaired by Ambassador
Jagdish Koonjul.

We have studied with interest the extensive
mandate given to him and his group. We are
encouraged by the progress made by the group to date.
We listened with great attention to Ambassador
Koonjul, and we thank him for his exhaustive report.
The Working Group and its very able Chairman
deserve our high appreciation.

Mr. Foreign Minister, your return to the Council
within a few months to revisit the conflicts in Africa
demonstrates your commitment to bringing about a
difference in the lives across that embattled
continent - a difference, as against indifference; an
impetus for action, as against inaction; a fresh look at
the state of affairs, as against a routine sense of
resolutions and statements. This is in consonance with
the kind of vibrant leadership that Singapore and
Ambassador Kishore Mahbubani have been providing
this Council this month.

We are particularly pleased that the dialogue has
included Ambassador Ivan Simonovie, President of the
Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC), a sister body
that shares so many ofthe tasks of the Security Council
in conflict prevention, if not resolution. We also
welcome the participation of Ambassador Amadou
Kebe and Mr. Ibrahima Fall and thank them for their
thought-provoking statements.

Sadly, Africa remains a conflict-ridden continent.
A dozen African countries are experiencing active
conflict, and many others are showing signs of
instability. That reality persists despite numerous
resolutions and statements, sanctions and special
missions. The Council has been spending about three
quarters of its time on African issues. While it has not
had the kind of success for which we had hoped, a
modicum of progress has been made. Peace has been
restored in Eritrea, Ethiopia, Sierra Leone and Angola,
but the quest for peace in the Great Lakes region and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Burundi and
Rwanda remains elusive.

West Africa remains fragile. There is instability
in Liberia, and threats of spillover into neighbouring
countries are real. Somalia has yet to find stability
within and peace with its neighbours. Sudan has
remained entangled in a civil war for two decades.
Guinea-Bissau and the Central African Republic are
tottering in post-conflict peace-building. Western
Sahara languishes in an apparently intractable dispute.
Each of these issues is dealt with as an individual item
by the Council, and rightly so. All of them have unique
historical legacies, dimensions and factors. All of them
require specific responses, and, if the conflicts are not
resolved, the Council must share a part of the
responsibility.

The Working Group should not become a "back
burner" for unresolved conflicts. Its existence should
not mean that the Council can become complacent or
that it can relinquish any of its primary responsibilities.
Africa's problems are all too real. That is so evident as
to require no further study or analysis.

Let me cite an example: the case of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. For the past few
years, the Council has, under Chapter VII, been asking
foreign forces to withdraw from the country's territory.
Most of the Democratic Republic of the Congo's allies
have withdrawn, but at least one of its adversaries is
maintaining some 40,000 troops 2,000 kilometres
inside the country. Here, as in the Middle East, the
Council has failed to secure compliance with its
mandatory resolutions. The international community
acted elsewhere to restore the sovereignty of fellow
Member States subjected to military aggression. The
Democratic Republic of the Congo has not been
favoured with such action. The country's resources are
still being plundered. The Council-mandated expert
panel has reported its findings and conclusions. The
nexus between conflict and plunder has been exposed
and names have been named, yet the tragedy continues
unabated.

I should like to make a few comments on the ad
hoc Working Group's mandate. First, with regard to
monitoring the implementation of Council decisions,
we are of the view that the Working Group should take
care to avoid duplicating the work of the Secretariat,
that of the regional and subregional offices of the
United Nations and that of the Special Representatives
and Representatives of the Secretary-General. In our
understanding, it is the Secretariat's responsibility to
ensure the implementation of Council decisions.
Monitoring effective follow-up is also a Secretariat
competence. The Secretary-General has in place the
necessary instruments - Special Representatives,
Representatives and Officers - and, when necessary,
sends special missions such as inter-agency teams. The
reports submitted by the Secretary-General, the
briefings provided by the Secretariat, the monthly
working luncheons, the annual retreats and other
meetings should provide the Council with the
necessary information, analysis and recommendations
for Council action. There is, therefore, a need for the
Group to be innovative in discharging this task and to
avoid duplication.

Secondly, with respect to enhancing cooperation
and coordination with the Economic and Social
Council, we note that the Working Group plans to meet
with the Economic and Social Council bureau on that
question. Before embarking on such an exercise, it
would perhaps be pertinent to determine whether
anything has been going wrong. One needs to find out
if the Secretariat, the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council have identified any lack
of cooperation, unnecessary duplication, encroachment
or inattention.

Thirdly, concerning the examination of regional
and cross-country conflict issues, ample research and
studies have already been carried out on that matter. In
addition, there are the reports of the Inter-Agency Task
Force. Should the Council need further input, it could
consider studies published by think tanks such as the
International Crisis Group (ICG), the Carnegie
Foundation, the Institute for Policy Analysis (IPA) and
other regional and research centres. In recent years, the
Council has been engaging increasingly in interaction
with think tanks, as well as with non-governmental
organizations. While on the Council, Bangladesh found
such encounters involving seminars, symposia and
other formal meetings to be extremely useful. A
seminar on a regional approach held under the
Colombian presidency was also appreciated. We
thought such exchanges contributed usefully to
decision-making in the Council.

Fourthly, with regard to cooperation with the
Organization of African Unity (OAU), the Secretary-
General has established a forum that has proved useful,
the annual high-level meeting with regional
organizations. The ad hoc Working Group should take
care that it does not duplicate that work. The Working
Group could indeed perform a most useful role and add
value to the Council's work by acting as a conduit
between it and the world beyond. It should - and we
are certain that it will - spur the Council to lead rather
than to react. We are confident that the prodigious
qualities of Ambassador Koonjul will make that
possible. It is our hope that the Group will help focus
on action rather than on rhetoric, and also that it will
assist in throwing a spotlight on the root causes of
conflict.
In addressing Africa's conflict, we need not
reinvent the wheel. Rather, we should revisit the
Secretary-General's April 1998 report (S/l998/318) on
the causes of conflict and the promotion of durable
peace and sustainable development in Africa. We
should take action to implement the recommendations,
some of which have been also endorsed in Security
Council resolutions. In a globalizing world,
interdependence is no longer an abstract mantra. Asia
is not that far from Africa, nor is any other continent.

In April 1998, in the report that we have just
cited, the Secretary-General stated,

"... African leaders have failed the peoples of
Africa; the international community has failed
them; the United Nations has failed them."
(5/1998/318, para. 5)

Those words were more a wake-up call than an
admonition. Four years have elapsed since then. Let
this interactive meeting be an impetus to reversing this
state of affairs.

