Mr. Swe (Myanmar): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today's open debate. It is
most timely that the Council is considering this
important issue following the publication of the recent
report by the Secretary-General (S/2010/ 181). I would
also like to join previous speakers in thanking the
Secretary-General's Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Coomaraswamy, the
Assistant-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations and the Deputy Executive Director of
UNICEF for their vital contributions to the protection
of children and for their comprehensive briefings this
morning.

Despite the commitment of the international
community to addressing this issue, children are still
becoming targets and being used in many armed
conflicts. In that regard, we must adopt a strategy that
addresses the root causes of armed conflicts. That
requires promoting sustainable development, poverty
eradication, national reconciliation, the rule of law and
the protection of human rights in order to achieve
positive results in conflict prevention and enhancing
the protection of children.

The Myanmar Government has been seriously
addressing the issue of under-age recruitment into the
armed forces. Under the Myanmar Defence Services
Act of 1959, a person cannot be enlisted in the armed
forces until he has attained the age of 18. Those who
do not conform to the minimum-age requirement are
discharged from the armed forces. We have in place a
directorate that oversees military recruitment
regulations, orders and directives. But in some cases,
underage children who profess to be older or who have
no official birth certificate or other documents have
slipped into the military. We have therefore also put in
place stringent scrutiny at various stages of the
recruiting, training and post-training periods. As a
result, a total of 344 persons were discharged from the
armed forces between 2004 and 2009.

With regard to the reintegration process, in 2009
a total of 100 children were returned to their respective
guardians. While underage children were discharged,
punitive actions were taken against military personnel
who failed to abide by existing recruitment rules and
regulations. In 2009, such punitive actions were taken
against 36 military personnel.

With regard to the action plan, my Government is
closely cooperating with the United Nations country
team in order to finalize it by updating our existing
plan.

On the advocacy and awareness-raising front, the
Myanmar Government, in cooperation with UNICEF
and international non-governmental organizations
(NGOs), has been conducting seminars and workshops
for military and police personnel and social workers on
the subject of preventing the recruitment of underage
children. The Government is also working closely with
UNICEF and international NGOs to raise general
public awareness on preventing underage recruitment.
We strongly believe that such regular training and
advocacy programmes will widen the scope of
knowledge on those important subjects.

Moreover, through a high-level committee, we
have established a mechanism on the prevention of the
military recruitment of underage children. The
committee has been providing periodic reports to the
Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on a regular basis. The Secretary-General's
report has recognized the concrete steps taken by my
Government. Myanmar will continue its support for
and full cooperation with the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the United
Nations country team.

My delegation would like to state categorically
that Myanmar is not a country in a situation of armed
conflict. Due to the Government's national
reconciliation efforts, 17 armed groups have already
returned to the legal fold and the people are enjoying
unprecedented peace and stability in almost all corners
of the country. In that regard, we are of the view that it
is no longer relevant to discuss the situation of
Myanmar under the thematic issue of children and
armed conflict.

While the Government of Myanmar is sincerely
and seriously addressing the issue of the recruitment of
underage children, we very much regret that our
national army, the Tatmadaw Kyi, is still listed under
annex I of the Secretary-General's report. We strongly
feel that, given our Government's endeavours to put in
place the necessary rules, regulations and directives to
prohibit the recruitment of underage children, the
inclusion of the Tatmadaw Kyi on that list is grossly
misleading. My delegation would therefore like to urge
that the progress achieved by the Government be duly
recognized and that our national army be removed
from the list in future reports.

In my conclusion, I would like to say that
Myanmar culture and tradition do not support the use
of children in armed conflict. The Government is
therefore determined to continue to work closely with
the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and with the United Nations country
team on this issue. We expect that Myanmar will be
de-listed from future reports of the Secretary-General
on children and armed conflict.

