Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): It is extremely
good to see you here today, Mr. President. A welcome
also goes to the members of the Monitoring
Mechanism, and thanks go to Ambassador Ryan for his
very useful and comprehensive introduction to the
debate.

It is right that the Council should be having this
open debate today. The length ofthe speakers list alone
testifies to the growing interest in the situation in
Angola both in and outside the Council.

As the representative of Sweden will say later in
the debate on behalf of the European Union - a
statement that we fully support and subscribe to - we
are all anxious to see a lasting peace in Angola and an
end to the dire humanitarian and economic situation in
the country, which itself has caused horrendous
suffering and has contributed to instability in the whole
region. More effective sanctions must be an important
element ofa solution. The pressure on Savimbi must be
maintained.

But there is also much to do in terms of
development, governance and dialogue among the
people of Angola. We very much welcome the
initiative taken by the Secretary-General in asking
Mr. Ibrahim Gambari, his Special Adviser for Africa,
to take a special interest in the situation in Angola. We
call on all parties to the conflict to make every effort to
assist him in his task. We look forward in particular to
Mr. Gambari's next visit to Luanda later in the year,
and we hope he will have a warm, fruitful and open-
minded reception.

The remainder of my statement will focus on
sanctions and the report of the Monitoring Mechanism.
The United Kingdom very much welcomes the report.
The Mechanism has worked hard and methodically
over the past few months to produce a detailed
document. Its findings on continuing violations of the
United Nations sanctions against UNITA are extremely
disturbing. The United Kingdom greatly welcomes the
Mechanism's endorsement of a concept of a global
certification scheme for rough diamonds.

Let me emphasize our strong support for last
year's General Assembly resolution on conflict
diamonds, which the United Kingdom co-sponsored,
and our commitment to participating fully in
international efforts to take this important work
forward as a matter of priority. We want to see a
simple, workable international framework in place at
an early date, one which protects the legitimate
diamond trade and enhances its reputation while
dealing a deathblow to the illicit trade.

We note the Mechanism's recommendation that a
continuous system of sanctions monitoring should be in
place. We would support the creation of a dedicated
capacity within the United Nations Secretariat to assist
the sanctions committees and the Security Council in
their work to ensure maximum effectiveness and
implementation of sanctions. If there is to be a
permanent monitoring mechanism, as Ambassador
Levitte has suggested, it is vital that it should be
properly resourced and staffed, with expertise in
monitoring, implementation and enforcement. We have
put forward proposals for the creation of a database of
alleged sanctions violations and a database of experts
who can advise the Secretariat on all aspects of
sanctions, including the specific areas I have just
mentioned.

We also fully support the Mechanism's
recommendations that the sanctions Committee should
continually update the list of senior UNITA officials
and adult family members. It goes without saying that
for this measure to be effective, it will be necessary for
the Government of Angola to provide regular
information to the Committee, to expand the list and to
remove the names of those who appear on the list but
have committed themselves to the implementation of
the Lusaka Protocol.

As others have said, the report usefully identifies
a number of individuals and companies involved in
sanctions violations, and a number of countries from
whose territories such violations are taking place. The
United Kingdom will look very seriously at any hint
that United Kingdom citizens and companies might be
involved in violating sanctions, and will investigate
fully where necessary. We would urge other Member
States to do the same and to ensure that violation of
United Nations sanctions is a criminal offence in their
domestic legislation.

We are alarmed by the malign role played by
individuals such as Victor Bout in the illicit arms-
supply chain. His name, for one, seems to crop up
again and again. We call on the Governments of all
Member States to ensure that their territory is not being
used as a base for the operations of such people. As I
have said before around this table, there should be no
sanctuary for sanctions-busters.

In conclusion, the United Kingdom welcomes the
adoption of Security Council resolution 1336 (2001),
extending the Mechanism's mandate for a further three
months. We call on members of the Mechanism to use
this time to probe further into all aspects of sanctions-
busting. It is important in this context to identify
specific instances of possible sanctions violations. The
Mechanism must leave no stone unturned to focus the
international spotlight on the dark and murky world of
sanctions-busting.

