Mr. Mahmassani (spoke in Arabic): I wish at the
outset to thank you, Mr. President, for inviting the
League of Arab States to participate in this meeting. I
welcome the presence in the Council Chamber today of
His Excellency Mr. Dileita Mohamed Dileita, Prime
Minister of Djibouti. I thank the Permanent
Representative of Eritrea for his statement and the
representative of Department of Political Affairs for his
briefing.

The Security Council is meeting today to
consider a new crisis confronting the Horn of Africa.
Since February, the Government of Djibouti has
reported to the League of Arab States concerning a
gradual massing of Eritrean troops along the border
between the two countries, including fortifications and
trenches and encroachments by Eritrean soldiers on
Djibouti's side of the border, overlooking Red Sea
shipping lanes.

Following a letter from the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and International Cooperation of the Republic
of Djibouti addressed to the Secretary-General of the
League of Arab States with a View to addressing the
tensions between Djibouti and Eritrea by peaceful
means, the League sent a fact-finding mission to the
Ras Doumeira area in the Republic of Djibouti, whose
visit occurred from 9 to 11 May 2008, in order to seek
a settlement of the crisis. The mission met with
officials in Djibouti and sought a meeting with officials
in Eritrea, but the Eritrean side did not respond to its
request.

The Council of the League of Arab States met on
12 June to discuss the situation between Djibouti and
Eritrea. It adopted a decision which stressed the
importance of respect for Djibouti's sovereignty and
territorial integrity and rejected any aggression against
that country. It called upon Eritrea to withdraw its
forces immediately from the border with Djibouti. The
Council of the League renewed its call for respect for
the principle of good-neighbourliness between the two
countries and respect for the post-colonial borders. It
called upon the Secretary-General of the League of
Arab States and the Arab Peace and Security Council to
continue their efforts to deal with the issue, and it
mandated the League secretariat to undertake necessary
contacts with the Government of Eritrea with a View to
addressing the situation, easing the tension and ending
the confrontation along the border between the two
neighbouring countries.

The current situation along the border between
Djibouti and Eritrea is a source of concern, because
there are many potential repercussions. A crisis of this
kind cannot be resolved by military means or by the
use or threat of use of force. The only way to resolve
the crisis is through peaceful negotiations between the
parties concerned to find a solution. The territorial
integrity and stability of States must be respected, and
Arab-African cooperation must be deepened.

We call on the parties to show restraint and to
take no measures to escalate the situation. A peaceful
outcome to the crisis requires the parties to commit to
implementing the agreements between them, to
18
maintain good-neighbourly relations, and to refrain
from intervening in each other's affairs.

The Horn of Africa continues to experience
numerous upheavals and instability. It certainly does
not need any new such situations. The crisis must
therefore be addressed and contained expeditiously. We
believe that the role of the Security Council, the main
body responsible for international peace and security,
is pivotal in that regard.

