Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in French): Mr. President, I would like to thank
and congratulate your country for having convened this
important meeting. Your presence today among us is a
testament to the importance that Cote d'Ivoire attaches
to peacebuilding.

(spoke in Spanish)

We also welcome the presence of Secretary-General
Antonio Guterres. We thank him and Mr. Moussa Faki
Mahamat for their briefings.

In 1992, the term "peacebuilding" appeared for the
first time in Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali's
report "An Agenda for Peace" (S/24111), which defined
it in its paragraph 21 as "action to identify and support
structures which will tend to strengthen and solidify
peace in order to avoid a relapse into conflict", with
the goal of overcoming the devastating effects of war
and armed conflict and building peace processes. That
launched one of most important and pivotal undertakings
of our Organization, one aimed at strengthening post-
conflict States. Peacebuilding is indeed a key tool, in
the framework of ownership and accountability on the
part ofMember States, for addressing, in an appropriate
manner, challenges pertaining to the restoration of State
order, the rehabilitation of administrative structures,
the restoration of domestic security and the rule of law,
and, of course, development.

On the other hand, to fully build peace, it is
necessary to address the root and structural causes
of conflict. It is also pivotal to foster a common
understanding of the factors that trigger conflict,
sharing information garnered from early-warning
mechanisms regarding potential conflict, devising
conflict-prevention mechanisms, coordinating joint
actions and ensuring mutual support throughout the
various stages of conflict response and management.

As we have stated on several occasions, cooperation
with regional and subregional organizations is key. The
relevance of such cooperation is reflected in the work
of the African Union, through the Peace and Security
Council and subregional organizations, as their efforts
have made possible significant progress in conflict
prevention, which is facilitated when such bodies share
with the United Nations their views on the situation and
in so doing promote a better understanding of a crisis
and a unified approach to its settlement.

We believe that the process of the institutionalization
of such cooperation should continue in order to
ensure fluid communication that allows for direct
consultations, better coordination of early-warning
mechanisms, conflict analysis and common strategies
developed on the basis of comparative advantages.

Peacebuilding is closely tied to the important
links between good practices, lessons learned and the
strengthening of interactive dialogue and coordination
between the General Assembly, the Security Council
and the Peacebuilding Commission. We are in full
agreement with the strategic plan devised by the
Peacebuilding Support Office, which is aimed at
ensuring that complementarity among peace and
security initiatives, national ownership and gender
and youth inclusivity, at all levels, form vital building
blocks in the elaboration of a strategic partnership in
the quest for effectiveness and flexibility, with a view
to bringing about lasting peace.

In our view, our Organization and the international
community as a whole has learned an important
lesson: that of Cote d'Ivoire. In that country it has been
demonstrated that peacekeeping operations can achieve
their goals in a context where the host Government is a
reliable partner that is deeply committed to upholding
its responsibility towards the citizens whom it serves
and to whom it has a duty - making it clear, of course,
that peacekeeping operations cannot substitute for
national political will or national efforts to overcome
the problems that triggered the conflict.

We would underscore the fact that in recent years
Cote d'Ivoire has made tangible progress on all fronts
owing in large part to the efforts of its citizens, with
the support of the United Nations and other partners.
The political climate has stabilized following three
peaceful electoral processes, allowing for economic
growth and for all citizens to share in the dividends
of peace, and strengthening the processes of security-
sector reform and of the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of former combatants into civil
society. We also underscore the importance of ongoing
efforts to promote reconciliation and social cohesion,
so as to enhance citizens' perception of the security
forces deployed in their communities, which is a crucial
element at the post-conflict stage.

We agree that there can be no development without
peace or peace without development. We therefore
believe that it is vital that the international community
as a whole pool and redouble its efforts to bolster
synergies between peacekeeping and peacebuilding
activities when necessary, in the framework of the
relevant remits, in order to achieve our fundamental goal
of the maintenance of lasting peace in the framework of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.

To conclude, we would stress that lasting peace
should be sustained through the use of political tools
in order to reach negotiated solutions. We strongly
urge that efforts to achieve peace be made by means of
multilateral mechanisms, in strict accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations.

