Mr. Frommelt (Liechtenstein): We thank you,
Sir, for organizing this important and timely open
debate and for distributing an excellent concept paper.
We also commend the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Children and Armed Conflict and
her Office for their dedication in advancing the work of
the United Nations on that topic.

Liechtenstein has been actively involved in the
efforts of the United Nations to address the plight of
children affected by armed conflict since the very
beginning. As a member of the group of friends of
children affected by armed conflict, we will continue to
do so and view this open debate as a further step that
should lead to a substantive new resolution and
towards a future agreement on the use of targeted
measures against those responsible for the worst
violations.

Security Council resolution 1612 (2005)
established a monitoring and reporting mechanism for
serious violations of the rights of the child at the field
level, as well as a Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict here in New York. While that decision
has already proven its positive effects on the ground, it
is important to maintain the political momentum and to
further develop and enhance tools aimed at improving
the safety and security of children affected by armed
conflict. As foreseen in resolution 1612 (2005), the
monitoring and reporting mechanism provides reliable
information on situations listed in annexes I and II of
the reports of the Secretary-General, including the
recruitment and use of child soldiers, the killing and
maiming of children, rape and other grave sexual
Violence against children, attacks against schools and
hospitals, the abduction of children and the denial of
humanitarian access.

However, only one of those six grave
violations - the recruitment and use of child
soldiers - currently triggers the inclusion of countries
in the annexes of the reports. We therefore reiterate our
call to treat all six types of grave Violations on an equal
basis as triggers for inclusion in the annexes of the
Secretary-General's reports. The current differentiated
treatment of those violations is, in fact, difficult to
understand in the light of the universality of human
rights and the principles of international humanitarian
law.

Any measures taken by the Working Group in
response to grave violations of the rights of the child
have to be complemented by effective enforcement.
One option worth considering in that regard is the
expansion of the Working Group's mandate to
recommend targeted measures, including arms
embargoes, bans on military assistance and the
imposition of travel restrictions on individuals.

With regard to the working methods of the
Council's Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict, we are concerned by the slowdown in the
publication of the Working Group's conclusions. While
in 2007 conclusions were published at intervals of two
to three months, this year we have not seen any
conclusions since February. We understand that the
procedural issues that led to the delay have been solved
and expect more conclusions to be adopted during the
second half of this year.

Liechtenstein also supports the recommendation
of the Secretary-General, contained in his last report to
the Council (S/2007/757), to refer to the International
Criminal Court (ICC) for investigation and prosecution
the Violations of the rights of children that fall within
the Court's jurisdiction.

Incidentally, this open debate coincides with the
tenth anniversary of the adoption of the Rome Statute,
and anniversary activities are under way in parallel to
the discussions in the Council Chamber. It is therefore
most appropriate to recall that the Rome Statute of the
ICC, among many other significant advances in the
area of international criminal justice, also set a
milestone for the fight to end impunity for massive
Violations of the rights of children. The specific
references to sexual violence and the conscription and
enlistment of child soldiers in articles 7 and 8 of the
Rome Statute concerning crimes against humanity and
war crimes must be highlighted in that connection.

The practical work of the ICC, in particular with
respect to the situations in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and in northern Uganda, has already had a
positive impact on the ground and is setting important
precedents. When the first trial commences, hopefully
later this year, the fight against the involvement of
children in armed conflicts will gain additional
prominence and draw even stronger international
attention.

The ICC is therefore playing a supportive role in
many areas where the Council has been actively
engaged for many years. Other examples are the
protection of civilians and the issue of sexual violence
against women and girls in armed conflict, recently
addressed specifically in resolution 1820 (2008). The
ICC's role is independent, but also complementary to
the mandate given to the Security Council and in
keeping with the purposes of the Charter of the United
Nations. We therefore hope that the Council will
continue to give political backing to the ICC in
carrying out its mandate under the Rome Statute.

