Mr. Adamu (Nigeria): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening this very important and timely
debate. I would like to thank Mr. Nicholas Haysom for
his briefing and Ambassador Tanin for a very perceptive
outlook on his country's progress.

Afghanistan continues to make significant progress
towards post-conflict recovery. The appointment
of all ministers and the formalization of the Office
of the Chief Executive and other key offices are
notable achievements. Indeed, the development and
implementation of lOO-day plans for each ministry
have certainly given the necessary momentum to the
realization of the national objectives. That progress can
be given further impetus by the Government with an
acceleration of its reform agenda. We welcome President
Ghani Ahmadzai's efforts in not only advancing the
rights of Afghan women but also empowering them. No
less significant is his steadfast commitment to electoral
reform, which is essential to the long-term peace and
security of the country. The Government's decision to
restore the faith of the people in the democratic process
is highly commendable. In our view, the establishment
of the Commission on Electoral Reform signals an
intent to address fundamental issues of governance
in consonance with the provisions of the political
agreement of 21 September 2014.

In addition to electoral reforms, we believe that
transparency, accountability and inclusive governance
are other dimensions that must be addressed in order
to achieve enduring peace and security in Afghanistan.
That must go hand in hand with the promotion of
economic growth in order to effectively address the
prevailing economic situation. Challenges, such as
institutional capacity and structural deficiencies, can
be more readily surmounted with the assistance of the
international community. That is why we are encouraged
by the agreement on the International Monetary Fund
programme designed to secure the Government longer-
term access to financial support. We know that some
progress has been made in developing the private sector.
However, more effort is required to promote vibrant
entrepreneurial activity. In addition to international
assistance, the private sector must also play a part in the
economic recovery of Afghanistan. Foreign investment
will be vital to stimulating economic growth in the
country. The Government should therefore exert more
effort towards improving the investment climate in
order to attract more foreign capital.

Political and economic activities can thrive only in a
peaceful environment. We are therefore encouraged by
the recent NATO initiatives to ensure continuous support
for the Afghan National Security Forces post-2015. We
expect that it will stand the Forces in good stead and
gradually build their capacity to successfully respond
to security threats. Yesterday's violence and the attack
on the Parliament Building today only endanger lives
and widen the gap between negotiation, inclusiveness
and the use of force. As the Afghan National Security
Forces strive to ensure peace throughout the country,
we call on anti-Government elements to refrain from
attacks that deliberately target civilians, to lay down
their weapons and to respond positively to President
Ghani Ahmadzai's offer to negotiate an inclusive peace
in the higher interests of the country.

Illicit drug production and trafficking in Afghanistan
remain a major concern. It is not only a major source of
terrorist financing, but its links with criminal activities
also undermine the rule of law. Nigeria commends
the efforts of the Afghan law-enforcement agencies
to eradicate drug crops; those efforts have been
strengthened by the improved coordination of efforts
among law-enforcement agencies and the improved
capability of the police to conduct operations. We are
encouraged by the success of the border liaison offices
in the seizure of narcotics, but believe that more can
be accomplished to strengthen those gains with the
support of the international community.

On regional cooperation, we welcome the active
engagement of Afghanistan with its neighbours,
especially in overcoming counter-terrorism challenges
and combating trafficking in drugs, arms and
humans and organized crime. We also welcome the
activities under the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process.
Both developments reaffirm the commitment of
regional partners to Afghanistan's stability, economic
development, territorial integrity and sovereignty. It is
our expectation that the discussions centred on regional
cooperation will address both security challenges
and the Afghan peace process and will also prioritize
regional economic activity as part of collective security.
Through that cooperation, the international community
has demonstrated its commitment to and support for
peace and prosperity in Afghanistan.

Afghanistan stands at the threshold of transformation.
The international community must be eternally
vigilant to make certain that the transformation is to
peace, security and, indeed, genuine reconciliation
and development. In that formidable endeavour, we
commend Special Representative Nicholas Haysom for
his inspiring leadership ofthe United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan. The Mission staff's distinctive
accomplishments and invaluable contribution to the
concerted global efforts to restore democracy, peace
and stability in Afghanistan will endure eternally.

