Mr. Park (Republic of Korea): At the outset, Sir, let
me congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council for the month of April. We look forward to
benefiting from your vast experience and wisdom as you
direct the affairs of the Council during your tenure. I should
also like to pay tribute to last month's President,
Ambassador Legwaila, for his outstanding efforts in guiding
the Council through its agenda in March.

My delegation believes that the situation in
Afghanistan clearly warrants the continued concern and
attention of the Security Council, given the unabated
military hostilities among the warring factions, the
worsening humanitarian situation in Afghanistan, its
geopolitical significance and its potential impact on
international peace and security. In this context, today's
open debate, initiated by the President of the Security
Council, is both timely and crucial.

After reviewing the 3 April 1996 report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan, we
cannot but express our disappointment and serious concern
at the continuation of a brutal civil war that has been with
us for 16 years now. This conflict is certainly not going to
produce any winners. It has only brought and will continue
to bring further devastation to an already war-ravaged and
dilapidated country, and will bring additional tragic human
suffering to the Afghan people.

We are particularly concerned by the assessment of
the United Nations Special Mission that most of the
warring factions in Afghanistan are still not genuinely
interested in peaceful, political negotiation, but continue
to seek a military upper hand at the cost of countless
human lives and terrible economic and social
consequences. The reported military preparations of the
Afghan Government and the Taliban for a major battle for
the control of Kabul are especially disturbing.

In addition to having a direct impact on the people
and the country of Afghanistan, continued armed
hostilities and a persistent anarchic environment over such
a long period of time will also further such criminal
activities as international terrorism and illicit trafficking
in arms and narcotics. This undoubtedly undermines the
stability of the entire region and beyond.

My delegation looks to Mr. Mahmoud Mestiri, Head
of the Special Mission, for his continued leadership and
vital role in pursuing efforts towards national
reconciliation and reconstruction in Afghanistan.

Mr. Mestiri's extensive, ongoing consultations and
meetings with Afghan factional leaders and senior
officials of other interested Governments should be
commended and further encouraged. We reiterate our full
support for the strengthened role of the United Nations
Special Mission and look forward to any measurable
progress towards a cessation of armed hostilities between
the warring parties and, ultimately, a comprehensive
political settlement.

We strongly urge all the Afghan parties concerned
to cooperate fully with the United Nations Special
Mission, lay down their arms and join together in
peaceful dialogue, in particular with a view to establishing
a fully representative and broad-based authoritative
council without delay.

We should also like to take this opportunity to
acknowledge and express our sincere appreciation for the
outstanding efforts of humanitarian agencies, in particular
the International Committee of the Red Cross. They have
been providing essential humanitarian relief to the Afghan
civilian population under extremely trying circumstances.
In this regard, we also urge the parties concerned not to
hinder the movement of these vital humanitarian supplies.

Another major area of concern identified in the
Secretary-General's report is that of escalating foreign
interference in Afghan affairs. This unwelcome

 

involvement, both military and political, only complicates
the peace process and intensifies the military confrontation
and animosity among the warring factions.

In this context, we agree with the Secretary-General's
View that this question should be addressed at the
international level, and we therefore believe that the idea of
convening an international conference on this matter
deserves further attention.

It is our conviction that national reconciliation and
rehabilitation in Afghanistan cannot be imposed by the
United Nations or any other benign outside force. It is
ultimately up to the parties themselves to ease the suffering
of the Afghan people and begin to rebuild their shattered
country.

