Mr. Karev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): First, I congratulate Judge Meron and the
current permanent judges of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) on their re-
election to new terms, as well as the two new
permanent judges of the ICTY. The results of the
elections show that the Member States of the United
Nations have an understanding of the wishes of the
ICTY judges. I also express our gratitude to the
Presidents and the Prosecutors of both Tribunals for
their extremely comprehensive briefings on the annual
reports.

The attention the Security Council has given to
the activities of the Tribunals, including consideration
of the implementation of the completion of strategies
for their work pursuant to resolution 1534 (2004), is
yielding positive results. In our assessment, over the
past year both Tribunals have clearly intensified their
implementation of the completion strategies as set out
in resolutions 1503 (2003) and 1534 (2004). Internal
reforms are under way to enhance effectiveness and to
speed up the handling of cases. Efforts are being made
to strengthen the capacities of the court systems of the
relevant States, with a View to subsequently
transferring to them for prosecution the mid- and low-
level leaders responsible for the commission of crimes
within the jurisdiction of the ICTY and the ICTR. We
welcome the Tribunals' efforts and the practical steps
taken to transfer cases to national courts.

As previously noted, one of the key conditions
for successful implementation of the completion
strategies for the work of the Tribunals is ensuring
States" full cooperation with the Tribunals. That does
not involve just the arrest and transfer to the Tribunal
of indicted individuals. It is also important to ensure
compliance with all State obligations stemming from
the Statutes of the Tribunals and the relevant Security
Council resolutions, including granting access to
witnesses, records and other evidence of decisive
importance.

We cannot fail to express concern at the
outstanding problems related to the financing of the
work of the Tribunals. As was pointed out by Judge
Meron, this year Russia paid in full its assessment to
the ICTY. We owe no debts to the Tribunal. The
Russian Federation calls upon other States to follow
that example. The significant gap between the
approved budget and Member States' payments of
assessed contributions is becoming a serious hindrance
to implementation of the completion strategies for the
activities of the ICTY and the ICTR by the deadlines
set out in resolutions 1503 (2003) and 1534 (2004), as
has been mentioned by most Council members.

In conclusion, I should to assure the Presidents of
the Tribunals that it is the view of the Russian
Federation that the successful implementation of the
Tribunals' completion strategies means that all of those
indicted will be tried. All those accused must be tried.

