Mr. Safaei (Islamic Republic of Iran): The
Security Council today heard the representative of a
main sponsor of State terrorism, the occupying Power
in the Palestinian territory, make some unacceptable,
fake remarks addressed to my country, the same
baseless remarks that have been repeated here ad
infinitum. Indeed, it should come as no surprise that
the representative of a terror regime that has been well
known as such from its very inception has accused a
nation that has witnessed the loss of more than 17,000
of its citizens during the past 35 years, a large number
of whom have fallen victim to heinous terrorist attacks
directly sponsored by elements of that regime. We
all remember the well-known example of the Iranian
nuclear scientists brutally killed before the terrified
eyes of their family members.

The brutalization of peoples under foreign
occupation constitutes the gravest form of terrorism.
We do not believe that there is any doubt that this
regime is responsible for aggression; occupation; the
killing of civilians, including women and children;
the crime of genocide; crimes against humanity; war
crimes and other criminal acts, as well as for turning
millions of Palestinian inhabitants into refugees, far
from their homeland. Its network of State terrorism has
a long list of deadly operations all over the world, and
they continue to threaten more killing.

I should like also to react to the unfounded
allegations levelled against my country by the
Ambassador of Saudi Arabia this morning at this
meeting of the Council, allegations that I categorically
reject. This was an attempt by Saudi Arabia to distract
international attention from the main source of the
threat in our region, namely, terrorists and extremist

groups inspired by the takfiri ideology, especially
Da'esh. Saudi Arabia's rhetoric against Iran can only
serve the perpetrators of crimes against the Palestinians
and those committed by violent extremists.

The Ambassador of Saudi Arabia falsely accused
Iran of destabilizing the region by interfering in the
domestic affairs ofthe States ofthe region, but, in fact, it
is the exclusionist ideology projected across the Islamic
world for decades from within Saudi Arabia that has
inspired the most destructive forces in the Middle East.
We know who supported the Taliban and who the many
elements are who make up the leadership and the rank
and file of Al-Qaida and Da'esh, and from whom they
have received financial assistance for many years.
Another destabilizing factor is the attempts by Saudi
Arabia to marginalize certain population groups. We
see this approach both within Saudi Arabia and in some
countries of the region, which leads to sectarianism.
This approach has led to Saudi military intervention in
Yemen, with severe humanitarian consequences, and an
attempt to impose its will on certain other countries to
marginalize the population groups that they do not like.
While Iran has never invaded any country, Saudi Arabia
has invaded two of its neighbours over the past several
years to put down uprisings. Saudi Arabia should halt
its sectarian policies and work towards re-establishing
security and stability in the region.

Iran has been present and active in the fight against
terrorist and extremist groups in the region. We have
first of all secured our borders to prevent any movement
to or from the areas controlled by these groups. In many
cases, Iranian officials have stopped and apprehended
individuals who tried to use Iranian territory to cross
over or send material assistance to terrorists. We will
continue our resolute fight to help stop this threat.

The meeting rose at 7.55 pm.
