Mr. Mahmassani (spoke in Arabic): I thank you,
Sir, for convening this important debate on the role of
regional and subregional organizations in the
maintenance of international peace and security. I also
commend your delegation on assuming the presidency
of the Council this month and pay tribute to your
predecessor, the Permanent Representative of Ghana,
for his outstanding guidance of the Council's work last
month.

I would also like to welcome the presence here
today of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon.

This meeting is of special importance in that it
seeks to strengthen and activate the capacities and role
of regional and subregional organizations as major
adjuncts of the United Nations in dealing with various
international political and socio-economic issues. The
United Nations should act consistently to ensure that
the Security Council assumes its primary responsibility
in the maintenance of international peace and security.
In response to the dangers and threats facing the
international community, over the past decade the
United Nations has developed new approaches,
including, inter alia, establishing and promoting
strategic partnerships and cooperative arrangements
with regional organizations, including with the League
of Arab States, that represent an important collective
security mechanisms and play a significant role in the
prevention and settlement of disputes.
In that regard, with respect to existing
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations, the League of Arab States continues
tirelessly to promote international peace and security in
the Middle East by taking every possible step to
strengthen cooperation with the United Nations; to
promote dialogue, confidence-building measures and
the peaceful prevention and settlement of conflicts and
disputes; and, of course, to build and maintain peace in
post-conflict situations.

Based on the geographical and regional
interrelationship between the regional organizations
and the United Nations, I stress the effective role that
the League of Arab States is playing in the
maintenance of regional peace and security in
coordination with the African Union and the United
Nations. We are doing so in the context of the peace
negotiations in the Sudan, following up on and
addressing the current situation in Darfur, and of
efforts to establish peace and stability in Somalia and
the Horn ofAfrica.

The Security Council is faced with unprecedented
challenges in maintaining international peace and
security. As a result, it is vital for the Council to turn to
regional organizations to settle issues in their
respective regions and to deal with items that are on
the agenda of the Security Council. Regional
organizations should be given a participatory role in
facing the threats that jeopardize international peace
and security. For regional organizations in general and
the League of Arab States in particular to play an
effective role in maintaining international peace and
security the United Nations and the Security Council
must strengthen their partnership with those
organizations and make optimal use of the obvious
capabilities of a number of regional organizations in
dealing with and managing international crises, given
their comparative advantage and the added value that
their actions would bring regionally. There is no doubt
that marginalizing or excluding such regional
organizations would not serve to advance joint
international activities, the success of which depends
on concerted international and regional efforts.

In 1992, the Secretary-General developed a peace
plan, defining the concept of cooperation between the
United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations with the belief that this cooperation is an
effective way to strengthen United Nations capacities
in terms of preventative diplomacy, peacebuilding and
peacekeeping. The Security Council has also affirmed
the important role of the regional organizations in
maintaining international peace and security and called
upon those organizations to improve the coordination
of their efforts with those of the United Nations. Allow
me to recall here the declaration adopted in 1994 by
the General Assembly on strengthening cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
in maintaining international peace and security. Since
that time, five high-level meetings have been held
between the General Assembly and heads of regional
organizations.

In this context, we reiterate the call, launched by
the Secretary-General of the League of Arab States, for
the holding of a conference to discuss questions of
international security in the largest possible sense of
the term. That would be an opportunity to reaffirm the
protective and collective safeguarding of international
peace and to address the challenges involved. Regional
meetings would be held beforehand to prepare for the
larger conference, which could make a major
contribution to mobilizing international efforts and to
educating worldwide public opinion with respect to the
important role of the Council in the maintenance of
international peace and security.

