Mr. Heinbecker (Canada): I am grateful to
Council members for agreeing to an open debate on an
issue of profound interest not only to the membership
at large but also to the Organization itself. My
Government is deeply worried by the discussions that
have been taking place in the Security Council
concerning sweeping exemptions for peacekeepers
from prosecution from the most serious crimes known
to humanity. Issues of such potentially far-reaching
consequences need to be debated openly, not
exclusively in closed-door consultations, if their
conclusions are to carry the conviction of the
membership as a whole.

Today I would like to make three basic points, on
which I will elaborate. First, the issue at stake is larger
than the International Criminal Court (ICC);
fundamental principles of international law are in
question. Secondly, the Council has not been
empowered to rewrite treaties; the draft resolutions that
are circulating contain elements that exceed the
Council's mandate, and passage of them would
undermine the credibility of the Council. Thirdly, the
issue is not of a choice between peacekeeping and the
ICC; options exist to resolve this issue that would
provide for the continuation of United Nations
peacekeeping and that would preserve the integrity of
the international legal system and of the Rome Statute.
We respectfully submit that those options should be
used.

(spoke in French)

The United States has clearly voiced its concerns
about the International Criminal Court. We respectfully
disagree with the United States on those concerns
because of the numerous safeguards written into the
Rome Statute, including through extensive United
States input into devising checks and balances,
precisely in order to preclude politically motivated
prosecutions. None of the States parties wants a
political court.

The crimes were meticulously defined in a
manner acceptable to United States negotiators and to
all other States, with thresholds that exclude the
random and isolated acts that a peacekeeper might
conceivably commit. For example, article 8 requires
the Court to focus on war crimes "committed as part of
a plan or policy or as part of a large-scale commission
of such crimes" (A/CONF183/9, article 8, para. 1). In
addition, the Court is obliged to defer to genuine
national legal proceedings.

No one in this Chamber believes that the
democratically elected Government of the United
States and its mature legal system would turn a blind
eye to allegations of such grievous crimes. And when
the United States discharged its obligations to
investigate alleged perpetrators - and, if necessary, to
prosecute them, as it would - intervention by the
International Criminal Court would be precluded.

Nonetheless, we respect the United States
decision not to ratify the Rome Statute. No one
could - or would want to try - to force the United
States or any other United Nations Member to become
a party to the International Criminal Court. Acceding
to a treaty is a sovereign decision. The United States
Government clearly has no obligations to the Court.
That is not the issue.

(spoke in English)
At stake today are entirely different issues that
raise questions about whether all people are equal and
accountable before the law; whether everyone in the
territory of a sovereign State is subject to that State's
laws, including international laws binding on that
State; and whether States may collectively exercise
their sovereignty to prosecute perpetrators of grievous
crimes. Those principles were affirmed at Nuremberg
and have been affirmed since.

As a country with extensive experience in
peacekeeping, having participated in almost all of the
United Nations peacekeeping missions and having lost
106 servicemen and servicewomen in peacekeeping
missions - more than any other country - Canada
has no doubt that peacekeeping and peace-building are
critical to the maintenance of international peace and
security.

The current debate has been mischaracterized as a
choice between peacekeeping and the International
Criminal Court. In fact, the stakes are actually different
and even higher. Fundamental principles of
international law and the place of those principles in
the conduct of global affairs are in question.

First, in the absence of a threat to international
peace and security, the Council's passing a Chapter VII
draft resolution on the ICC of the kind currently
circulating would in our View be ultra vires.

Secondly, acting beyond its mandate would
undermine the standing and credibility of the Council
in the eyes of the membership.

Thirdly, the proposed draft resolutions currently
circulating would set a negative precedent under which
the Security Council could change the negotiated terms
of any treaty it wished - for example, the nuclear
Non-Proliferation Treaty - through a Security Council
resolution. The proposed draft resolution would
thereby undermine the treaty-making process.

Fourthly, the proposals now circulating would
have the Council, Lewis-Carroll-like, stand article 16
of the Rome Statute on its head. The negotiating
history makes clear that recourse to article 16 is on a
case-by-case basis only, where a particular situation -
for example the dynamic of a peace negotiation -
warrants a 12-month deferral. The Council should not
purport to alter that fundamental provision. Those
States that have pledged to uphold the integrity of the
Statute - especially the six States parties in the
Council - have a special responsibility in that regard.

Fifthly, passage of the proposed draft resolutions
currently circulating would send an unacceptable
message that some people - peacekeepers - are
above the law. It would thus entrench an unacceptable
double standard in international law.

Sixthly, it is worth recalling that the ICC may
only exercise jurisdiction where impunity would
otherwise result.

Let me emphasize what the effect of the draft
resolution would be. Where sending States declined to
prosecute peacekeepers alleged to have perpetrated
crimes, the proposals now circulating would assure the
alleged perpetrators of impunity from prosecution for
genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes.

For those reasons, adoption of the draft
resolutions currently circulating could place Canada -
and indeed other Members of the Organization - in
the unprecedented position of having to examine the
legality of a Security Council resolution.

The Council does not have to pursue this fraught
course of action. Solutions exist outside the ambit of
Council responsibility. The United States, as do all
countries, has several options to protect its interests
without vetoing United Nations peacekeeping missions,
which are so vital to millions of people. In considering
these options, it is perhaps helpful to recall the point
made by the Secretary-General, that for the missions in
the Balkans, the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia already has primacy over the
International Criminal Court. Also, no mandate
renewal beyond the Balkans is foreseen for a United
Nations mission operating on the territory of a State
party in which the United States has personnel
stationed.

The first option is therefore to do nothing now
because the ICC does not have jurisdiction over any
United States personnel on United Nations
peacekeeping missions.

Secondly, the absence of ICC jurisdiction
notwithstanding, the United States could simply
withdraw its forces from current missions. Their doing
so would be regrettable and would not be without
consequence, but adjustments could be made.

Thirdly, the United States could decline to
participate in future United Nations missions.

Fourthly, for all United Nations or coalition
missions, the United States could negotiate appropriate
bilateral agreements with receiving States. Doing so
would be consistent with article 98 of the Rome
Statute.
Recently, I sent a letter to all members of the
Security Council urging them not to endorse a blanket
immunity for these most serious of crimes. I
respectfully repeat that plea again today.

The proposed draft resolutions circulating avoid
the word "immunity" but in fact have precisely the
same effect as the proposal that the Security Council
would not entertain on 30 June. We appeal to members
of the Security Council to ensure that essential
principles of international law and the spirit and letter
of the Rome Statute not be compromised; that a
solution to this problem be found that preserves the
indispensable instrument of United Nations
peacekeeping; and that the unique authority of the
Council not be undermined by over-reaching.

We have just emerged from a century that
witnessed the evils of Hitler, Stalin, Pol Pot and Idi
Amin, and the Holocaust, the Rwandan genocide and
the ethnic cleansing in the former Yugoslavia. I believe
that we have all learned the fundamental lesson of that
bloodiest of centuries: impunity from prosecution for
grievous crimes must end.

We remain convinced that the concerns expressed
by the United States can be addressed in ways that do
not compromise the Court or international law or place
the Security Council in the untenable position of
permitting the possibility of impunity for genocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes.

