The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Bosnia and Herzegovina in which she requests to be invited
to participate in the discussion of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite that representative
to participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mrs.
Kalajdzisalihovie' (Bosnia and Herzegovina) took a
seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the letter
dated 7 March 1997 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council, conveying the
communication dated 7 March 1997 which he received
from the Principal Deputy High Representative for the
Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina, document S/1997/201, and the letter dated 7
March 1997 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council, attaching the executive
summary and key findings of the report prepared by the
International Police Task Force (IPTF) pursuant to the
decisions on Mostar of 12 February 1997, document
S/ 1997/204.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to documents S/l997/I40 and S/1997/183,
which contain the texts of letters dated 17 February and
3 March 1997, respectively, from the Permanent
Representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has considered the letter
of 7 March 1997, and its annex, from the Secretary-
General to the President of the Security Council
concerning the incident on 10 February 1997
involving a Violent assault against a group of
civilians attempting to visit a graveyard in West
Mostar in the presence of the United Nations
International Police Task Force (UN -IPTF), in which
one person died and others were wounded
(8/1997/201).

"The Security Council notes that the
participants in the meeting on 12 February 1997
referred to in the letter from the Secretary-General
agreed, inter alia, to request the UN-IPTF to
conduct an investigation into that incident, to accept
and endorse that report in full, and to draw the
necessary conclusions concerning the arrest, bringing
to trial and dismissal from office of those found
responsible for instigating or participating in violent
acts.

"The Security Council fully supports the
conclusions drawn from the UN-IPTF report by the
Office of the High Representative and fully
supported by the UN-IPTF, the Commander of the
Stabilization Force in Bosnia and Herzegovina and
the members of the Contact Group.

"The Security Council strongly condemns the
involvement by West Mostar police officers in the
violent assault on 10 February 1997 as referred to in
the UN-IPTF report annexed to the letter from the
Secretary-General to the President of the Security
Council of 7 March 1997 (S/I997/204).

"The Security Council also condemns the
failure of the local police to provide protection to
civilians subject to inter-ethnic attacks which
occurred throughout Mostar both before and after the
 

incident on 10 February 1997, and stresses the
importance it attaches to preventing such incidents in
the future.

"The Security Council takes note of the
announced suspension of some of the police officers
identified in the UN-IPTF report but remains deeply
concerned by the failure to date of the responsible
authorities to take all the necessary steps to implement
the conclusions drawn from that report. It strongly
condemns attempts by those authorities to place
conditions upon the arrest and prosecution of the
police officers identified in the UN-IPTF report as
having fired upon the group of civilians.

"The Security Council demands that the
responsible authorities, notably in West Mostar,
immediately implement the conclusions drawn from
the UN-IPTF report, and in particular suspend all
relevant police officers and arrest and prosecute
them without further delay. It also calls upon the
responsible authorities to investigate all police
officers involved in the incident.

"The Security Council requests the Secretary-
General to keep it informed of the situation. It will

remain actively seized of the matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1997/ 12.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The meeting rose at 1 pm.

