Ms. Jarbussynova: I wish to commend the Italian
presidency of the Security Council and the speakers who
took the floor for keeping all of us focused on this often
hidden yet unquestionably despicable offence against
human dignity. I also thank the Italian presidency for
inviting me to take the floor today.

As the world's largest regional security organization
under Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations,
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) wholeheartedly takes part in fighting
human trafficking. In that regard, I echo our strong
support to the Secretary General and the whole United
Nations system in implementing concrete steps to
strengthen the international response to counter the
crime in all its forms, wherever it occurs.

It became sadly clear how important it is for
the international community to act unanimously on
preventing, protecting from and prosecuting human
trafficking stemming from conflict around the globe. I
will not elaborate further on those loathsome practices,
or indeed on how conflict is both the cause and
consequence of heightened vulnerability for millions
around the world. Rather, I would like to focus on
two points.

First, how do we make sure we effectively remedy
the risks of trafficking stemming from conflict? How
can we foster better synergies to achieve long-lasting
results? Secondly, it is imperative that we now adopt
a multidisciplinary, cross-sectoral and transnational
approach and that we implement it unconditionally. It
should be an approach where inclusion, collaboration
and sharing of best practices become watchwords in
our combined endeavours to ensure more effective
investigations, timely prosecutions and prompt
identification of victims, especially in countries of
destination for victims of trafficking.

Drawing upon almost two years of fact-finding
missions in countries most impacted by large migratory
flows, my team and I are finalizing a report framing
the challenges and opportunities of anti-trafficking
responses at first-identification and reception facilities
for migrants and refugees in the OSCE region. We
are more convinced than ever that the establishment
of a multi-agency co-ordination mechanism would
ensure sufficient expertise to identify vulnerabilities,
facilitate information-sharing on presumed victims
of trafficking throughout their journey and guarantee
the sustainability of assistance efforts. I commend the
Governments of Italy and Greece for their enormous
efforts to date and for their readiness to promote
more-elaborated anti-trafficking responses.

Yet, we shall not limit our action to the development
of policy and legislative frameworks. We need all hands
on deck to deliver tangible responses. It thus gives
me great pride that my Office so far trained 200 law
enforcement officials, prosecutors, labour inspectors,
financial investigators and civil society representatives
from 40 countries in an intensive, innovative simulation
exercise to combat trafficking along migration routes.
That endeavour would not have been possible without
the engagement and active cooperation of the United
Nations family: the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC), the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the
International Organization for Migration, EUROPOL
and INTERPOL.

Our aim is for that format to become a role
model of international cooperation at its best. We
already have plans to translate the material from the
simulation exercises - up until now conducted only in
English - into Italian, as we are organizing simulation
exercises for Italian professionals in Vicenza at the
end of January. We are then planning to translate
it into Russian so as to engage more professionals
from OSCE participating States. I am glad that my
country, Kazakhstan, has offered its regional hub on
transnational threats to security as a venue for exercises
potentially to take place in September. We are also
translating the material into French to not only engage
OSCE representatives, but also to train representatives
from our partner countries from which large migratory
flows arrive on the European continent.

Such practical initiatives are not only necessary
to foster better synergies; they are critical if we are
to achieve long-lasting, concrete results. In terms of
the latter, I am pleased with the response of the OSCE
Special Monitoring Mission in Ukraine to the training
offered by myself and my staff on how to monitor and
report trafficking-related trends in the context of a
conflict situation. I applaud the efforts of UNODC to
develop guidelines on trafficking in persons in conflict
and post-conflict situations, and we stand ready to
support its regional implementation and evaluation.

We also dwelled on what is often a sophisticated
system of recruitment, along with a number of worrying
trends, including the steadily increasing numbers of
recruits - girls and young women - who join terrorist
organizations to serve as wives, the appearance ofmixed
forms of exploitation within terrorist organizations and
the engagement of young male and female high-school
graduates for various exploitative purposes.

That information led to the research project that
we launched in June 2017 to better understand the
links between recruitment, exploitation patterns of
traffickers and terrorist groups. With the overall
aim of preventing that new emerging form of human
trafficking, that research will detail and discuss real
cases of deceitful and forced recruitment for sexual and
labour exploitation.

Finally, given that children and unaccompanied
minors are particularly vulnerable to violence and
exploitation, we made a pledge to help enhance the
coherence of international efforts and develop more
integrated, effective and expert recommendations to
adequately respond to child trafficking in all its forms,
in line with the findings of our seventeenth high-level
Conference of the Alliance against Trafficking in
Persons, which took place last April.

I will conclude with a word on the Inter-Agency
Coordination Group against Trafficking in Persons
(ICAT). As a platform to promote synergies and advance
the global anti-trafficking agenda, I could not be more
proud that the OSCE is its first partner member. I call
upon Member States, however, to secure the necessary
funds and resources to capitalize on its demonstrated
potential. To that end, I commend the Government of
Belarus for promoting its vital role, and I look forward
to the OSCE Ministerial Council this December, where
we will jointly discuss ICAT's achievements.

I agree that human trafficking survivors should
guide our responses and actions. We cannot turn our
backs on the immense injustice and denial of dignity
that they face. As such, a human rights-centred approach
must remain the overarching principle underpinning
all our efforts. Too many human traffickers act
with impunity, as low global conviction rates sadly
demonstrate. It is high time that they were forced to
think twice before acting.

