Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): The draft resolution that the Security
Council is to adopt today reaffirms its vigorous and
comprehensive support for the people of Tajikistan on
their difficult path to peace and national reconciliation.
We note with satisfaction that the peace process in
Tajikistan has moved forward after the signing in
Moscow on 27 June 1997 of the General Agreement on
the Establishment of Peace and National Accord in
Tajikistan.

At the same time, despite the agreed timetable, there
are significant delays in the implementation of key
elements of the inter-Tajik agreement, particularly as
regards problems of reintegration, disarmament and the
disbanding of the armed units of the United Tajik
Opposition. The delays in the implementation of the

 

Protocol on military issues have led to an unjustified shift
in emphasis and a break in the sequence of steps in the
implementation of the General Agreement, with major
emphasis being placed on political aspects to the detriment
of the resolution of military issues.
Such an imbalance contradicts the logic of the
complex peace process and has become the major reason
for the dangerous complications in the situation in a number
of regions in Tajikistan. We draw the attention of the
parties to the provisions in the draft resolution before the
Security Council today that reflect the need for a balanced
approach to the implementation of the General Agreement.

The outbreak of tensions in Dushanbe and
Kofarnikhon in March and April this year, which led to
numerous casualties, demonstrated how fragile peace still
is in the country. Russia fully shares the well-known
assessments of these events made by the Security Council,
the Secretary-General and the Contact Group of Guarantor
States.

Russian leaders and the Secretary-General discussed in
detail the problems of a settlement in Tajikistan during the
Secretary-General' 5 recent visit to Moscow. The unanimous
View was expressed that there is no reasonable alternative
to the Moscow agreements: only the unconditional and
timely implementation of all the commitments undertaken
can lead to a solid national agreement in that country. The
draft resolution also calls for this.

We note that the views expressed by the members of
the Security Council and the Secretary-General are identical
regarding the need for comprehensive international support
for the peace process in Tajikistan. In this respect, an
important role is being played by the United Nations
Mission of Observers in Tajikistan (UNMOT) and by the
Contact Group. We also believe that the Joint Consultative
Group meeting of donors being organized by the World
Bank in Paris on 20 May must demonstrate the
international community's solidarity with the Tajik people
during this very difficult period and should promote the
stabilization and economic rebirth of Tajikistan.

We express our highest appreciation for the efforts of
the Secretary-General's Special Representative for
Tajikistan, Mr. Gerd Dietrich Merrem, who, unfortunately,
will soon be retiring. We hope that the Secretary-General's
new Special Representative for Tajikistan will be a worthy
successor to Mr. Merrem.

We support the Secretary-General's intention to
conclude the deployment of UNMOT and to reduce its
personnel to the level authorized by the Security Council.
We are confident that the Government of Tajikistan and
the United Tajik Opposition will carry out their
commitments to ensure the security of United Nations
personnel. We are satisfied with the excellent cooperation
between UNMOT and the Collective Peacekeeping Forces
of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS). We
reaffirm the readiness of the CIS peacekeepers to continue
to provide assistance in resolving issues with regard to the
security of the United Nations military observers, and to
resolve with the leadership of UNMOT specific issues for
taking measures in this respect. We believe that the
potential of the Collective Peacekeeping Forces could be
more effectively used to assist in the implementation of
the General Agreement in accordance with their mandate.

Russia, together with the United Nations, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the
Organization of the Islamic Conference and the member
States of the Contact Group, will in the future continue to
do all that is necessary to prevent the implementation of
the Moscow agreements from being thwarted and to
promote the stabilization of the situation and the steady
progress of the peace process in Tajikistan.

