Mr. Krokhmal (Ukraine): I would like to join
previous speakers in thanking Mr. Vieira de Mello for
his comprehensive briefing, which provided us with a
clear and objective picture of the situation in East
Timor and of the activities of the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET).

Let me begin by focusing on the matter of
involving East Timorese in the reconstruction and
administration of the territory. My delegation fully
supports UNTAET's activities in this respect, which are
very important. UNTAET has made significant
progress in establishing key elements of the civil
administration. It is clear that the active involvement of
the East Timorese in local governance is essential for
the transition of East Timor to independence. It should
remain among the main priority tasks of UNTAET. We
think that the National Consultative Council, through
which the East Timorese participate in the decision-
making process, should play a very important role in
this field. We note with satisfaction that UNTAET and
the National Council of Timorese Resistance have
agreed on a new composition and structure of the
National Consultative Council. This will certainly help
to improve the activities of the main decision-making
body in East Timor and will enhance its transparency.

Despite the fact that the general security situation
has been improved, a number of serious incidents,
including those taking place across the border, have
been reported from East Timor. We are pleased to note
that the deployment of the main part of UNTAET's
civilian police component has been completed and we
would also like to underline the fact that the civilian
police have contributed enormously to ensuring
relative security in East Timor as well as to developing
the police force. Ukraine will continue its support for
the efforts of UNTAET's civilian police aimed at
fulfilling the tasks entrusted to it by the Security
Council.

We believe that the question of refugees is central
to the reconciliation process. The safe return of
refugees from West Timor to East Timor remains one
of the main problems faced by UNTAET. We continue
to be concerned about conditions for the refugees in the
camps in West Timor and about the decreasing number
of returnees.

Turning to economic matters, poverty and
unemployment are posing serious threats to internal
stability in East Timor. The prompt implementation of
various employment-generating projects and
programmes, as well as reconstruction of the local
economic and financial sectors, are of critical
importance in terms of regaining normality in East
Timor. We would like to underline the need for
improved coordination among UNTAET, the World
Bank and all the agencies involved in the field of the
practical implementation of the reconstruction projects
and programmes.

My delegation also welcomes the East Timor
donor's meeting in Lisbon, and we are encouraged by
the conclusion of grant agreements between the World
Bank and UNTAET in the educational and agricultural
sectors.

In conclusion, I wish to pay tribute to the efforts
made by Mr. Vieira de Mello and his team, especially
in the current circumstances in which they are carrying
out their tasks.
