Mr. Wittig (Germany): At the outset, I would like
to thank the Secretary-General for his briefing on
nuclear non-proliferation, disarmament and security. I
would also like to thank him for his leadership in that
important area over the years.

Non-proliferation, disarmament and arms control
play a key role in Germany's foreign and security
policy. We are therefore pleased that those topics are
high on the international agenda again. We see the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT) as the cornerstone of the international nuclear
non-proliferation regime. We believe that the NPT is in
need of constant strengthening.

In 2010, NPT States parties reaffirmed their
commitment to the Treaty in all its aspects. The parties
adopted a comprehensive Action Plan covering all
three pillars of the Treaty. That outcome was extremely
important at a time when the global non-proliferation
regime had been confronted with serious proliferation
challenges. The 2010 Action Plan sets a broad agenda.
It spells out a commitment by the nuclear-weapon
States to make further efforts to advance the
disarmament of all types of nuclear weapons, with the
final objective of a world free of nuclear weapons.

Along the same lines, I should like to express my
appreciation to the United States presidency, which has
organized today's important briefing at the Security
Council. We welcome the opportunity to take stock of
the achievements made during almost three years since
the historic Security Council summit (see S/PV.6191)
that adopted resolution 1887 (2009). In that resolution,
the Council expressed its commitment to creating the
conditions for a world without nuclear weapons.

My Government actively supports the vision
presented by President Obama in his 2009 Prague
speech of "a world without nuclear weapons". The
entry into force of the New START agreement between
the United States and the Russian Federation was a
first step in the right direction. More steps towards that
long-term goal are necessary. Together with partners in
the lO-country Non-Proliferation and Disarmament
Initiative, Germany has made concrete proposals to
promote the implementation of the key elements of the
Action Plan adopted by the NPT Review Conference in
2010.

It is our firm belief that non-proliferation and
disarmament are joint security interests of all nations
and have to be pursued simultaneously. We also
promote accession to the Non-Proliferation Treaty with
a view to its universalization.

Likewise, we hope for an early entry into force of
the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT)
and urge the eight remaining annex 2 States to sign and
ratify the CTBT. We see a fissile material cut-off treaty
as the next crucial step towards achieving the
ambitious goal of a world free of nuclear weapons. We
remain entirely engaged in supporting an early start of
the negotiations. In that context, Germany wishes to
see a Conference on Disarmament in Geneva that is
working effectively.
Germany sees nuclear non-proliferation and
disarmament as mutually reinforcing processes - or,

as we say, two sides of the same coin - based on our
firm conviction that progress in disarmament can
contribute to diminishing proliferation risks. At the
same time, in order to make substantial disarmament
possible, we need an effective non-proliferation
regime.

We therefore cannot turn a blind eye to the
ongoing proliferation crises. They threaten the very
foundation of the global non-proliferation regime, in
particular the Non-Proliferation Treaty. They also
endanger regional stability.

We are directly involved in the efforts with regard
to the Iranian nuclear programme. Germany remains
engaged in finding negotiated and sustainable solutions
to the outstanding questions. We strongly advocate
negotiations and dialogue to find a long-term
comprehensive solution that restores international
confidence in the exclusively peaceful nature of Iran's
nuclear programme.

The last meeting with Iran in Istanbul opened
prospects for a new negotiation process. Our efforts in
the framework of the E3+3 are aimed at facilitating a
sustained and intensive process of serious dialogue.
That dialogue must lead, in a short time, to concrete
confidence-building measures based on reciprocity. We
do not want talks for the sake of talks. We have to
ensure that Iran meets all obligations, while fully
respecting Iran's right to the peaceful use of nuclear
energy. We are convinced that the measures taken
played an essential role in moving Iran back to the
negotiation table, so we must maintain the pressure.

On North Korea, the Security Council clearly
stated, just a few days ago (see S/2012/PRST/13), that
the recent launch using ballistic missile technology
constituted a serious violation of its relevant
resolutions. As further provocations cannot be ruled
out, the international community must remain firm and
united with regard to the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea: no more nuclear tests, no launches using
ballistic missile technology, a retraction of the
announcement of withdrawal from the NPT, the
abandonment of existing nuclear programmes, and a
swift return to International Atomic Energy Agency
safeguards. We will stay the course and remain firm in
our efforts to leave no room for doubt that all countries
must be held accountable for their obligations under
the NPT.

Both the fight against terrorism and the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction lie at the
very heart of Germany's foreign and security policy. If
the two were to merge, we would all be confronted
with the most dangerous and devastating situation of
our globalized world. We welcome that the Council,
which is tasked to deal with the maintenance of
international peace and security, has seized the
opportunity today to deal with this sensitive issue of
the utmost importance.

Of all of the non-proliferation initiatives that
Germany is supporting, one deserves particular
attention, in particular from the New York perspective.
Under the wise leadership of my South African
colleague, Ambassador Sangqu, the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) helps
States to prevent weapons of mass destruction and their
means of delivery from being proliferated to non-State
actors. We welcome the 10-year extension of the
mandate of that important Committee.

To demonstrate our support, Germany and the
United Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs are
organizing a conference in Wiesbaden, to take place
next week. At that conference, the Committee will seek
direct interaction with relevant industries and industry
groups on ways to jointly facilitate the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004).

Nuclear security is a precondition for nuclear
non-proliferation. Securing nuclear material is a
common global challenge. In an age marked by
globalization and international terrorism, a lack of
security in just one of our countries poses a serious
threat to all of us. A chain is only as strong as its
weakest link.

Following the successful 2010 Nuclear Security
Summit in Washington, DC, on the protection of
weapons-grade materials, we welcome the Seoul
Nuclear Security Summit, held less than a month ago.
My Minister emphasized that we must now focus our
efforts on civilian uses. They, too, pose a risk,
especially with regard to the threat of a dirty bomb.

Almost every country in the world has
radioactive sources for civilian purposes. Those are
often indispensable in medicine, research and industry.
We must, however, act to prevent their misuse and
make sure that we have put in place the best possible
security measures to safeguard nuclear materials.

Let me conclude by stressing the importance of
nuclear disarmament, non-proliferation and security.
Disarmament does not endanger our security, it
increases it. So do non-proliferation and securing
nuclear and radioactive materials. Those are the three
pillars for greater global security and stable peace
around the world. Let us continue to work together
towards that end.

