Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): A few
minutes ago, the Security Council unanimously adopted
resolution 2231 (2015), on the Iranian nuclear issue,
endorsing the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
reached on that matter by the P-5+l - China, France,
the Russian Federation, Germany, the United Kingdom
and the United States of America - in Vienna on on
14 July.

In spite of ups and downs, the efforts made with
regard to the Iran nuclear issue over more than the past
10 years have finally resulted in a political solution.
With the conclusion of the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action, the international nuclear non-proliferation
regime has been safeguarded. Iran has made a political
commitment not to develop nuclear weapons, while at
the same time it has been given the legitimate right to
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. A new chapter has
also begun on Iran's relationship with all sides.

The conclusion of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action brings far-reaching inspiration to contemporary
international relations. First, the setting up of a new
type of international relationship centred on mutual
benefit and win-win outcomes has a strong vitality. The
Iranian nuclear issueconcerns the immediate - and
even core - interests of all sides. Without a multi-win
and all-Win spirit, the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action would not have been achieved. Even if it had
been, it would not have lasted for long.

Secondly, it is essential to stay the course in
seeking political solutions to major issues. However
the difficult the process may be, a political solution
is always the only practical and viable path. The
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action also serves as a
successful example of how to address other regional
and international hot-spot issues through political and
diplomatic means.

Thirdly, it is possible to achieve success so long as
confidence is maintained, political will is demonstrated
and tireless efforts are made in the course of seeking
political solutions. The Council's adoption of resolution
2231 (2015), which endorses the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action, is an important step in the process of
implementing the agreement. This is a good beginning.
Implementing the agreement over the next 10 years
will be even more important, during which it will be
essential to adhere to the following principles.

First, the Council's resolution and the Joint
Comprehensive Plan ofAction must be implemented in a
balanced, precise and comprehensive manner. All sides
should effectively fulfil the commitments they have
made and seriously and effectively implement all the
provisions of the agreement. Secondly, in accordance
with the principles of mutual respect, equality and
mutual benefit, it is essential to appropriately resolve the
differences that may arise during the implementation
process, demonstrate goodwill and stay the course for
the implementation of the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action. Thirdly, it is necessary to constantly take
stock of experiences and good practices during the
implementation process, maintain the effectiveness of
the relevant mechanism and make positive efforts to
maintain world peace, promote regional stability and
improve relations among all sides.

China has all along worked constructively for
fruitful negotiations on the Iranian nuclear issue. We
will continue to make new contributions to implement
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action in a responsible
manner.

