Mr. Wittig (Germany): At the outset, I would like
to thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his very
useful briefing, as well as the United Nations assessment
mission on piracy in the Gulf of Guinea for its report
(see S/2012/45). I equally thank Mr. Abdel Fatau Musah
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and Her Excellency Mrs. Florentina
Adenike Ukonga of the Commission of the Gulf of
Guinea (CGG) for their contributions.

In addressing the scope of the threat of piracy in
the region, the report confirms an alarming situation.
Piracy and armed robbery in the Gulf of Guinea have
risen and pose a growing threat to economic
development and security for the States in the region
and beyond. In that regard, let me focus briefly on two
points, namely, the need for a comprehensive,
integrated approach to maritime security and the
importance of enhanced coordination among the
affected States and regional organizations.

First, in order to increase maritime security in the
Gulf of Guinea, an integrated concept is required.
Questions about how to prevent piracy and how to
combat it, as well as the political and legal framework
of dealing with pirates and their supporting networks,
need to be tackled. An effective approach will rely very
much on the affected States' capacities to deploy well-
trained and well-equipped security forces as well as
competent judicial institutions, both acting according
to principles of the rule of law. A comprehensive
approach should adequately address the immediate
threat, while at the same time deal with the root causes
and conditions conducive to the growth in piracy and
armed robbery. Where applicable, lessons learned from
fighting piracy off the coast of Somalia should be taken
into account.

My second point relates to the significance of
regional leadership. In that regard, we welcome the
initiatives taken by States of the region and regional
organizations such as ECOWAS, the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS) and the
Commission of the Gulf of Guinea. Those include
adoption of the ECCAS strategy on maritime security;
the creation of the ECOWAS subcommittee on
maritime security; and the preparatory steps taken by
ECOWAS towards developing an integrated maritime
security strategy, and the increased cooperation
between ECCAS and ECOWAS.

In that regard, we strongly encourage ECOWAS,
ECCAS and the CGG to work on the organization of
the joint summit at which they intend to develop a
coherent regional anti-piracy strategy. Cooperation and
coordination among the affected countries, as well as
with and among the regional organizations, including
the African Union, need to be further enhanced.

The international community, including the
United Nations and its regional offices - the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa and the
United Nations Office for West Africa - should
support those efforts. The European Union started to
focus on the issue in 2010, and is carrying out projects
that aim in particular to support the capacities of
ECOWAS and ECCAS and cooperation with the
International Maritime Organization. Germany will
continue to be engaged in building capacities of the
affected States and regional organizations in order to
tackle the challenge of piracy, which undermines the
security and economic development of the region.

My delegation supports the draft resolution that is
currently being negotiated, as well as its swift
adoption.

