Mr. Wali (Nigeria): I wish to congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the Presidency of the
Security Council for the month of October and thank
you for organizing the debate. I also take this
opportunity to congratulate Spain on the able manner
the affairs of the Council were conducted last month.

The topic for the debate today could not have
been more timely and appropriate. The concept of
justice and the rule of law is fundamental to human
existence and the enjoyment of freedom, which we all
cherish.

Nigeria believes that it was with this in mind that
the third paragraph of the preamble to the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, adopted by the General
Assembly on 10 December 1948, provides, among
other things, that

"whereas it is essential, if man is not to be
compelled to have recourse, as a last resort, to
rebellion against tyranny and oppression, that
human rights should be protected by the rule of

"

law .

Article 7 provides, inter alia, that, "All are equal before
the law and are entitled without any discrimination to
equal protection of the law."

As a means of actualizing those fundamental rights,
article 10 provides that,

"Everyone is entitled in full equality to a fair and
public hearing by an independent and impartial
tribunal, in the determination of his rights and
obligations and of any criminal charge against
him."

The Secretary General of the United Nations,
Mr. Kofi Annan, in a report dated 13 April 1998
(S/1998/318), identified, among other reasons,
"insufficient accountability of leaders, lack of
transparency in regimes, inadequate checks and
balances, non-adherence to the rule of law lack of
respect for human rights," as causes of conflict in
Africa. Nigeria notes with satisfaction that in
responding to the complex conflict situations in Africa
the Security Council now decides on mandates that are
multidisciplinary in nature.

Consequently, Nigeria welcomes the efforts of the
United Nations in ensuring that peacekeeping missions
are no longer limited to disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration, but are expanded to include the
strengthening of democratic governance, building the
capacity of local institutions, reform of internal
security systems as well as restoration of the rule of
law and basic human rights.

Nigeria also welcomes that new approach
because it allows the building of durable peace, which
will facilitate sustainable development in countries
emerging from conflict. The strategy is also more cost-
effective because the causes of conflicts are addressed
by encouraging, among other things, democratic
pluralism, transparent and accountable governance, the
rule of law and economic recovery. In that regard, it is
gratifying to recall that such tenets of accountability,
transparency and good governance have been adopted
at the initiative of African leaders and Governments as
an integral part of the New Partnership for Africa's
Development (NEPAD).

It is therefore necessary for the United Nations
and the international community to ensure that the
implementation of the Millennium Development Goals
go side by side with the entrenchment of justice and
the rule of law, especially in countries emerging from
conflicts.

Nigeria reaffirms its support for Security Council
resolutions 808 (1993) and 955 (1994) establishing
respectively, the International Tribunals in the former
Yugoslavia and in Rwanda. Similarly, we reaffirm our
support for the establishment of the Special Court for
Sierra Leone. We believe that the work of the tribunals
and the Special Court will bring justice to the victims
of abuse of human rights and international
humanitarian law.

We therefore appreciate and acknowledge the
excellent but tedious work so far undertaken by the
International Tribunals and the Special Court in their
efforts to bring the perpetrators of heinous crimes
against humanity to justice. In our view, the
establishment of the tribunals is indicative of the
collective rejection of impunity by the civilized world.

The establishment of the two International
Tribunals and the Special Court is helpful, yet,
regrettably, their ad hoc nature can hardly enhance
their usefulness. Furthermore, the fact that the Special
Court is funded through voluntary contributions has
posed serious financial problems to the integrity of the
Court. Nigeria, therefore, appreciates the agreement by
the United Nations to come to the financial aid of the
Court, and to bail it out of its financial predicament.
We, therefore, call for the funding of the Court from
the regular budget of the United Nations if the integrity
and dignity of the Court are to be preserved.

Nigeria is of the view, and indeed is convinced,
that the fight against impunity should be taken to its
logical conclusion. It is therefore necessary to have a
more permanent international judicial institution which
would replace the two tribunals and the Special Court.
Consequently, Nigeria believes that the establishment
of the International Criminal Court at The Hague was
envisioned to fulfil that purpose. It will be recalled that
the Rome Statute which established the ICC came into
force in July 2002. It is encouraging that 97 countries
are so far parties to the Statute.

Nigeria wishes to urge those States that have not
yet done so to become parties to the Statute in order to
make the Court more universal, thereby giving greater
acceptability and universality to the global fight
against impunity. As noted by the Secretary-General,
the Court is "already having an important impact by
putting would-be violators on notice that impunity is
not assured" (S/2004/616, para. 49). Nigeria therefore
supports the statement by the Secretary-General in his
report that domestic justice systems should be the first
resort in pursuit of accountability.

Accordingly, Nigeria urges States parties to the
Rome Statute to incorporate into their national laws the
provisions of the Statute which are against impunity
and crimes against international humanitarian law.
Nigeria reaffirms its support for the Rome Statute, and
acknowledges with approval the commendable role that
non-governmental organizations are playing to ensure
the effectiveness and independence of the International
Criminal Court. The fact that there have already been
some referrals from Member States to the ICC so soon
after its establishment is evidence of the working of the
complementary roles expected to be played by the
Court and Member States in the fight against impunity
and breaches of international humanitarian law.

Given the need to ensure justice and the rule of
law, particularly in developing countries and countries
emerging from conflict, there is a need for the United
Nations to increase its assistance to such countries. In
this regard, we call on the United Nations to provide
training for lawyers, prisons officials and prosecutors,
as well as to organize seminars and workshops for
lawyers, judges and others in those countries. There is
also a need to assist such countries by providing
additional funds for the education of the populace,
especially at secondary- and high-school levels. It is
Nigeria's view that an enlightened populace will
readily protect and guard its rights and obligations.

The concept of justice, the rule of law and equity
that obtains at the national level needs to be replicated
at the global level. In this regard, it will be necessary
for the United Nations and the international community
to foster an international system that truly and
genuinely upholds the principle of the equality of
States, as envisioned by customary international law
and the Charter. Accordingly, there is a need to ensure
rule-based, open and transparent participation by all
sovereign States in global collective decision-making.
Nigeria therefore calls for the best to be made of the
potentials and benefits of globalization as a potent
force for all humanity. In our View, the present
asymmetries in the architecture of the financial and
international trading system accentuate divisions,
marginalization, inequalities and unfairness. As a
result, developing countries are at a disadvantage, as
they lack the power and the voice to negotiate and
make decisions on an equal footing with their
development partners.

