The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.

I thank Special Representative Yamamoto for
his briefing and for all of his and the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan's (UNAMA) work
in Afghanistan. He has the United Kingdom's continued
and full support. I also want to pay particular tribute to
Ms. Samar, who is not only the first briefer from civil
society of our presidency, but also the first-ever civil
society briefer from Afghanistan to speak before the
Security Council. It has taken 37 years of Afghanistan
being on our agenda for this day to become a reality,
and I look to future presidencies to make sure that it
does not take another 37 years for it to happen again.

As so much has already been said about the
situation in Afghanistan, I am going to focus on just
two core issues: the need to reduce the violence, and
the ongoing priority of human rights. The recent
abhorrent attacks underscore the pressing, immediate
need for us all to work together to end the violence.
The people of Afghanistan have suffered for too long.
The human cost has simply been too high, and now,
more than ever, a coordinated response is needed from
the Afghan Government and society, the region and
the international community. As we know all too well,
the violence will only increase in the coming weeks as
the winter weather retreats across most of the country.
We must focus on achieving meaningful steps from all
sides. That means tackling the terrorist sanctuaries,
their funding and logistical support.

I want to pay tribute to the continued sacrifice
of the Afghan security forces as they perform that
dangerous and unrelenting task. They have the United
Kingdom's full support. As the coalition's lead on
the Afghan National Army Officer Academy, we are
proud to help train the next generation of Afghanistan's
military leaders.

Secondly, we must not lose focus on the pressing
need to sustain progress on human rights in Afghanistan,
as Ms. Samar so eloquently made clear. The human
rights situation today is unrecognizable from that of
2001. Women now hold 28 per cent of parliamentary
seats, which was something unthinkable under Taliban
rule. For comparison's sake, in the United Kingdom
that statistic is 29 per cent. Seven million children are
now attending school, of whom more than 3 million
are girls. Legislation protecting the rights of the
marginalized is in now in place, and Afghanistan's new
Anti-Corruption Justice Centre held its first trial late
last year in a fair and transparent manner. Those are
significant steps. However, as we look to the future
of Afghanistan, we should recognize that being better
than 2001 is not the benchmark to which to aspire.

We need to help Afghanistan build on the steps
taken so far so that all Afghans can enjoy an even safer
and more prosperous future in which human rights
are a given and not in question. The United Kingdom
is doing its part to ensure progress on a broad range
of human rights challenges. We are helping increase
women's social, economic and political participation
and supporting the Government of Afghanistan to
reform its electoral system in order to improve the
transparency and credibility of elections. We are
helping fund institutions that empower Afghans to
develop human rights monitoring capabilities, and we
are providing training in international humanitarian
law to combat abuses. We are doing so because the
United Kingdom remains committed to helping the
National Unity Government realize its constitutional
and international human rights obligations. We will
continue to support the Government of Afghanistan,
local and international non- governmental organizations,
civil society organizations and international partners to
help make that a reality.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I thank the representatives of members of the
Security Council for respecting the time limit, and
I respectfully remind future speakers of the need
to conclude their remarks within five minutes. If
necessary, after the light begins to flash, I will use the
gavel to stake the time.

I give the floor to the representative of Germany.

