The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia, in which they request
to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual practice,
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Misic' (Bosnia and Herzegovina) and Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia) took
places at the Council table.

The President: I have received a request dated 9
November 1995 from Mr. Jovanovic. With the consent of
the Council, I propose to invite him to take a seat at the
side of the Council Chamber.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Jovanovic took
a seat at the side of the Council Chamber.


The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them document
S/ 1995/940, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Argentina, the Czech Republic, France,
Germany, Italy, the Russian Federation, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
United States of America.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document S/l995/9lO, which contains the
text of a letter dated 31 October 1995 from the President of
the International criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia addressed to the President of the Security
Council.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to vote on the draft resolution before it. Unless
I hear any objection, I shall put the draft resolution to the
vote.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I shall first call on those members of the Council
who wish to make statements before the voting.


