We would like to thank Ms. Ingrid Hayden, Officer in Charge of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), for her briefing. I would also like to extend our congratulations to Ms. Deborah Lyons on her recent appointment as Special Representative of the Secretary-General in Afghanistan and Head of UNAMA. I would further like to express our gratitude to Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto for his contribution and efforts in supporting the work of the Secretary-General and the Council in Afghanistan. South Africa extends its condolences to the families of the victims of the recent attack on a Sikh temple in Kabul. We strongly condemn this and all violent attacks, especially those targeting innocent civilians. Terrorist acts, whatever their motivation, can never be justified. South Africa fully supports the important role of UNAMA and its contribution to laying the foundations for sustainable peace and development in Afghanistan, while noting the challenging environment in which it operates. The continuing levels of violence in Afghanistan, in particular the indiscriminate attacks perpetrated against civilians, women, children and the elderly, remain of concern and risk derailing the ongoing efforts to deliver lasting peace in Afghanistan. South Africa encourages all Afghan stakeholders committed to the nation's peace talks to renew their efforts to rebuild trust and work towards peace and reconciliation, as well as to promote national unity and cohesion with a view to achieving a lasting political solution. My delegation welcomes all efforts to find a long-term solution to the conflict in Afghanistan and hopes that the recent signing of agreements between the United States and the Afghan Government and the Taliban, respectively, will be an important first step from which intra-Afghan negotiations can be launched. It is also important to acknowledge the role that women have played in Afghanistan's peace process and we must all encourage their continued participation in peace talks and post-conflict efforts. The vast gains made in women's and girls' rights should be protected. Importantly, the peace process should be Afghan-owned and -led. In this regard, we call on all Afghan stakeholders to resolve their differences and work together in order to establish a peaceful and stable environment for all Afghans
