The President: I will now make a statement in
my national capacity as the representative of the
Russian Federation.

The Russian delegation abstained in the voting on
the resolution of the Security Council submitted by
Gabon and Nigeria on strengthening sanctions against
Eritrea. However, we understand the many concerns
expressed today in the statements by the
representatives of member States of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD).

The text of the resolution contains a range of
provisions that lack adequate foundation, and the role
of the group of experts has been expanded beyond
measure. In that respect we refer in particular to the
"planned terrorist attack" in Addis Ababa during the
African Union summit there. The Russian Federation is
11-62209

categorically against terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations. However, in this case, the Security
Council was not presented with convincing proof of
Eritrea's involvement in that incident.

We have not seen the results of any investigation
of that incident, if indeed there was one. We also have
doubts with respect to the provision in the resolution
that gives the Sanctions Committee a mandate to draft,
with the support of the expert group, guiding principles
for States on maintaining vigilance in their cooperation
with Eritrea in the mining sector. When it comes to
guiding United Nations Members, guidance should be
provided by a resolution of the Security Council and
not by the preliminary work of subsidiary bodies, as
that can lead to various interpretations of resolutions
that have been adopted.

Practical implementation of the provisions of the
resolution regarding the Eritrean diaspora raises further
questiond. In general, we are concerned by a trend in
the recent work of the Council of including ambiguous
language in the texts of draft resolutions, which
impedes their implementation in practice. It should be
noted that resorting to sanctions should be seen as an
extreme measure. It is very important that we exhaust
the political and diplomatic means available before
resorting to sanctions.

We believe that settlement of the problem in the
Horn of Africa involves establishing a broad and
multifaceted dialogue among the countries of the
region. We call upon Eritrea and its neighbours to
openly and transparently discuss all of the key issues in
an effort to improve the situation in that area of the
African continent.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda. The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 3.40 p.m.
