Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome you, Madam, as you preside over
the Security Council today. We also thank Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, for his briefing.

Today we are once again discussing the situation
in the Middle East. What is the Middle East? Is it even
possible to consider the region in isolation from North
Africa or the Persian Gulf? In our opinion the answer
is obvious. However, the issue of a Palestinian-Israeli
settlement is central to all the problems in the Middle
East. We have recently been seeing attempts to shift
the focus away from this problem, which underlies
everything that has been happening there, and replace
it with other issues that are often artificially pumped
up. Besides that, we are seeing dangerous trends on the
Palestine-Israel track aimed at expanding unilateral
measures and aggressively revising formerly settled
arrangements. To state it unequivocally, as far as we are
concerned the internationally recognized foundations
for a settlement in the Middle East, including the relevant
Security Council resolutions, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the Madrid principles, remain unshakeable.

We believe that today it is more essential than ever
to take practical measures to extract the peace process
from its dangerous impasse. Russia is continuing
its efforts to revive a direct dialogue between the
Palestinians and Israelis both bilaterally and in other
formats. We are extremely disturbed by Mr. Mladenov's
analysis of the situation in which he says that in the West
Bank and the Gaza Strip the situation is barely being
prevented from even further deterioration, let alone
improving. Sooner or later, and most likely sooner,
that state of affairs will end up erasing the already
unacceptable virtual boundary between shaky stability
and chaos. Concrete measures to improve the situation
are therefore essential, and the recipes for them are
obvious. First of all, Israel's settlement activity in the
West Bank and its policies of confiscation ofPalestinian
property must end. Both Palestinians and Israelis must
refrain from violence and aggressive and provocative
rhetoric. The same goes for the announcements of plans
to annex residential areas in the West Bank.

We believe firmly that no breakthroughs can be
achieved through actions undertaken on their own, as
the history ofthe Middle East has repeatedly confirmed.
And yet despite that there are continuing persistent
attempts to impose so-called alternative schemes for
a settlement of the situation that undermine the long-
established internationally recognized parameters for
resolving the question of Palestine. The decision by
the current United States Administration on Jerusalem
and its illegitimate recognition of Israel's sovereignty
over the occupied Syrian Golan are gross violations of
international law and Security Council resolution 497
(1981) in particular. In that context we want to emphasize
that there can be no question that the Golan Heights are
Syrian territory occupied by Israel as a result of the
1967 war and unlawfully annexed 14 years later. It is
clear to us, like most of our colleagues, that the only
way out of all of this is through concerted international
and regional efforts, with the United Nations and its
Security Council playing a central role.

Active steps are needed to improve the depressing
humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip. We will
continue to assist the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, whose
activity has a political as well as a humanitarian
dimension and an important stabilizing effect in
the Palestinian territory and the countries of the
Middle East.

Israel and Palestine have major religious
significance for hundreds of thousands of adherents
of the monotheistic religions. The establishment of
a lasting peace in these lands is in the interests of
every Christian, Muslim and Jew. Meanwhile, the
destabilization of the situation in the Middle East
and North Africa has been a terrible blow to the
region's religious and ethnic minorities. Extremists
are exploiting ethnic and religious factors in order
to incite hatred and add to their own ranks. We must
take immediate measures to stop the mass exodus of
Christian and other minorities from the countries ofthe
Middle East and preserve the unique balance in which
the peoples of the region have coexisted for centuries.

The unresolved problem of Palestine, along with
the years of instability in the region as a whole, has
built up the potential there for protests and radicalism.
The situation demands concerted efforts on the part of
responsible members of the international community.
The Secretary-General was instructed to work on this
issue under resolution 598 (1987), and there is interest
in pursuing this among the countries of the region. The
need to develop a sustainable mechanism for collective
security in the region through dialogue on an equal
footing is becoming all the more urgent. Russia's
initiative in that regard is aimed both at unblocking
conflict situations and developing measures for
confidence and control. We urge our international and
regional partners to carefully consider Iran's initiative
on confidence and security measures in the Strait of
Hormuz. It is an invitation to a serious dialogue with
the goal of improving the situation in the region that we
will always firmly support.

If we do not consolidate the efforts of all interested
parties, including the countries of the region and its
immediate neighbours, it will be impossible to create
the conditions necessary to end the bloodshed in
Libya and make progress towards a dialogue aimed at
a political and diplomatic settlement of the situation
there under the auspices of the United Nations.

We have been carefully following the current
situation in Lebanon and hope that the country will be
able to surmount these difficult times and emerge from
them even more united.

There have been signs of a modest de-escalation
in the situation in Yemen, with prospects for making
progress on a path to a peaceful settlement with the
assistance of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General, and we will work to reinforce those trends.

Russia has put a great deal of effort, through
constructive, inclusive and honest work, with no double
standards, into shifting the focus of the conflict in
Syria onto a political track. We hope to see progress
in its resolution based on agreements reached by the
Syrians themselves. It is they, and only they, who bear
the chief responsibility for their country's fate.

We are ready to cooperate constructively with our
partners on every item on the Middle East agenda. We
believe that it is crucial to improve our coordination
and our development of consolidated and unbiased
approaches in the interests not of external actors but of
the Governments and the peoples of the Middle East.

