Mr. Valdes (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me
to thank you, Mr. President, for your timely initiative
to convene this open debate on the work of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, at a time when the
international community is confounded both by the
appalling violence unleashed against the population of
Palestine and by the atrocity of the acts of terrorism
committed against civilians in Israel.

That situation morally degrades all mankind and
should lead us to realize the urgency of making
progress towards the common goals that we set for
ourselves as an Organization in the aftermath of the
events of 11 September 2001, namely, to eradicate
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations and to
address situations, such as that in the Middle East,
which feed the worst expressions of hate and
resentment and thereby foster a climate that contributes
to the spiral of Violence and terror.

Chile fully endorses the statement to be made
shortly by the representative of Costa Rica on behalf of
the Rio Group.

Today, my country would like to reiterate its
condemnation of the terrorist acts committed on
11 September and to express its support for resolution
1373 (2001), which seeks, within the framework of the
Charter of the United Nations, to restore international
security through the adoption of adequate measures to
eradicate international terrorism.

Within that framework, we welcome the
establishment of the Counter-Terrorism Committee of
the Security Council, established pursuant to that
resolution, which recently put forward its programme
of work for a third period of 90 days. We note the
professionalism and transparency of its efforts and the
wise guidance of Ambassador Jeremy Greenstock and
his Vice-Chairmen. We trust that during this new phase
the Committee will maintain the transparency of its
work and the impartiality of its results.

We urge the countries that have not yet submitted
their national reports to cooperate with the Committee,
whose positive results will benefit the international
community as a whole.

As we said in our first statement following the
events of 11 September, Chile believes that terrorism is
a rejection of the basic principles of human coexistence
and that it is contrary to every civilized principle.
Combating terrorism is therefore the responsibility of
each and every member of the international
community. As Secretary-General Kofi Annan has
stated, the United Nations must have the courage to
recognize that just as there are common objectives,
there are also common enemies, and that to defeat
them, all nations must combine their efforts, and the
United Nations has a unique role to play in promoting
this effort.

That is why we believe that it is essential for us
to underscore today the value of both multilateral
action and the United Nations in this complex task.
Moreover, we feel obliged to express our conviction
that it is only within this multilateral framework that it
will be possible to combat both those who make
terrorism a way of life and the conditions that enable
their hate to resonate among disaffected groups
throughout the world.

The fight against terrorism must therefore be
waged within the framework of each country's respect
for the rule of law, international law and human rights.
Morally and ethically ambiguous actions which use
that objective as justification merely hinder efforts to
eradicate terrorism. Any State that loses sight of the
ethical difference that separates it from the terrorist is
giving up in advance the principal weapon that enables
it defend its citizens, namely, the legitimacy of its
cause.

We are also convinced that the oppression of
peoples, ignorance accompanied by extreme ideologies
and especially the conditions of extreme poverty in
which a substantial part of humanity lives are
increasingly creating a climate of marginalization and
dehumanization that encourages recourse to violence
and legitimizes the actions of terrorists through the
degradation it perpetrates. We should not lose sight of
the limitations of strategies that reduce this combat to a
simple question of military strength. Our strategy in
combating terrorism must be based on a multifaceted
and resolute approach that includes the commitment
freely undertaken by our heads of State and contained
in the Millennium Declaration.

While respecting the mandate given to the
Committee, Chile would like the Committee to also be
used to gather experiences that would facilitate
progress towards the elaboration of new concepts of
security that are more in tune with the problems of the
twenty-first century.

My country welcomes the recent entry into force
of the International Convention for the Suppression of
the Financing of Terrorism, adopted by the General
Assembly in 1999, on which many of the provisions of
Council resolution 1373 (2001) were based. It also
notes with satisfaction that in the Organization of
American States negotiations have been concluded on
the inter-American convention against terrorism, which
we hope will be adopted at that organization's general
assembly to be held in Barbados.

In 2001, Chile, in its capacity as coordinator of
the Rio Group, organized a meeting of legal experts to
consider questions related to the prevention and
punishment of acts of terrorism, and particularly to
Security Council resolution 1373 (2001). The text
adopted at that meeting was the result of a fruitful
exchange of opinions on national legislation in force
regarding terrorism and on their reform. That made it
possible to take note of the progress achieved by our
Group and the advantages of reviewing these efforts
within a regional framework.

Chile will participate in all appropriate forums
with a message of total rejection of terrorism without
relativism of any kind. To that end, it has a clear
willingness to implement and apply the 12 treaties
adopted within the framework of the United Nations on
this topic. Chile is a party to all those treaties.

