Ms. Norman-Chalet (United States of America): I want to thank Mr. Griffiths and Mr. Lowcock for their insightful but sobering briefings. Mr. Griffiths' conclusion a gave heart-breaking human face to what we are discussing today and the challenges that we have been seeking to address for some time. In that regard, I also want to make clear, as we have in each of our monthly meetings, that the United States strongly supports his and Mr. Lowcock's efforts and will continue to do so. In that vein, the United States urges the Government of the Republic of Yemen and the Houthis to work with Special Envoy Griffiths towards agreement on the final draft of the joint declaration. We regret that this process has not yet made more progress. As we just heard so clearly, the Yemeni people, struggling with an economic crisis, food insecurity, fuel shortages, coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and an enduring conflict, deserve such a step forward towards stability and security. But as we well know, another destabilizing force is felt through the Islamic Republic of Iran, which holds little interest in fostering stability and security in Yemen, or anywhere else in the region. Just the opposite: Iran continues to send lethal aid to the Houthis, fuelling the Houthis' ongoing offense near Ma'rib as well as the larger conflict. On 20 August, the United States initiated the process that will restore virtually all United Nations sanctions on Iran, which had been lifted under sub-paragraph (a) of paragraph 7 of resolution 2231 (2015). As Secretary Pompeo said on that day, the United States will never allow the world's largest State sponsor of terrorism to freely buy and sell planes, tanks, missiles and other kinds of conventional weapons. These United Nations sanctions will continue the arms embargo. The arms embargo is an essential component in our efforts to curb Tehran's destabilizing actions in Yemen as well as those it is taking against its neighbours. We have said it before, and we will say it again today: the Security Council is utterly failing in its mission to maintain international peace and security by allowing Iran to maintain and expand its destabilizing activity in the region unhindered. The Houthis unconscionable persistent cross-border aerial attacks that destroy civilian infrastructure in Saudi Arabia, including recently on Abha airport, are additional evidence of the urgent need to maintain the embargo and push back against further Iranian encroachment. We are encouraged by the resumption of the cabinet formation discussions between the Southern Transitional Council and the Government of the Republic of Yemen, and we strongly urge both parties to continue progress on the implementation of the Riyadh agreement. In particular, swift cabinet formation is urgently needed so that the Government can work as a unified body to respond to the needs of the Yemeni people and work the most effectively with the Special Envoy on the political process. Turning specifically to the humanitarian situation, the United States shares the concerns expressed today over the major funding gaps for aid operations this year and the potential implications of the deteriorating economic outlook regarding worsening food insecurity. The Trump Administration has _ contributed more than $1.3 billion in humanitarian assistance to Yemen over the past two years. Even with this partial suspension of certain assistance operations in Houthi- controlled areas of northern Yemen due to Houthi interference, we remain the largest single donor to Yemen's humanitarian response this year. We urge our partners and other donor nations, including those in the region, to step up, contribute and help fulfil the humanitarian response plan's request. We also urge donors that have not yet disbursed their 2020 pledges to do so expeditiously, as well as to consider additional financial support to help stabilize the Yemeni currency and allow continued flows of essential commercial imports. We reiterate our call on the Houthis to cease the obstruction of, and interference in, aid operations. Our partners must be able to independently assess needs and respond in line with humanitarian principles. The unhindered flow of essential goods into and throughout Yemen is more vital than ever given the increasing food insecurity plaguing so many Yemenis. The United States notes with serious concern the Houthis' decision to manufacture a fuel shortage in northern Yemen, choosing profit over the lives of Yemenis. Let us be clear: the decrease in fuel imports through Al-Hudaydah port in recent months was caused by Houthi misappropriation of fuel tax and customs receipts from the Central Bank of Yemen that were supposed to have funded Government salaries in northern Yemen. The current shortages would not exist were it not for this inexcusable Houthi fraud. We call on the Houthis and the Government of the Republic of Yemen to expeditiously agree to the Special Envoy's request to hold discussions on fuel imports and associated revenue disbursements. In the interim, we thank the Government for facilitating the entry of oil tankers into Al-Hudaydah port, including two tankers earlier this month, despite the Houthis' unfailing intransigence, so that Yemenis can get the fuel they need. We also call on the Houthis to reverse their announced decision to close the Sana'a airport to the United Nations and other international relief aircraft as aresult of this crisis of their own making. This is simply another example of Houthi extortion using international assistance. Meanwhile, the Yemeni people continue to suffer. This is inexcusable. We urge the Houthis to cease their continuous assault on religious freedom, and we demand the immediate and unconditional release of the Yemeni citizen Levi Salem Musa Marhabi. Mr. Marhabi has been wrongfully detained by the Houthis for four years despite a Houthi "court" ordering his release in September 2019. His health continues to deteriorate as he languishes in a Sana'a prison, where the threat of contracting COVID-19 is all too real. Mr. Marhabi is one member of an ever-shrinking community of Yemeni Jews, who have been an important part of Yemen's diverse social fabric for thousands of years. The Houthis must respect freedom of religion and refrain from oppressing members of minority groups. Finally, as other colleagues have highlighted, we continue to monitor the FSO SAFER oil tanker and the grave environmental, economic and humanitarian dangers posed by a potential spill. We call on the Houthis to approve once and for all the United Nations mission plan for the FSO SAFER assessment and to live up to their commitments and permit United Nations technical teams immediate and unconditional access to the deteriorating vessel.
