Mr. Judeh (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Allow us,
Mr. President, to express our profound gratitude for
your initiative in convening this important meeting
on the settlements of disputes in North Africa and the
Middle East and on facing terrorist threats in the region.

By virtue of our geographic location, we - in the
Hashemite Kingdom ofJordan - are the most implicated
in the current struggles in the region; and we are the most
directly affected by the political, economic, security and
humanitarian problems. Our vision of the root causes
and the factors of instability in the region come out of
a realistic View of our direct and Vital interests in the
settlement of disputes and the restoration of peace and
stability to the region. The root causes of conflict in the
region - which have been exacerbated since what has
previously been referred to as the Arab Spring - have
been fed by deprivation. By deprivation, I mean both
political and social deprivation, which began at different
phases over the last several years. The situation has
worsened to varying degrees in the various countries
of the region. The common denominator among the
countries that have experienced such struggles is the
cumulative effects of that deprivation - be it political,
social or economic - and the lack of political prospects
to correct the situation in those areas. Efforts to steer
away from political discrimination and marginalization
have also been inadequate. Those shortcomings have
led to approaches that are guided by sectarian or
tribal tensions - at the expense of national unity and
peace. That has created fertile ground for terrorist
organizations to expand their operations.

Today, we are also witnessing the occupation of
Jerusalem - in particular, the occupation ofthe Al-Aqsa
mosque compound - Haram al-Sharif. The ongoing
Israeli violations threaten peace between religions. We
call on Israel to stop these violations immediately and to
respect the sanctity of holy places, in accordance with
the fact that his Majesty King Abdullah is the Custodian
of the holy Muslim and Christian places in Jordan, in
order to avert the repercussions of such a crisis on the
whole world. There is no doubt that the root cause of
the conflict is the fact that the people of Palestine have
for decades been deprived of their historical rights and
prevented from establishing an independent State on
their national territory. That was the beginning of the
instability in the region, which over the years has been
translated into various forms of extremism both inside
and outside the region.

The only solution, therefore, is the two-State one:
the establishment of an independent Palestinian State
within the borders of 4 June 1967. This is indeed of
major interest to Jordan, because Jordan is directly
involved in all serious negotiations on issues pertaining
to the final solution in this respect.

The basis for restoring stability and solving the
existing problems requires a comprehensive political
process that deals with the root cause of the conflicts
in the region: the absence of a political solution to
the Syrian conflict, which is about to enter its sixth
year - one that leads to a political transition, satisfies
the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people and
guarantees their unity and security. That absence
serves only to fuel extremism and terrorism and to
aggravate the situation. In addition, the absence of
an inclusive and comprehensive political process in
Iraq and sectarian marginalization has also given the
Islamic State in Iraq and Sham (ISIS)/Daesh a chance
to develop. Defeating that terrorist regime will require
a political reconciliation process and the strengthening
of national unity among all Iraqi factions.

In Libya, despite international efforts to achieve a
political solution among the Libyan parties and make
the transition to a modern State, which requires the
support of international legitimacy, there has been an
expansion of terrorist activities, notably those of ISIS,
among others.

Regarding Yemen, we have to recognize that there
is no alternative to a political solution and that all
political parties should go back to the political process as
represented by the Gulf Cooperation Council initiative
and the results of the National Dialogue Conference,
in addition to accepting constitutional legitimacy as
represented by his Excellency Abdrabuh Mansour
Hadi Mansour. Had it not been for the fact that some
parties rejected this process, there would have been no
reason for military action to strengthen and stabilize
the legitimacy of the Government.

The conflicts that are raging in many countries
have taken on sectarian aspects and threaten to ignite
a Sunni-Shiite conflagration that would jeopardize
the security and stability of the region. The fact that
these conflicts have taken on a sectarian aspect has
strengthened, in one way or another, the approaches
taken and the views espoused by certain terrorist
organizations. Jordan has repeatedly emphasized that
it completely rejects the idea that this is a Sunni-Shiite
sectarian conflict or any form of religious conflict.
A confrontation of this nature must be dealt with in a
completely political context.

The humanitarian dimension of the ongoing
conflicts is increasingly problematic. Today we see
Syrian refugees flowing into neighbouring States and
beyond. The humanitarian consequences resulting from
the absence of political solutions cannot be contained.
There can be no humanitarian solution to the Syrian
problem. What we need is a political solution that will
put an end to this human suffering. Jordan, my country,
today is hosting approximately 1.4 million Syrian
citizens, in addition to a large number of refugees from
other countries, despite our limited capabilities. My
country has, however, almost exhausted its ability to
host those refugees in the absence of the international
support required to share the burden.

Today we are seeing heart-rending photographs of
those people, of an ancient civilization and culture, as
they seek refuge outside their country. The international
community as a whole must assume its responsibilities,
as countries cannot alone assume it in its stead. It is
important to emphasize that we should comply with
and fully implement Security Council resolutions
relating to the fight against terrorism. We in Jordan are
at the forefront of the international efforts to combat
terrorism, at the military, security and ideological
levels. His Majesty King Abdullah II ibn Al Hussein has
emphasized that this war is our war. It is a war within
Islam, against the Khawarij, who distort the image of
our religion, which is a religion of tolerance and one
that preaches acceptance of others, peace and dialogue.

In his address to the General Assembly the day
before yesterday (see A/70/PV.13), His Majesty stressed
that it is certain that the most important front in this
war is the intellectual one. We must seek, as a human
society, to win over hearts and minds; we should unite all
of our efforts to wage this war. It is vital that we comply
with and fully implement the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council regarding the fight against terrorism,
including resolution 2170 (2014), on the threat posed
by the Al-Nusra Front and Daesh, and resolution 2178
(2014), on facing the threat of foreign terrorist fighters,
who are joining terrorist organizations in the region
from more than 100 countries. This phenomenon has
dire consequences for both countries of origin and
countries of destination, in addition to the dangers

it poses to neighbouring countries, including the
perpetration of terrorist attacks in those States, which
places a heavy security burden on them.

The success of efforts to combat terrorism and
extremism will require an inclusive political approach
dealing with the root causes of the crisis: deprivation,
marginalization and exclusion, which were primarily
responsible for weakening the State and created a
vacuum that was then exploited by terrorist groups.
Revitalizing political processes aimed at solving these
problems would support the military and security
approaches, both within and outside the region, and
address the issue of the financing of foreign terrorist
fighters by depriving their purposes and motives of any
legitimacy.

We in the Security Council, the organ entrusted with
the maintenance of international peace and security,
must rise to the challenge and meet the expectations
of peoples all over the world. We must assume our
responsibilities in this context.

