On behalf of my delegation, I thank Special Representative of the Secretary- General Mr. Zahir Tanin for his briefing. I would also like to welcome the First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia, Mr. Ivica Daeic. I would further like to join others in expressing our concern over the recent developments in the field. Today, I would like to bring the following three points to the attention of the Council. First is the need to resume dialogue immediately. It is regrettable that the European Union-facilitated dialogue is at a standstill. Any peaceful avenue to resume talks should be explored by all stakeholders. The highest political figures should demonstrate commitment to dialogue so as to convince their constituents that they are serious about peace. There will be no progress in combatting organized crime and corruption or in advancing economic development without first resuming dialogue. We condemn the incidents of desecration and vandalization of religious sites of cemeteries, which are among the negative impacts of lack of dialogue. This should be taken very seriously. Secondly, I turn to the important role of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) in maintaining stability in the region. Indonesia commends UNMIK's multiple approaches to engaging grassroots communities through capacity-building, roundtables and workshops. Its support in the Working Group on Persons Unaccounted for in Relation to the Events in Kosovo provides a bridge to mend the wounds of conflict. UNMIK also deserves the recognition of the Council for becoming the first peacekeeping operation to obtain the ISO 9001:2015 quality management standard for end-to-end mission support field operations. This is a clear confirmation that UNMIK's operations are client-oriented, transparent and accountable, and serves as a testament to a desirable performance culture. My third and last point concerns coronavirus disease (COVID-19) prevention measures. The Secretary-General's report (S/2020/255) highlights the fact that authorities in Pristina declared a public health emergency in the region as the number of confirmed cases rose. As we know, this global pandemic draws attention to the need for cooperation and to protect the vulnerable. Working with neighbours plays a vital role in managing, containing and eliminating the pandemic. It is therefore critical that the authorities in Pristina start to work together with neighbouring communities to address this issue promptly. We call for unity of action in addressing COVID-19 and its potential security-related impact so to ensure that the situation does not deteriorate. If there is a lesson to be drawn from the current global pandemic, it is that we must work seriously on achieving unity and peace worldwide. It is time to put aside all the past resentments and seek to live as a single human heart - one heart that beats for the single cause of peace for each nation and all people.
