Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I, too, would
like to thank Ambassador Quinlan for his 90-day report
and to take this opportunity to wish him the greatest of
success in his task as Chairman of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006). I would also like to thank the Panel of Experts
for its work in support of the Committee.

The Council has taken note of the 21 February
report (see S/2013/103) of the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). That
report once again drew attention to Iran's refusal to
meet its international obligations and commitments
under the resolutions of the Security Council and the
IAEA Board of Governors. The report underscores
several elements of concern, including the absence of
substantive discussions between the IAEA and Iran on
unresolved issues and the possible military dimension
of the Iranian nuclear programme. Iran, as we know,
resorts to making objections on methods so as not to
respond substantively. The Agency has still not had
access to the Parchin military site.
Another element of concern is the continuation
of enrichment activities at Natanz and Fordow, with
no credible civilian aim. Twenty-per cent-enriched
uranium continues to be accumulated. Enrichment
capacity is also being stepped up, in both quantity
and quality. That is what we have concluded from the
announcement, on 23 January, of the installation of
new generation centrifuges at the Natanz enrichment
facility. The deployment and use of centrifuges on such
an industrial scale represents a significant development
in Iranian capacity to produce enriched uranium.
It is without a doubt another violation by Iran of its
international obligations.

Finally, let us not forget that other nuclear
activities are continuing, including those related to
the construction of a heavy water reactor, without Iran
allowing the IAEA to carry out verification.

The quarterly report of the 1737 Committee also
shows that Iran is still not meeting its international
obligations, as it continues to pursue its illicit nuclear
and ballistic activities as well as its attempts to get
around sanctions. France is concerned by the repeated
violations by Iran of the arms embargo imposed by
the Security Council, which are fuelling the spiral of
violence in the Middle East. In particular, we have
already expressed our concern regarding the transfer of
arms from Iran to Syria. Several such cases were noted

by the Experts' report. We welcome, in that regard, the
imposition of sanctions on Yas Air and SAD Export
Import Company, which were implicated in attempts to
deliver weapons to Syria.

We are also concerned by information relating to
the transfer of arms and ballistic material to non-State
actors in Gaza. The Panel of Experts provided the
Committee with a compilation of statements by Iranian
officials on that matter. Iran must explain those
deliveries, which represent a violation of the arms
embargo imposed by resolution 1747 (2007).

Yemen also recently informed the Council of the
seizure off its coast of a large quantity of weapons
originating in Iran and likely destined for Yemeni
insurgents, risking the destabilization of the political
transition process in that country.

Developments continued in the Iranian ballistic
programme during the reporting period, with contempt
for Council resolutions. Iran launched Shahab-l and
Shahab-3 missiles in July 2012 as part of Great Prophet
VII military exercises. France, together with Germany,
the United Kingdom and the United States, notified
the Committee of that new violation of resolution 1929
(2010), following which the Panel of Experts carried
out an investigation leading to a report concluding
unambiguously that the exercise undeniably constituted
a violation of resolution 1929 (2010).

In that case, as in the others I mentioned, the 1737
Committee must remind Iran of its obligations. It must,
together with the experts, consider the appropriate
measures that must be taken, including the imposition
of sanctions against the entities and persons responsible.

We remain open to dialogue, as shown by the
numerous meetings held between the E3+3 with Iran in
2012. More recently, during the Almaty meeting held
on 26 and 27 February, the E3+3 put new, balanced
proposals to Iran, which bear witness once again to
the will of the six parties to react positively if Iran
undertook the necessary steps to respond to the urgent
concerns of the international community. While those
discussions allowed for useful first steps to be taken,
they did not produce concrete results. The discussions
will therefore continue, first between experts in March,
then at the political director level in early April to
evaluate the situation. We remain, with our partners
in the group, fully committed to seeking solutions
providing for concrete progress to be made. But nothing
will be possible without clear political will on the part
of Iran to respond to the concerns of the international
community. Unfortunately, Iran has yet to show any
such will.

