Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I wish you, Sir, and your delegation success
as you assume the presidency of the Council for the
month of December. We also thank Ambassador Mayr-
Harting and the delegation of Austria for their
leadership last month.

We thank the Presidents and Prosecutors of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) for the information they
provided on the situation in the Tribunals and their
efforts to implement their completion strategies.
Today's briefings give us a further opportunity to
assess the results that the Tribunals have achieved, to
formulate practical recommendations and to chart a
course for the future.

Completing the work of ad hoc bodies of
international criminal justice poses a complex and
multifaceted challenge. It requires not only significant
efforts by the courts themselves but also the assistance
and oversight of the Security Council. Even bearing
ongoing trials in mind, we can say with considerable
certainty that, in both international law and political
terms, the Tribunals are close to completing their
missions.

A significant number of individuals who
committed crimes have fallen into the hands of
international criminal justice. The majority of them
have been convicted and are serving their sentences. As
instruments of post-conflict settlement, the Tribunals
have played their role in restoring peace and political

equilibrium in their respective regions. We also note
the Tribunals' contribution to the development of
national judicial systems and investigative organs; this
will enable national bodies to work independently
without prompting. There are now operationally
independent judicial systems in Rwanda and the States
that came into being in the territory of the former
Yugoslavia. We see no basis for rejecting the sovereign
right of those States to dispense national criminal
justice, especially since those countries have stated
their willingness to independently prosecute accused
identified by the ICTY and the ICTR.

We therefore believe that it is time for the
Security Council to adopt specific decisions on
implementing measures set out in the completion
strategies conveyed to the Tribunals six years ago in
resolution 1503 (2003) and reaffirmed in resolution
1534 (2004). In that context, we must also address the
issue of the deadline for extending the terms of the
current judges. It is our view that in 2010 the Tribunals
will maintain their current intensive pace of work.
Trials - no matter how complex - must not drag on
interminably.

For the successful completion of the Tribunals'
mandates and in order to speed up the trials, it will be
particularly to ensure effective cooperation by States,
first and foremost States in the regions covered by the
Tribunals. Here, we note the positive assessment of the
level of cooperation by the Serbian authorities set out
in the report of Prosecutor Brammertz (S/2009/589, annex II). We call on other countries to respond
promptly and appropriately to requests by the
Prosecutors of the Tribunals.

I note in conclusion the interesting and diverse
proposals for carrying out residual functions of the
Tribunals when they have completed their work. We
expect the Security Council to come forward next year
with optimal and mutually acceptable scenarios for
establishing a residual mechanism for the Tribunals.
