President Kikwete: At the beginning,
Mr. President, you promised that we would have seven
minutes to speak; now you have reduced the time limit
to five.

Let me thank you, Mr. President, for considering
the idea of holding this meeting to discuss the relations
between the African Union (AU) and the United
Nations. As rightly stated, African peace and security
issues are on the current agenda of the United Nations
Security Council. As members are aware, we in the
African Union have developed a comprehensive,
action-oriented peace architecture for addressing
conflicts on our continent. Conflict prevention and
mediation, post-conflict peacebuilding, counter-
terrorism, humanitarian emergency response and the
non-proliferation of nuclear and conventional weapons,
particularly small arms and illicit weapons, are the
major issues that preoccupy us in that regard.

In the African Union, our constitutive partnership
with the United Nations has been underlined as
essential for the effective implementation of our
Union's peace and security agenda. It is for that reason
that we in the African Union consider this meeting to
be critical for the strengthening of our partnership.

Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations
defines the basis for cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations in the maintenance
of international peace and security. While the ultimate
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security rests with the Security Council,
regional organizations and peace initiatives serve as
important building blocks for global collective
security.

Today's meeting is a welcome endeavour in our
joint quest to advance cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union. Our experience in
various conflict situations, during which we have
worked together in Africa, has demonstrated that we
have been able to achieve notable successes. But much
more needs to be done, and there are challenges that
need to be overcome through joint efforts. This
meeting, therefore, is a perfect setting for identifying
and discussing those challenges and agreeing on a way
forward to overcome them.
Let me remind this important organ of the United
Nations that Africa has come of age. We have become
aware of our responsibility to take action with regard
to conflicts on our continent and elsewhere on this
planet. Indeed, through the African Union and the
regional economic communities, African nations have
increasingly been seen to be proactive in taking
decisions and actions to deal with conflicts that befall
African nations and peoples.

The AU and the regional economic communities
need partnership with the United Nations for many
reasons. First, they need to build their capacities to
prevent, manage and resolve conflicts. There is a
serious demand for assistance in building the requisite
institutional capacities. Substantial human and
financial resources are required to enable us to carry
out these critical functions, and such resources are not
readily available. The United Nations can be of great
help in assisting us; with such help, we can overcome
these constraints. The Ten-Year Capacity-Building
Programme for the African Union is an appropriate
mechanism. The AU will continue to work with the
regional consultative mechanism of the United Nations
in Addis Ababa in implementing the Programme. But
Africa's demand for resources is enormous. We appeal
to the international community to do more.

There is also the question of speed in taking
action when threats to peace arise, particularly on the
African continent. Experience has shown that the
United Nations is not as fast as one would like in
taking decisions and action. We wish that the processes
within this institution could be expedited. I am sure
that I am not the first one to have said that; neither is
this the first time that such an appeal has been made to
the Security Council.

There are two other things that require the
attention of those participating in this meeting. The
first relates to mandates for regional organizations,
especially where military intervention and sanctions
are involved. The United Nations holds the overall
mandate for those two types of action. We in the AU
and the regional economic communities have
intervened from time to time, and our intervention has
proved effective. My concern is about the danger of
conflict arising between the AU and the United
Nations, especially if the latter were to take a different
position where such decisions have been made and
actions taken. I believe that this matter needs to be
08-30672
given serious thought and that ways to prevent such a
thing from happening must be considered.

The second thing requiring our attention is an
appeal that the United Nations establish mechanisms
for helping the African Union and the regional
economic communities to build the capacities to
implement their decisions regarding conflict resolution
as expeditiously as possible. As members know,
conflict prevention and resolution require swift
reactions. Indeed, the AU and the regional economic
communities have demonstrated the capacity to be fast
in many instances. Unfortunately, as I said earlier, we
are constrained in terms of resources.

In some ways, this matter is very much related to
the current funding regulations of the United Nations,
which do not allow the funding of peacekeeping
missions and operations led by other groups, even
when authorized by the Security Council. That impedes
peacekeeping and peace support missions undertaken
by the African Union and the regional economic
communities in Africa. That in turn affects the
predictability and sustainability of such missions and
may jeopardize entire peace initiatives undertaken by
the AU and the regional economic communities in
Africa.

In that regard, we welcome the proposal by the
Secretary-General that an African Union-United
Nations panel be set up within the next three months to
consider the modalities of how to support regional
organizations in terms of financing such operations. We
hope that the panel will look at the possibility of
amending regulations to enable the United Nations to
finance regional operations authorized by the United
Nations Security Council. But we also hope that
modalities will be explored for assisting acceptable
initiatives of regional organizations that do not have
the authorization of the Security Council. After all, the
goal is the same: the maintenance of international
peace.

Experience has shown that such interventions
have been very useful, at least in the case of Africa.
Where regional, economic communities and our
continental organization, formerly the Organization of
African Unity and now the AU, have taken action - in
Sierra Leone, Liberia, Burundi, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, southern Sudan, Somalia,
Darfur, Zimbabwe and the Comoros - it has helped so
much in mitigating the crises before the United Nations
arrived on the scene. Indeed, I believe that if in the
future such mechanisms are strengthened and working
relations with the United Nations are better defined and
streamlined, there would be fewer instances where
direct intervention of the United Nations as an
institution would be involved.

Take as an example Zimbabwe, the subject of so
much discussion these days. The Southern African
Development Community (SADC), as an organization,
has done a tremendous job. It is SADC's work that has
enabled the people of Zimbabwe to hold the recent
round of peaceful elections. SADC remains seized with
the situation in Zimbabwe to ensure that the will of the
people of Zimbabwe is respected. This is the spirit of
the meeting last week, and it will be the spirit of future
meetings to be held soon. SADC needs to be supported
in this regard.

Before I conclude, I wish to thank the Secretary-
General for his tireless efforts in mobilizing additional
resources and logistical support for the international
community in support of African peacekeeping
missions in places like Darfur and Somalia. I also
thank the countries and organizations, such as the
European Union, that have responded positively. But
much more needs to be done, urgently.

The peacekeeping operations in Darfur and
Somalia, both of which are authorized by the Security
Council, are still seriously constrained owing to a lack
of adequate financial resources, logistics and
equipment. Within the broader issue of cooperation
between the United Nations and the AU, I reaffirm and
urge continuing implementation of the declaration on
Enhancing UN-AU Cooperation, agreed upon by our
two organizations in 2006.

In conclusion, let me once again thank you,
Mr. President, for giving the AU an opportunity to
share its thoughts during this important debate. We
need and encourage cooperation between our two
organizations, and our two Councils need each other.
We in the African Union support the idea that these
meetings should be held annually with as much
technical consultation as may be required to be
conducted in between. We look forward with great
anticipation to the outcomes of this debate today and
tomorrow. As usual, we expect the resolutions and
decisions to advance and consolidate the working
relations between the United Nations and the AU, and
6
between the United Nations Security Council and the
African Union Peace and Security Council.

