Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I thank Under-
Secretary-General Herve Ladsous for his comprehensive
briefing today and thank Ambassador Staffan de
Mistura for his participation in today's meeting and for
his outstanding work as Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). I wish
him well in his new and important duties. We also
welcome the presence of Ambassador Jan Kubis,
congratulate him on his nomination and wish him full
success. I express Portugal's full support to him in the
challenging work ahead. We also welcome the
participation of His Excellency Mr. Jawed Ludin and
thank him for his contribution to today's debate.

The past few months have witnessed several
important events for Afghanistan, particularly with
regard to regional cooperation, the way forward after
2014 and the second phase of the transition process.
Regional cooperation, as several speakers have
highlighted, continues to be one of the fundamental
pillars of a new Afghanistan.

The Istanbul Conference for Afghanistan, held on
2 November, initiated the Istanbul Process, reaffirming
general principles of regional cooperation, but also
including a list of specific confidence-building
measures for consideration by the countries of the
region. We look forward to the concept paper to be
circulated in January, outlining the agenda for a
follow-up ministerial-level conference in Kabul in June
2012.

On 5 December, the Bonn Conference provided
an extremely significant opportunity for charting the
way forward for the partnership between Afghanistan
and its international partners. The Conference
reaffirmed the commitment of the international
community to support Afghanistan through the
transition, with a focus on economic development and
on the peace and reconciliation process, in line with
agreed principles.

The commitments made are all the more
important since they revolve around the Kabul process
and are based on greater transparency and better
governance. The civil society meeting, which
reaffirmed the centrality of human rights and
fundamental freedoms enshrined in the Afghan
Constitution, is particularly noteworthy and should
serve as an example to us of the strength of the Afghan
society's capacity to mobilize around shared values and
ambitions.

As regards the inteqal, or transition, process,
Portugal is encouraged by the progress achieved so far.
The fact that areas already under full Afghan security
responsibility do not show any particular increase in
violence and security incidents is extremely positive.
As the Chair of the Transition Coordination
Commission has noted,

"Commitments made at the Lisbon Conference
are still on track: the phased military withdrawal
has begun, the Kabul Process is reinvigorated,
and preparations for strategic partnerships are
under way."

As the Secretary-General said in his report, the
human rights and humanitarian situations remain "a
major concern throughout the country" (S/2011/722*, para. 27). The vast majority of civilian casualties are
attributable to anti-Government elements, and efforts
by pro-Government forces have resulted in a
significant decrease in the percentage of civilian

casualties attributable to them.

Rule of law, in particular the judiciary and
penitentiary systems, needs particular monitoring and
reform, as highlighted by the Secretary-General's
report. Regarding the recent findings on abuses of
detainees and indeed of several cases of torture, the
cooperation provided by competent Afghan authorities

to UNAMA is the best possible way to get these
occurrences to stop. Portugal supports the remediation
plan advanced by UNAMA comprising inspection,
human rights training, monitoring and supporting
Government accountability actions.

Portugal follows with utmost attention the
situation of Afghan women and welcomes the recently
released report on the criminal justice system's
implementation of the 2009 Law on the Elimination of
Violence against Women. We support to the fullest
extent the efforts of the Government of Afghanistan
and of UNAMA to promote and protect the human
rights of women and to advocate and monitor
implementation of this law, as well as to promote the
political participation of women in the peace and
reconciliation process. Portugal echoes the Afghan
women's civil society and advocacy groups, as well as
the United Nations, who carried those messages
forward to the International Conference on Afghanistan
in Bonn, in order to highlight the continuing need to
support women's rights and empowerment in
Afghanistan.

I conclude by recalling the overarching goals that
have inspired the recent initiatives on Afghanistan.
Portugal encourages the efforts that Afghan institutions
and Afghan civil society are making to consolidate the
gains of the last few years. As the transition process
gathers momentum and increasingly reaches greater
sections of Afghanistan, and as the phased military
withdrawal of the international military presence
continues, socio-economic development, particularly in
education, professional training and the social
promotion of women, must be considered a strategic
interest in the creation of a peaceful and prosperous
Afghanistan.

