Mr. Eitel (Germany): On 11 October 1991, the
Council adopted resolution 715 (1991). In its paragraph 7,
the Council requested the Committee established under
resolution 661 (1990), the Special Commission and the
Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) to jointly develop a mechanism for
monitoring any future sales or supplies by other countries
to Iraq of items which could be used for the production
or acquisition of banned weapons. Subsequently, those
three parties undertook considerable efforts to fulfil that

 

task. The thoroughness of their work is reflected in the fact
that it took more than four years to complete it. The last
step was the adoption of the mechanism by the Committee
established under resolution 661 (1990). On 7 December
1995, I, as Chairman of the Committee, was finally in a
position to sign a letter to the President of the Council by
which the provisions for the mechanism were submitted to
this body.

Today, we will approve the mechanism and give it the
binding force Chapter VII of the Charter provides for. Its
aim is to prevent the misuse of items legally imported into
Iraq for the illegal purposes of production or acquisition of
banned weapons. This aim justifies the new obligations
imposed on Iraq and on other States. To reach this aim, a
system of notifications will be established; notifications,
both by Iraq and by States planning to supply dual-use
items to Iraq, will be required. These notifications will be
complemented by the possibility of an inspection of those
items at the end-user site. I am confident that the Special
Commission and the International Atomic Energy Agency
will provide the necessary advice and assistance with regard
to the implementation of the mechanism.

The mechanism will be complementary to the other
elements of ongoing monitoring and verification. It is a
regime not for international licensing, but for the
transmission of information. It will therefore fulfil its
purpose of effectively monitoring activities relevant to
prohibited weapons while not impeding Iraq's legitimate
right to import or export items for non-proscribed purposes.

The mechanism will enter into force While the
sanctions imposed on Iraq are still in force. It should be
applied as soon as possible. The sanctions allow the import
of humanitarian items - medical supplies, foodstuffs and
other supplies for essential civilian needs - to Iraq.
Included amongst those items are dual-use items which will
fall under the mechanism; therefore, the draft resolution
provides that the obligation to notify will become effective
for all States except Iraq as of the date on which the
Secretary-General and the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency report to the Council
that they are satisfied with the preparedness of States. With
regard to Iraq, this obligation will become effective as of a
date agreed upon between the Special Commission, the
Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency and Iraq. This date must not be later than 60 days
from today.

As important as early application is, it is after the
lifting of sanctions that the mechanism will have its full
effect. As a matter of fact, implementation of the
mechanism is a prerequisite for the lifting of sanctions.

The fact that we are able to adopt the mechanism
today is a success attributable to many parties. My
delegation coordinated the effort to reach this end, but we
would have failed if we had not found support from and
a constructive and cooperative approach by many others,
and I now express my thanks to them. My special thanks
go to the United Nations Special Commission and the
International Atomic Energy Agency, which laid the
foundations of the mechanism. I am grateful to the
members of the Committee established under resolution
661 (1990) and, in particular, to the members of the
Council and - I stress - their experts, who, through
lengthy discussions, found the solutions which have
enabled us to act today.

I hope that the adoption of the draft resolution will
be another step towards establishing conditions for a
durable peace in the region. Germany, therefore, will vote
in favour of the draft resolution.

