Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): At the outset,
I would like to thank you, Sir, for having organized
today's debate on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. Iwould also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his report on the subject (S/2012/376) and for his
incisive statement. Our thanks are also due to the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Emergency Relief Coordinator, the Assistant
Secretary-General of the United Nations Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights, and the Director
of the International Committee of the Red Cross for
their statements.

It has been India's consistent View that the protection
of its population is the foremost responsibility of every
State. The right to life is the foundation of any social
order. It is one of the fundamental rights enshrined in
the constitutions of a vast number of United Nations
Member States, including my own, from which no
derogation is permissible even in times of emergency.

India's commitment to the right to life has been
demonstrated at the international level as well. More
than five decades ago, long before that term came into
common usage in the Council, Indian soldiers defended
the civilians of the Congo as part of the United Nations
mission. Since then, our men and women in uniform
have been at the forefront of turning this Council's word
into deed, including through the services of the United
Nations first female formed police unit. We remain at
the cutting edge of many United Nations operations
in places where civilians are under threat. India thus
brings to this table a quantum of experience in actually
protecting civilians in peacekeeping missions that is
unique in its relevance and in its variety and depth.

The Security Council has been considering the
protection of civilians as a thematic subject since
1999 and has adopted a number of resolutions. This
issue has also been incorporated in the Council's
resolutions on women, children, the protection of
humanitarian workers, conflict prevention and sexual
exploitation. A number of country-specific resolutions
also have provisions aimed at the protection of
civilians. These resolutions, taken together, have raised
awareness and strengthened the international legal
framework for protecting civilians in armed conflict.
Unfortunately, notwithstanding the development of
international humanitarian law and the efforts of the
international community, civilians continue to suffer
disproportionately during armed conflicts.

It is therefore necessary to take stock of what we
have achieved and where we have failed and why. The
latest report of the Secretary-General has identified
four challenges: enhancing compliance by non-State
armed groups; enhancing protection by United Nations
peacekeeping and other relevant missions; improving
humanitarian access; and enhancing accountability for
violations.

A study undertaken by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO)
makes it clear that the major share of the blame for
failures lies with the Security Council itself, which has
been unable, over more than a decade, to develop a clear
understanding of the nature and extent of the problem;
has been unable to give clear directions about what it
wants and how the DPKO should operate; and has not
given credence to the voices of countries whose troops
are actually deployed on the ground. As the report
succinctly states, the confusion over the Council's intent
is evident in the lack of policy, guidance, planning and
preparedness.

It is important for the Council to act urgently to
address this situation. As was made clear by the Force
Commanders of United Nations missions in their
briefings to the Council last week (see S/PV.6789),
the primary gap facing the peacekeepers in protecting
civilians is the lack of adequate resources. Without an
adequate number of well-trained troops, equipped with
adequate equipment, assets and enablers, the Council
cannot hope to realize its aspirations for the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. In that context, my
delegation thinks that the Council's responsibility does
not end with the generation of mandates. The Council
should be held accountable if unachievable mandates
are generated for political expediency or if adequate
resources are not made available.

At the normative levels, there are several other
issues that the Council needs to consider in the context
ofthe role it has assumed for the protection of civilians
in armed conflict.

First, the protection of civilians, when applied
as a basis for Security Council action, must respect
the fundamental aspects of the Charter of the United
Nations, including the sovereignty and integrity of
Member States. Any decision to intervene that is
associated with political motives distracts from the
noble principles and needs to be avoided. Also, the
response of the Council and international community
must be proportional to the threat involved.

Secondly, the principle of the protection of
civilians must be applied in a uniform manner to all
parties to a conflict. The failure of the Council to
enforce the accountability of armed groups has served
to exacerbate the situation in several instances, and
must be addressed.

Thirdly, in the implementation of the Council's
mandate for protecting civilians, there is a need to
ensure responsibility while protecting. The recent
actions of some organizations and Member States have
brought to the fore a considerable sense of unease about
the manner in which the humanitarian imperative of
protecting civilians has been interpreted for actual
action on the ground. Monitoring of the manner in
which the Council's mandates are implemented has
therefore assumed great importance.

Fourthly, to enable States to fulfil their responsibility
to protect their populations, national capacities need to
be strengthened, where needed, without political or
extraneous motives. That calls for enhancing support for
socio-economic development and promoting inclusive
political institutions. It also calls for patient work,
rather than media-driven deliberations and actions.

Fifthly, the Council must resist the temptation to
resort to its Chapter VII powers instead ofpromoting the
pacific settlement of disputes under Chapter VI. In that
connection, the Council must also respect international
legal institutions, and not make use of them for political
purposes such as regime change.

In conclusion, I would like to stress that the
Council's responsibility for protecting civilians does
not end with a military or police response. Civilians
require humanitarian wherewithal for survival. That
requires a more integrated and holistic view. Multiple
stakeholders should be involved in that process, not just
the military. Engagement among warring factions in a
conflict situation in a nationally owned and inclusive
political process is of paramount importance. Such an
inclusive approach to national reconciliation, anchored
in State sovereignty, is the only way to move forward
and ensure the protection of civilians in an effective,
pragmatic and enduring manner.

