Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): We commend the French
presidency for holding today's important debate. We
are grateful to Under-Secretaries-General Valerie Amos
and Alain Le Roy and Assistant Secretary-General Ivan
Simonovie for their presentations. We welcome the
opportunity for the Council to exchange views with the
wider membership on the transformation of the civilian
protection landscape over the past few months.

The protection of civilians in armed conflict is
one of the crucial challenges of our time. In the
Security Council and other forums, Brazil has sought
to contribute to the United Nations efforts in that area.
Last February, during the Brazilian presidency of the
Security Council, we organized a meeting aimed at
considering all dimensions of the protection agenda
(see S/PV.6479).

The protection of civilians is a humanitarian
imperative. It is a distinct concept that must not be
confused or conflated with threats to international
peace and security, as described in the Charter, or with
the responsibility to protect. We must avoid
excessively broad interpretations of the protection of
civilians, which could link it to the exacerbation of
conflict, compromise the impartiality of the United
Nations or create the perception that it is being used as
a smokescreen for intervention or regime change. To
that end, we must ensure that all efforts to protect
civilians be strictly in keeping with the Charter and
based on a rigorous and non-selective application of
international humanitarian law.

Whenever possible, the protection of civilians
should be pursued through peaceful and preventive
means. Those include dialogue with the local
populations, compliance with international
humanitarian law, coordination with humanitarian
actors and diligent monitoring and reporting. In some
cases, coercive measures may be necessary to protect
civilians. Nevertheless, the use of force must always be
a last resort. We must take the greatest care to ensure
that our actions douse the flames of conflict instead of
stoking them.

When the Council does authorize the use of force,
such as in the case of Libya, we must hold ourselves to
a high standard. The Council has a responsibility to
ensure the appropriate implementation of its
resolutions. Force must be used carefully, with due
regard for the principle of proportionality and in strict
accordance with the terms of the authorization. The use
of force to protect civilians does not abrogate
international law, but underlines the need for strict
adherence to it.

Moreover, just as peacekeepers must be
accountable for their actions and omissions in the
cause of protection, Member States, too, must be clear
on how they are fulfilling the mandate they have
received from the Council. In the same vein, the use of
force by peacekeepers to protect civilians must be
carried out with utmost restraint. This is necessary to
ensure that blue helmets are not perceived as parties to
the conflict. Avoiding such a perception is crucial for
the continued success of peacekeeping. Trust in the
Organization's impartiality is indispensable for it to
constructively contribute to sustainable political
solutions to conflict, which is the ultimate goal of
United Nations peacekeeping.

Protecting civilians is one of the most important
ways in which the Organization gives expression to its
ultimate objectives, as set out in the Charter. The
United Nations has made great strides in this area, both
in the Council and in other forums. Going forward, we
must continue to advance the protection agenda,
focusing on the five core challenges identified by the
Secretary-General in 2009.

Brazil supports a consensual, non-selective
approach to ensure the protection of civilians around
the world. In the Council, in the General Assembly and
in the field, we remain committed to finding solutions
to the dilemmas of protection.

