Mr. Larrain (Chile) (interpretation from Spanish):
The most recent report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Angola, which we considered last week,
brings rather discouraging news regarding the prospects
for peace in that country. Indeed, according to that report,
during the last two and a half months there have been
setbacks in different areas, which have jeopardized the
efforts that have been made and which affect the viability
of the peace process as a whole.

In addition to the deterioration in the military
situation, which calls into question the implementation of
the ceasefire, important provisions of the Lusaka Protocol
have not yet been implemented, such as those relating to
the information that must be provided with regard to the
demobilization of the military forces and provisions
relating to the process of the normalization of State
administration. At the same time, restrictions are being
placed on the freedom of movement of the personnel of
the United Nations Observer Mission in Angola
(MONUA), and on more than one occasion MONUA's
verification tasks have been obstructed.

Indications of large-scale military preparations in
different parts of the country only confirm the fears that
the achievements resulting from the signing of the Lusaka
Protocol in November 1994 are being seriously
threatened. Given this situation, we believe that
postponing the withdrawal of United Nations military
units from Angola, as recommended by the Secretary-
General, represents the most appropriate response to the
situation that is prevailing in that country today.

Angola has reached a stage that is decisive to the
consolidation of the peace process. We believe that it is
incumbent upon the Uniao Nacional para a Independencia
Total de Angola (UNITA) to demonstrate, through
actions, its commitment to this process. This means that
it must end the delays and unfulfilled promises and
implement the relevant resolutions of the Council and the
pending aspects of the Lusaka Protocol. That Protocol
remains as the obligatory framework for the parties and
the unavoidable course that must be followed if peace is
to be achieved in Angola. That instrument contains rights
and obligations freely undertaken by the parties, and there

 

can be no justification, under any circumstances, for
straying, explicitly or tacitly, from its provisions.

My delegation believes that the efforts being made to
put the peace process in Angola back on track are
worthwhile. In this context, we support the initiative of the
Secretary-General to convene a meeting on Angolan
national territory between President Dos Santos and
Mr. Savimbi in order to eliminate the obstacles still in the
way of the prompt implementation of the Lusaka Protocol.
We believe that such a meeting could contribute to
improving the climate of confidence between the parties, a
step which is essential for re-establishing dialogue and
warding off the threats to the peace process.

We appreciate the initiatives made by the Special
Representative, Mr. Beye, in attempting to bring the parties
closer together.

We also appreciate the steps taken by the three
observer countries of the peace process in Angola, and in
particular their recommendation of a course of action for us
to take at this decisive moment in the peace process.

In the View of my delegation, the Uniao Nacional para
a Independencia Total de Angola (UNITA) should see this
new action by the Council not just as a punitive exercise
but also as a new, urgent appeal by the international
community to return to the course outlined by the peace
agreements that it freely signed.

UNITA and its leaders will, in the last analysis, have
sole responsibility in determining whether or not the
additional measures drawn up by the Council are
implemented.

Today it is up to both parties, but especially UNITA,
to determine whether peace will be fully consolidated or
whether there will be a return to military confrontation,
bringing death, destruction and suffering for the Angolan
people.

It is time for the leaders of the parties to ask
themselves what the Angolan people want after so many
years of conflict, and to act accordingly.

We believe that peace, which is so elusive in that part
of the African continent, deserves another chance. For this
reason, we support this draft resolution.

