Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I would first like to
express my country's firm condemnation of the heinous
terrorist attack of 15 April in Kefraya and Foah, which
killed more than 120 children and women and injured
hundreds of innocent civilians. On behalf of my
Government and the people of Kazakhstan, I would like
to offer our sincere condolences to the Syrian people,
particularly the families of the victims, and to wish the
injured a speedy recovery.

We would like to thank Special Coordinator
Nickolay Mladenov for his briefing on the situation
in the Middle East, and we would like to comment on
some key issues.

With regard to the Palestinian question, we urge
both sides to demonstrate the political will necessary
to reach a historic and long-awaited peace agreement
by strengthening the peace, security and development
nexus. Promoting economic confidence-building
measures between the parties will help to accelerate
a political settlement based on the principle of two
States for two peoples. That concept should guarantee
the inalienable right of Palestinians to statehood
and Israel's right to security. We are of the View that
negotiations should be resumed as soon as possible in a
bilateral format with no preconditions, and mediated by
the Middle East Quartet.

The catastrophe in Syria has spread beyond the
region and is having global repercussions. Kazakhstan
supports the efforts of Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura,
the Islamic Republic of Iran, the Russian Federation,
Turkey and the international community to bring the
Syrian Government and opposition together. The
upcoming meeting to be held in Astana on 4 and 5 May
is intended to carry forward the Geneva negotiations
that are scheduled to take place soon after.

While doing everything possible to ensure the well-
being of the Syrian people, we urge the international
community to make a coordinated effort to combat
the terrorist activities of the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) and other organizations. In that
regard, we would like to remind the Security Council
of Kazakhstan's initiative to develop a code of conduct
for anti-terrorist operations, which represents a major
step towards establishing a worldwide, United Nations-
led coalition or network for implementing the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy.

In Lebanon, the formation of a new Government
and the election of a new President are positive events
leading to the holding of free and fair parliamentary
elections. We should help Lebanon consolidate its
Constitution and democracy, which remain contingent
on developments in its neighbour Syria. The Lebanese
armed forces are playing a vital role in maintaining
security on the border with Syria and throughout
Lebanon and thereby helping to avert threats from ISIL
and Al-Nusra. Syrian refugees in Lebanon now number
more than 1.5 million, and the international community
must provide the country with more assistance.

The conflict in Yemen has no military solution; as
with all other conflicts and crises, only a diplomatic
and political settlement can resolve it. All the parties
involved in the conflict, along with their allies, should
end all warfare and every form of military force. It is
clear that the deep-seated contradictions in Yemeni
society can be resolved only through a broad, inclusive
national dialogue.

The worsening humanitarian situation in the
Middle East demands urgent action on the part of all
of us to mitigate the suffering of the local populations,
especially in besieged cities. The humanitarian crisis
impedes progress on political processes, and the failure
to achieve political progress is an obstacle to solving the
humanitarian crisis. Similarly, the exodus of refugees
from Syria and other countries in the region has brought
political problems to the host countries and caused
geopolitical tensions with far-reaching implications in
Europe and other countries around the world, resulting
in worsening destabilization. Besides that, we have also
been witnessing outbursts of xenophobia, hostility and
Islamophobia that must be urgently addressed if we are
to maintain harmony within and among nations.

Finally, I would like to emphasize Kazakhstan's
strong commitment to ensuring that the long-awaited
peace in the Middle East can be reached, based on the
fundamental principles of compromise, mutual respect
and political dialogue.

