Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): The
statement made by the Prosecutor concerning the
Permanent Representative of the Sudan is a violation
of all political and diplomatic norms. It is a threat that
should be rejected and that reflects his methods of work
at the Court. I would even say that it is the statement of a
terrorist who is trying to silence the voice of justice and
that of a politician who does not recognize the political
and diplomatic rules and norms that give us the right to
defend ourselves and to make our voices heard by the
Council, which is responsible for peace and security.

If he and his supporters have been touched by our
strong words that have shaken his credibility and put in
question his professionalism, then that is another issue
that does not give him to right to once again use the
Rome Statute to intimidate diplomatic personnel, whose
duties and functions are stipulated in political and
diplomatic rules. Such conduct should be rejected. To
permit it would only undermine international legality,
the work of the United Nations and all diplomatic norms.

Perhaps the Council has noticed that he is in an
emotional state and is behaving emotionally as a result
of what we stated regarding his conduct and his lack
of credibility. That has prompted him, at this delicate
juncture, to make a statement accusing the Permanent
Representative of the Sudan of being behind the crimes
committed in Darfur. That is the way in which he thinks,
and that is the manner in which he has tackled all of
these issues - in a totally illegal, immoral and illogical
manner, to the extent of intimidation and terrorization.

I would have preferred to hear him respond to all of
the arguments that I have put forward and the statements
made by international personalities who have denied
that ethnic cleansing has been committed in Darfur. Why
did he not say at the time that he would also prosecute
President Obasanjo, Mr. Danforth and Judge Cassisi
for having refuted allegations that ethnic cleansing had
been committed?

I will stop here. I am confident that the Council's
wisdom will guide it as concerns the manner in which
he thinks and behaves.

