Mr. Kvelashvili (Georgia): At the outset, let me
express our heartfelt gratitude to the presidency of
the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan for organizing
today's open debate and, personally, to His Royal
Highness Crown Prince Al Hussein bin Abdullah II
for his leadership, which has significantly contributed
to the constructive and comprehensive nature of our
deliberations today.

Georgia fully supports and shares the vision,
approaches and conclusions outlined in the concept
paper (S/2015/215, annex) disseminated earlier by
the Permanent Mission of Jordan, and calls on all
stakeholders to play a more vigorous role in our joint
efforts aimed at countering violent extremism. We
are also convinced that it is time for the international
community to stand firmly for the principles enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations, and underline the
importance of respect for international law for the sake
of peace and stability in the world.

Georgia fully associates itself with the statement
made by the Head of the Delegation of the European
Union. In addition, I would like to make some comments
in my national capacity.
The latest developments in the Middle East, Africa
and Eastern Europe have clearly demonstrated that we
cannot take our security for granted, and in today's
uncertain world, all like-minded countries must stand
united to protect and promote peace, stability and a rules-
based world order. Georgia believes that utter disrespect
for the fundamental principles of international law
and for human rights and basic freedoms in domestic
affairs have significantly contributed to the dangerous
erosion of trust among nations and peoples, which has
in turn played a pivotal role in all recent manifestations
of violent extremism and the radicalization of youth in
certain parts of the world.

For instance, European security is being
significantly challenged by the Russian Federation's
aggressive behaviour towards its neighbours,
especially Georgia and Ukraine, through the ongoing
illegal military occupation of integral parts of our
sovereign territories. That worrisome pattern of
arbitrarily altering international borders by force poses
a significant threat not only to the strategic Vision of a
Europe whole, free and at peace, but also to the notion
of amicable relations among young men and women
of all countries of our region. When State-run mass
media, especially television, encourage extreme forms
of nationalism and Violent ideology and try to justify
on chauvinistic grounds the grabbing and annexing of
foreign lands, youth radicalization becomes a common
phenomenon.

With regard to the Middle East, we are deeply
shocked and distressed by the violent developments and
rapid deterioration of the security situation in parts of
Iraq and Syria. Georgia condemns in the strongest terms
the despicable acts of terrorism and violence against
civilian populations on the basis of their religious and
ethnic affiliation. Terrorist groups such as the Islamic
State ofIraq and the Levant (ISIL) pose threats not only
to the nations of the Middle East but also to Europe,
North America and beyond. It is only through our joint
efforts and commitment that we can stop, reverse and
prevent such violent actions from happening.

We fully support international cooperative efforts
to counter ISIL. Georgia has already joined three
counter-ISIL working groups on counter-financing,
counter-messaging and foreign terrorist fighters. We
hope that the work of those groups will further increase
the level of coordination and dialogue among coalition
members.

At the national level, Georgia, which has historically
been an example of ethnic and religious tolerance,
is working on modifying a domestic policy aimed at
countering the rising global threat of extremism and
terrorism. My Government has already initiated the
relevant legislative amendments, whose adoption aims
at bringing the criminal code of Georgia in line with the
best international practices. It is of special importance
that, inter alia, the amendments will criminalize the
whole spectrum of activities related to foreign terrorist
fighters, in accordance with resolution 2178 (2014).

At the same, more has to be done at national
and international levels to address the root causes
conducive to the spread of Violent extremism, including
policies aimed at social and economic development,
and fostering education and youth employment, as well
as their political empowerment.

The participation ofthird-country citizens as foreign
terrorist fighters in ISIL and other terrorist groups is
a matter of serious concern. Addressing this problem,
especially taking into account its transnational and
cross-border nature, requires coordinated approaches.
We stand ready to work closely with our international
partners in countering the global problems posed by
foreign terrorist fighters by better coordinating our
efforts, as well as exchanging experience and good
practices.

