Mr. Berger (Germany): I thank the Legal
Counsel for her detailed briefing on the modalities for
the establishment of specialized Somali anti-piracy
courts. We also commend the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2011/360) for its detailed analysis of the
legal, administrative and financial implications.

Despite some progress in recent months,
Germany is very concerned about the persistent threat
of piracy and armed robbery off Somalia and in the
region. The Security Council clearly needs to continue
to address this threat to peace and security. The
Council has taken up this task by unanimously
adopting resolution 1976 (2011). The Security Council
and the international community have shown unity and
resolve, but we have to step up our efforts.

The report of the Secretary-General identifies a
number of challenges with regard to the establishment
of specialized Somali anti-piracy courts and the setting
up of an extraterritorial Somali court in a third country
in the region. We hold the View that it must ultimately
be in Somalia that pirates are prosecuted and
imprisoned. The urgent establishment of adequate
structures in Somalia is crucial to reaching that goal.

We therefore share the aim of assisting the
Somali justice system to prosecute piracy suspects in
accordance with international standards, in particular
fair trial and due process guarantees, and to imprison
those convicted in accordance with international
human rights standards, thereby enabling States to
transfer piracy suspects to Somalia.

To that end, we would like to encourage all
countries to continue their efforts and commitments in
that regard. We appreciate the efforts of neighbouring
States of Somalia and States in the region, such as
Kenya and the Seychelles, to contribute to the efforts
to prosecute piracy suspects. We believe these efforts
need to be further enhanced until the Somali justice
system is able to prosecute piracy suspects.

The activities of the Contact Group on Piracy off
Somalia and its Trust Fund are important and very
useful components of these combined efforts. We
support these efforts and invite others, including the
shipping industry, to further participate and commit
funds in order to build support for courts and prisons in
Somalia that are up to acceptable international
standards.

Let me also mention the recent signing of a
memorandum of understanding between the
Seychelles, the Transitional Federal Government,
Somaliland and Puntland concerning the transfer of
convicted persons from the Seychelles to prisons in
Somalia. This is the first arrangement entered into by
Somali authorities in that regard.

The Secretary-General's report describes
challenges with regard to the establishment of an
extraterritorial Somali specialized anti-piracy court in a
third State in the region. We take note of these
challenges. The numerous uncertainties show that this
option needs further and thorough exploration.
However, we should continue to follow up on the
Secretary-General's report in this respect and try to
find solutions to the challenges he presented.

With regard to the financial implications of the
eventual establishment of such an extraterritorial court,
we take note of the report's finding that it would not be
possible at this stage to comment authoritatively on
costs figures. We would nevertheless like to underline
that any such solution would have to be found within
reasonable financial limits.

Let me conclude by underlining that we look
forward to constructively continuing cooperation with
partners in the Security Council and the Contact
Group.

