Mr. Elaraby (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic): At
last, eight days after the beginning of the Israeli aggression
against Lebanon, the Security Council has met to adopt a
resolution calling for an immediate cessation of military
operations which are a flagrant aggression against a country
which was a founder Member of the United Nations.

The Egyptian Government has stated, and repeats
again today, that it absolutely rejects the Israeli aggression
against Lebanon. The people and Government of Egypt
support the brother people of Lebanon in their tragedy;
we support them in all international forums, including the
Security Council and the General Assembly, giving
Lebanon our full support for the defence of its people, its
territorial integrity and its sovereignty.

Before turning to Egypt's position on the two draft
resolutions, I should very briefly like to speak about the
manner in which the Council has dealt with this matter
since the Israeli aggression began. It has been marked by
a negativism which will no doubt have unfortunate effects
on the maintenance of international peace and security,
particularly, in the Middle East region.

Lebanon requested an emergency meeting of the
Council on Sunday, 14 April, but differences in the
positions of members of the Council led to a delay in a
favourable response being made to the request. Deferring
a decision by the Council for eight days has enabled the
aggressor to continue its aggression, flouting the
principles of international law and of the Charter of the
United Nations.

A very honest comparison of this case - in which
Lebanon called on the Security Council to take the
necessary measures under the Charter to protect it against
aggression, to protect its people against raids, carnage and
the forced displacement of thousands of innocent
civilians - with that of minor aggression against a
limited number of citizens of another State, when the
Security Council adopted immediate, specific measures,
strengthens the suggestion that the Security Council
applies double standards, depending on the State that is
the victim of aggression, its citizens and the country that
launches the aggression.

The draft resolution submitted by the Arab Group
shows the severity and scale of the tragedy being
experienced by the Lebanese people following the Israeli
aggression. The draft resolution co-sponsored by Egypt
within the Arab Group reflects the following fundamental
principles. First of all, it calls on Israel immediately to
cease its military action and to withdraw forthwith its
forces from all Lebanese territory; secondly, it calls for
strict respect for the territorial integrity, sovereignty, and
political independence of Lebanon; thirdly, it calls for the
implementation of all relevant Security Council
resolutions, in particular resolution 425 (1978); fourthly,
it strongly condemns the Israeli aggression, which has

 

brought about high tolls of civilian casualties, led to the
displacement of civilians and a massive destruction of the
country's infrastructure and of archaeological and cultural
sites; fifthly, it calls for participation in the reconstruction
of Lebanon and for help in meeting the humanitarian needs
of the civilian population; and, sixthly, it calls for redress
for Lebanon for the loss resulting from the Israeli
aggression.

Those are the main elements of draft resolution
S/1996/292, submitted by the Arab Group, which, as I have
said, show the severity and scale of the Israeli aggression,
aggression which cannot be tolerated or passed over in
silence by the Council. The credibility of the Security
Council is at stake here. The whole world is looking to the
Security Council as the body responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security, pursuant to
Article 24 of the Charter.

In all frankness, I have to say that we find it very
difficult to be convinced by the positions of those that
opposed our draft resolution. What could prevent the
Council from calling for an immediate cessation of military
action and for strict respect for the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of Lebanon? Is it shameful to condemn
aggression or to request compensation for Lebanon? It is
indeed deplorable that the Council was not able to adopt
this draft resolution. I should like to thank those States that
supported the draft resolution, thus standing on the side of
justice and law.

Turning to the draft resolution contained in document
S/1996/304, which was co-sponsored by a number of
States, I would first of all like to extend my appreciation
and sincere thanks to Ambassador Dejammet, Permanent
Representative of France, for his tireless and sincere efforts
on behalf of the French Government in the last few days,
efforts which led to this draft resolution. Although the
Egyptian delegation supported it, we should like to point
out that it does not contain all of the principles which
should apply with regard to the situation in Lebanon.

The resolution does not clearly condemn Israel, and it
does not deal with the question of the compensation to
which Lebanon in is entitled for the loss of human life and
the destruction of property. The resolution refers to Security
Council resolution 425 (1978), within the context of
relevant resolutions adopted by the Security Council.
Resolution 425 (1978) is indeed still in force, but it has to
be looked at as a whole. As I said, my delegation voted in
favour of the resolution we have just adopted, for it calls
for an immediate halt to hostilities and it reaffirms the need
to respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Lebanon.

The resolution adopted a few moments ago by the
Security Council does not really cover the entire scope of
the Israeli aggression against Lebanon and does not live
up to our expectations for what the Security Council's
reaction to the aggression should be.

Our hearts are heavy and we suffer when we look
upon the human tragedy that Lebanon has been
undergoing in the last eight days in full View of the entire
world.

We trust that the adoption of this resolution will
indeed lead to the cessation of the hostilities and the
military actions. We trust that the Security Council will
shoulder full responsibility for the implementation of the
resolution we have just adopted and that it will remain
seized of the situation in Lebanon at this decisive turning
point, so as to preserve some of its credibility, to ensure
the triumph of justice and the purposes and principles of
the Charter and to save the peace process in the Middle
East, which has been seriously jeopardized.

