Mr. Cunningham (United States): I, too, wish to
welcome you, Sir, to New York. Your presence here
with us today is most welcome and signifies your
country's commitment to Afghanistan. I want to
completely associate the United States with your
message of condolence and sympathy to the Afghan
people in the aftermath of the earthquake today.

I also want to thank the Deputy Secretary-General
for her comprehensive overview of where we stand
now. I think it is a very useful outline.

We welcome the Secretary-General's report on
the situation in Afghanistan and the proposal for the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA). We look forward to hearing other nations'
views on UNAMA and to discussing it more fully in
the coming days. For now, I want to second the
Secretary-General's comment that what Ambassador
Brahimi, his colleagues, the United Nations and,
indeed, the international community have
accomplished thus far is truly remarkable under the
circumstances. We support the Secretary-General's
intent to get an effective, efficient and integrated
mission fully in place as soon as possible with a light
expatriate footprint and heavy reliance on the Afghans
themselves.

Today, I want to say a word about security. We all
recognize that there is a variety of security challenges
in Afghanistan today. The Afghans are addressing these
challenges and the United States, together with others,
is assisting them to do so in a number of ways. We will
continue the campaign against Al Qaeda and the
Taliban. Working with our international partners in the
coming weeks, we will begin training a national army
and the United States will contribute significantly to
the training and equipping of police. In early April, we
intend to meet with other interested countries to
discuss efforts to improve the security situation in
Afghanistan.

When the current mandate of the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) comes up for
renewal, we will support its extension through
December of this year. We will also provide assistance
to Turkey should it, as we hope, agree to take over
ISAF command from the United Kingdom. The United
States is working, through its special forces and civil
affairs teams, with local Afghan commanders and these
teams will continue to help local commanders deal with
contentious issues and to discourage conflict among
them. We believe that these efforts are responsive to
Afghanistan's needs and are already having a very
positive impact.

Given the present security situation and the range
and variety of assistance already available or under
way, we do not currently see the need to expand ISAF's
areas of activity beyond Kabul and its immediate
environs. We remain extremely appreciative of the
United Kingdom's leadership of the International
Security Assistance Force and express our thanks for
the support of the other troop-contributing nations.

