Mr. Akram (Pakistan): Mr. President, it is a

pleasure to see you presiding over the Security Council
this month.

Two days ago, in the dead of night, a missile
carrying a powerful bomb was launched in Gaza by
Israeli aircraft with foreknowledge that this would
result in large civilian casualties. The United States
spokesman is reported to have said "The missile
launched was a deliberate attack on the site, knowing
that innocents would be lost." Fourteen innocent
civilians died, including nine children.

Terrorism has been defined by some as the
deliberate use of violence against innocent civilians.
By this yardstick this Israeli attack was an act of
terrorism, not least because it was planned and
perpetrated, not by a fanatical group, but by a so-called
democratic Government. Violence breeds violence.
State terrorism inevitably breeds terrorism.

We welcome the universal condemnation of this
abhorrent act. We welcome in particular the statement
issued by the United States, on behalf of President
Bush, against this heavy-handed action. We express our
condolences to the families of all the victims.

The Security Council must take strong action
against such acts of unbridled violence. No State
should be allowed to entertain the expectation that it
enjoys immunity, that it can perpetrate violations of
international humanitarian law with impunity merely
because it justifies them as being aimed against so-
called terrorists. We must counter the widespread
perception of double standards and multiple morality.

Over the past several months, the fruits of
decades of peace endeavours have been trampled by
unbridled Israeli violence, collective punishment and
the slaughter of innocents in the Middle East. This
brutal and ill-timed attack threatens the high-level
diplomacy that was so recently resumed to build peace
in the region. We must not allow this brutal act to
prevent the realization of a just and durable peace
there.

The Security Council and the international
community must continue to call for the immediate
withdrawal of Israeli troops from the territories
reoccupied in recent weeks, for an end to all violence,
to the economic strangulation of the Palestinians and to
the paralysis in the process of reaching a just peace. We
must continue to promote a durable solution on the
basis of the principle of land for peace contained in
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973)
and 1397 (2002) and so vividly reflected in the bold
proposal of Crown Prince Abdullah of Saudi Arabia
and in the Beirut Declaration of the Arab States, as
well as in the recent declarations by President Bush
and the "quartet" meeting.

