I thank United Nations Special Envoy Geir Pedersen for his briefing today. The United States fully agrees with him that there should be an immediate nationwide ceasefire in Syria. Not only is a ceasefire an essential element of resolution 2254 (2015), but a ceasefire would also enable efforts to suppress the spread of coronavirus disease (COVID-19). I want to reiterate in this context that the United Nations must be at the centre of any effort to establish a ceasefire and that Special Envoy Pedersen has the authority to monitor lines of contact to ensure that the ceasefire agreements are honoured. What is becoming increasingly clear is that the Al-Assad regime is intent on exploiting the COVID-19 crisis for its own strategic political and military advantage. When Russia and China forced the reduction of cross-border aid points from four to two, they said that the United Nations should engage the regime to facilitate cross- line aid from Damascus to Syrian civilians. The United Nations has engaged. But since then, the Secretary-General has reported that efforts to gain approval from the regime to deliver medical aid to COVID-19 hotspots are taking months - and this, from a regime that has already used chemical weapons against its own people, deprived its people of food and water, and destroyed medical facilities. Years of such appalling behaviour prove that the Al-Assad regime will stop at nothing to pursue a military victory, even if it means refusing to deliver medical supplies that are essential for suppressing COVID-19. In the light of these dreadful, irrefutable facts, we must collectively ask how the Security Council can help restore stability in Syria. The answer lies in making progress on all tracks of resolution 2254 (2015). The Council must make every effort to ensure the Al-Assad regime reverses its destructive pattern of behaviour against its own people and agrees to a comprehensive, enduring and verifiable nationwide ceasefire. Equally important is making progress on the Constitutional Committee, whose stakeholders have agreed on an agenda, but which has not met because of the regime co-Chair's unwillingness to convene virtually. The Trump Administration calls once again for the Al-Assad regime to protect the fate of thousands of civilians held arbitrarily in detention centres. As we have noted before, the crowded and inhumane conditions of these centres dramatically increase the risk of a rapid spread of COVID-19. We demand the immediate release of all civilians detained arbitrarily, especially women, children and the elderly. The Al-Assad regime must also immediately grant impartial and independent entities, including medical and health organizations, access to regime detention facilities in order to prevent the spread of COVID-19. There is one way forward: full implementation of resolution 2254 (2015). It bears repeating that the only way forward is the full implementation of resolution 2254 (2015). That is what will move Syria towards a future of peace, prosperity and dignity for all its people. Accordingly, that is the approach we must pursue as a Council.
