The President (interpretation from Russian): I shall
now make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of the Russian Federation.

The Russian delegation shares the View expressed by
the Secretary-General in his last two reports on the United
Nations Preventive Deployment Force (UNPREDEP) that
the continuing complex situation in Kosovo, Serbia, Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, makes it advisable to extend the
mandate of that operation. But it is clear to us that the
direct reason prompting the members of the Security
Council to adjust the Council's decision on terminating
UNPREDEP after 31 August relates to resolution 1160
(1998), which authorized the imposition of an arms
embargo and called for the cessation of external support
for the Kosovar terrorists.

To date, unfortunately, we have no reliable
mechanism for monitoring the prohibitions established by
resolution 1160 (1998); this has a negative influence on
the situation in Kosovo itself, and on the overall stability
of the region.

We believe that UNPREDEP can and should make
a useful, practical contribution to carrying out monitoring
functions in line with resolution 1160 (1998). An
appropriate provision, based on the recommendation of
the Secretary-General, has been included in the draft
resolution before the Council today, which clearly states
that the tasks of UNPREDEP will include

"monitoring and reporting on illicit arms flows and
other activities that are prohibited under resolution
1160 (1998)." (5/1998/668, para. 1)

In practice, this very important provision should
mean primarily a more direct, better focused monitoring
of the arms embargo in the Kosovo direction, including
in particular the initiation of more intensive patrol
procedures in the border areas. There is clearly an urgent
need to reach a speedy, effective conclusion of this task,
given the ongoing delivery of supplies from external
sources to the Kosovo terrorists, primarily in the form of
arms and money, despite all the demands of the Security
Council and of the international community.

It is precisely in the context of UNPREDEP's
monitoring tasks under resolution 1160 (1998) that it is
advisable to consider increasing the troop strength of the
Force, with most of the additional contingent being
deployed on Kosovo's border with the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia, as well as on its border with Albania. The
draft resolution provides for returning the strength of
UNPREDEP's military component to its previous level of
1,050 troops. At the same time, it expresses the Council's
readiness to consider further the recommendations
contained in the Secretary-General's recent report on
UNPREDEP, in particular the possibility of increasing the
size of the military observer and Civilian Police
components.

We are open to a constructive solution to this
question. The Russian Federation will support the draft
resolution on extending UNPREDEP's mandate and
 

increasing its troop strength and will take action for the
adequate implementation of the Security Council' s decision.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now put to the vote the draft resolution contained in
document S/1998/668.

A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Bahrain, Brazil, China, Costa Rica, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Japan, Kenya, Portugal, Russian Federation,
Slovenia, Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America

The President (interpretation from Russian): There
were 15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been

adopted unanimously as resolution 1186 (1998).

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.55 pm.

