Mr. Al Bayati (Iraq): Allow me at the outset to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council this month. I am
sure that, under your leadership, we will have a very
fruitful and successful month. I would also like to
thank the delegation of Lebanon for its successful
presidency of the Security Council last month.

Allow me to present my delegation's appreciation
for the section regarding Iraq in the report of the
Secretary-General on children and armed conflict
(S/2010/181). We also appreciate the important role
played by the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, in her direct and indirect monitoring,
drawing attention to and overseeing the issue of
children and armed conflict.

My delegation is pleased to make the following
observations about the section on Iraq in the Secretary-
General's report (S/2010/ 181). The report covers the
period of 2009, and we would like to note that the
security situation in Iraq continues to improve despite
the security challenges faced during the final months of
last year. The security situation has witnessed many
positive developments in 2010, including the
following.

The lowest rate of terrorist attacks and casualties
since 2003 was recorded during the first five months of
2010. This is a result ofthe security offensive launched
by Iraqi security forces in the past three months to hunt
down Al-Qaida, with a focus on the capture or killing
of most of the leaders of Al-Qaida in Iraq. The most
prominent leader of Al-Qaida in Iraq, the Egyptian Abu
Ayyub al-Masri, and the head of the terrorist group
Islamic State of Iraq, Abu Omar al-Baghdadi, were
killed in mid-April this year. These strikes have
dispersed Al-Qaida's strength, disrupted its strategies
and revealed Al-Qaida's plans to Iraqi security
agencies, thus weakening its ability to finance and
recruit terrorists in Iraq.

The success of the general elections, held on
March 7 2010, with no major security incidents
recorded, is clear evidence of the great improvement in
Iraq's security situation and of the growing capabilities
of Iraqi security forces to maintain order throughout
the country. The Secretary-General mentions this fact
in his latest report to the Security Council on the
activities of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI), in which he notes that

"the overall environment in which the poll was
conducted was relatively free of violence and
without any major security incidents that affected
the polling itself' (S/2010/240, para. 6)

and that

"the Iraqi security forces have demonstrated their
increased capacity to assume greater security
responsibilities, evidenced by their successful
maintenance of security during the March
elections" (ibid., para. 16).

The report does not mention the efforts made in
various fields by the Iraqi Government's in cooperation
with UNAMI, or the cooperation between UNAMI's
Office of Human Rights and the Iraqi Government.
Regarding what the report now before the Council calls
in paragraph 81 the "continuing recruitment of children
by armed groups", that was based on information from
police and military sources, community members, the
media and United Nations partners - sources with
vastly different levels of credibility. Although the
report states in paragraph 81 that information was
provided by the "Multi-National Force-Iraq" in Kirkuk
in 2009, I would like to note that this force no longer
exists and that its mandate expired under resolution
1859 (2008), adopted on 22 December 2008.

Paragraph 82 of the report indicates that, since
the implementation of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism, 142 cases of violence were recorded, but
states that only 10 of these cases were actually
confirmed. Additionally, reports of the Secretary-
General in 2009 did not refer to any serious cases of
violence recorded by the mechanism, which was
implemented in Iraq in April 2009, suggesting that
inaccurate information has been included in a report of
such importance.

The cases of abuse indicated in paragraph 83 of
the report lack source attribution, particularly the
information submitted regarding a bus transporting
children to a child care centre adjacent to the Ministry
of Justice, in which the driver and 24 children were
killed and six children injured in the bombings that
took place on 25 October 2009, in which the Ministry
of Justice and the offices of Baghdad province were
targeted.

Paragraph 83 of the report describes the
25 October 2009 attacks on Baghdad as carried out by
insurgents. The report does not clearly mention that
these were terrorist attacks, despite the fact that the
Secretary-General strongly condemned the attacks in
his report contained in document S/2009/585 as
"senseless and indiscriminate" and that Security
Council press release SC/9775 condemned these
attacks in the strongest terms and described them as a
series of terrorist attacks.

In paragraph 84, the report notes a number of
children who have been arrested and convicted. There
is a big difference between arrest and conviction.
Every country of the world condemns the
imprisonment of children who have been convicted,
and Iraq is no exception. That paragraph also refers to
people between 15 and 18 years of age as children.
However, according to international standards, people
aged 18 are considered adults and should not be
included in the report.

Paragraph 84 of the report mentions the arrest of
62 male adolescents. However, the term "adolescent"
encompasses a broad category, including young adults.
Also, the paragraph includes the word "allegations"
and the phrase "significant numbers", which we find to
be inaccurate and lacking in credibility when the
sources of information are considered. We therefore
believe that they should not be included in this
important report.

As I have said, my Government views the section
on Iraq contained in this report to be inaccurate in its
monitoring the situation of children in Iraq. The
information it contains contradicts some information
contained in reports of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI)
that indicate an improvement in the security situation
in Iraq. In the future, especially after the clear and
significant improvements made in the security
situation, we hope to enable the Office of the Special
Representative, in cooperation with UNAMI, to
provide more accurate information in order to give a
clear picture to the States members of the Security
Council.

With regard to the promotion and protection of
children's rights in Iraq, the Iraqi Government has
made a number of efforts, of which I would like to
inform the members of the Security Council.

Constitutional guarantees and Iraq's compliance
with the Convention on the Rights of the Child form
the basic framework for the protection and promotion
of the rights of the child in my country. Children were
the group most affected by changes in human rights
conditions as a result of the terrorist attacks that struck
the country in recent years.

Our child welfare body comprises the
institutional structure for the protection of the rights of
the child in Iraq. That body is made up of several
parties from various ministries linked to the welfare of
Iraqi children. It has taken on the responsibility for
implementing policies to improve the status of children
by carrying out inspection visits to all childcare centres
in Iraq. Iraq is prepared to submit its national report
with regard to the Convention on the Rights of the
Child, as well as its reports concerning the Additional
Protocols to the Convention.

The final draft of the Iraqi Parliament's child
project has been finalized and is currently before the
Council of Ministers. Iraq is implementing a joint
project, in cooperation with UNICEF, UNAMI and the
United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), to
strengthen protection and justice for children and
young people in Iraq. In cooperation with the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, UNFPA and the Economic and Social
Commission for Western Asia, Iraq is proceeding with
a project to promote civic values and life skills for
young people through education.

Government institutions that deal with children in
Iraq are continuously working to reduce child labour
through inspections, control units and the
establishment of specialized centres throughout Iraq.

The Government is working to reduce the number of
homeless children through field follow-ups and
placement in Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs
foster care programmes. That effort to provide them
with basic needs aims to prevent their exploitation by
terrorist groups.

Social welfare homes for children with special
needs have been established in all governorates of Iraq.
All placements are followed up by regular visits by an
inspector from the child welfare body.

The Government of Iraq aims to promote a
culture of children's rights, in particular through school
programmes and the adoption of measures to prevent
violence against children, in accordance with the Iraqi
Constitution.

In her speech this morning, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Coomaraswamy said, "In
some wars, we find children being used as suicide
bombers; there were seven such cases in Afghanistan
and several in Iraq in 2009". I would like to make the
following points with regard to that statement.

Iraq, like any country, works continuously to
maintain and improve security and stability and
safeguard them from the threat posed by certain
terrorist groups. Iraq is not a country at war. We have
found no evidence of even a single case in 2009 in
which a child was used in a suicide attack. We would
appreciate it if Ms. Coomaraswamy could provide
evidence of the several cases she mentioned in her
briefing. Her citing of several cases to the Council is
inaccurate, vague and misleading.

Similarly in her statement, Ms. Hilde Johnson,
UNICEF Deputy Executive Director, made several
points about Iraq that need to be addressed. After citing
Iraq, Ms. Johnson spoke about her colleagues in the
field in situations where there is no rule of law.
Ms. Johnson made that statement despite the fact that
Iraq is a constitutional parliamentary democracy where
freedom, human rights and the rule of law are
paramount. As Ms. Coomaraswamy did in her
statement, Ms. Johnson classified Iraq with countries in
situations of armed conflict. Iraq is neither a country at
war nor in a situation of armed conflict. Unlike in other
countries where the number of United States forces is
being increased, the agreement between the
Government of Iraq and the United States of America
to fully withdraw combat forces by the end of August
2010 is proof that Iraq is neither a country at war nor
one in armed conflict, as mentioned in the statements
by Ms. Coomaraswamy and Ms. Johnson.

I would like to conclude by expressing our thanks
to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict, her Office and her
team for their efforts. We will continue to cooperate
with United Nations bodies to ensure human rights in
general and the rights of the child in particular as
priorities of the Iraqi Government.

