Mr. Lambertini (Italy): Italy aligns itself with the
statement made by the Deputy Secretary General for
the European External Action Service, Mr. Popowski,
on behalf of the European Union (EU). I would like to
add a few remarks in my national capacity.

Threats and challenges to international peace and
security require a coherent, coordinated approach
on the part of the international community. That is
why the United Nations is consolidating partnerships
with Member States and regional and subregional
organizations. Many regional and subregional
organizations have long histories ofcooperation with the
United Nations in conflict-prevention and mediation,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. Cooperation between
the United Nations and European Union in conflict
prevention and management has become a major
component of global security governance today.
The EU-United Nations partnership is today heavily
operations-driven. A recent, pragmatic example is the
EU Mission to the Central African Republic, which is
preparing the ground for a United Nations mission that
will take over in September.

But there are many other important examples of close
EU-United Nations cooperation in crisis management.
These include, inter alia, the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya and the European Union Integrated
Border Assistance Mission in Libya, under the Common
Security and Defence Policy (CSDP) - and I take this
opportunity to stress the gravity of the current situation
in Libya and its capital, Tripoli, to which my country
attaches great importance; the United Nations Interim
Administration in Kosovo and the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo; the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia and the European Union
Training Mission in Somalia, under the command of
Italy, which also provides its main contingent; and
the European Union Training Mission in Mali, the
European Union CSDP Mission in Niger and the United
Nations Multidimentional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali.
The principles underpinning our action are those
of the African Peace and Security Architecture, which
proposes to increase the capacity of both the African
Union and the regional economic communities in
planning and conducting peace-support operations.
We should aim at building on their best practices and
creating synergies among these groups. To that end, my
country has consistently provided financial support to
implement a project, which has different modules in
different countries, in order to promote knowledge and
skills for rendering operative the civilian component of
the African Standby Force.

In the Horn of Africa, many of our interventions
in the field of peace and security have been conducted
in cooperation with the African Union, whose role we
praise. We have also provided political and financial
support to the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), the regional organization for the
Horn of Africa. We have backed IGAD's endeavours for
peace in South Sudan and Somalia, always encouraging
close cooperation with the United Nations and the
African Union. The project we have developed with
IGAD's Somalia Office for the resolution of outstanding
issues between the Somali Federal Government and the
Juba Administration is particularly meaningful. That
initiative and others have addressed centre-periphery
relations, which, we believe, remain one of the key
issues of the Somali stabilization process. Our support
has always been transparent and in keeping with the
New Deal for Somalia and with the United Nations'
lines of action.

Italy is the top contributor of Blue Helmets among
the members of the Group of Western European and
Other States and the seventh top contributor to the United
Nations peacekeeping budget. It is in this same spirit that
my country also strongly supports EU-United Nations
cooperation. Under Italy's presidency of the European
Union Council in 2003, renewed United Nations
cooperation in crisis management began through the
adoption of the joint declaration on EU-United Nations
cooperation in crisis management. Many significant
achievements have followed since then.

The current Italian presidency of the European
Union Council would like to take stock of the best
practices and lessons learned in this cooperation and
further build on this partnership. This is why we are
pleased to host, on this topic - with Germany and
with the help of some well-known think-tanks - two
high-level regional seminars whose programmes were
presented during the 17 July event in New York, in the
presence of Under-Secretary-General Ladsous. The
seminars will take place this coming fall in Rome and
Berlin, followed by a final conference in Brussels.

In a 2010 statement to the Security Council, the EU
High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy, Lady Ashton said:

"The reasons behind the creation of the United
Nations were similar to those that originally
drove European integration: 'to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war'. Today, the
United Nations and the EU need to promote the
ideals that inspired earlier generations... in a new
world." (S/PV6306, p. 2)

As a founding member of the EU, Italy firmly
believes in the vision of the united States of Europe and
in a unique European foreign and defense policy. Italy
has always embraced the vision and the values of the
United Nations Charter. The United Nations and the EU
are two sides of the same coin, two paths leading to the
same goal - a peaceful world. To achieve this goal,
we need more Europe in United Nations peacekeeping,
and my country is proud to be on the front line of this
commitment.

