Mr. Aboulgheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): First
of all, I should like to say, Mr. President, that my
country holds your sisterly country and people in high
regard. Today, by happy coincidence, the President of
Egypt, Mr. Hosni Mubarak, is visiting Tunisia - that
green and beautiful country - within the framework of
the constructive communication between our two
peoples and our two Governments. I should like to
extend to you, Sir, my thanks for organizing this
important discussion, which we hope will make a
further contribution to the efforts and endeavours of the
United Nations on the issue under consideration.

The issue that we are discussing today is very
important - indeed, it is vital. Egypt believes that the
importance of the issue, with its complex elements and
its multifaceted character, is such that a single United
Nations body - even the Security Council - cannot
deal with it in its entirety. In fact, as the Tunisian
working paper that you, Mr. President, have distributed
in preparation for this meeting, makes clear, the matter
requires cooperation between all the main bodies of the
Organization, including the General Assembly, the
Security Council and the Economic and Social Council,
in addition to the Secretariat, presided over by the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, in whose
leadership, wisdom and continuous efforts in the
service of the Organization and its noble goals we have
every confidence.
We believe that all these bodies should carry out
their work, each within its own competence and in
accordance with its mandate, in conformity with the
Charter. In addition, the United Nations specialized
agencies and their executive boards should work to
fulfil these objectives.

From that perspective, I should like to deal with a
number of points to which my delegation attaches great
importance when discussing the issue of peace-
building. First, from a theoretical point of view, it
might seem that the establishment of an agreed strategy
or comprehensive, joint approach to peace-building is
not difficult to achieve. However, the fact is that the
specifics of any individual case prevent us from
committing ourselves to the idea of a joint approach
that can be implemented across the board. Each case
has its own specific characteristics. We believe,
therefore, that during the post-conflict phases in
countries and communities that have been destroyed or
severely affected by conflict, the United Nations must
have a large degree of flexibility so as to ensure that
stereotyping does not lead to disregarding or
misrepresenting some of the important elements in any
particular case.

Secondly, the importance that the Security
Council attaches to the issue of peace-building - an
issue that, as I pointed out earlier, falls within the
competence of the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council - is something for
which we should be grateful to the Council. We would
prefer the Security Council to give more attention to
emerging or ongoing conflicts, or to situations that
seem likely to erupt into full-blown conflict. We would
like to see the Security Council focus on peace-
building in a controlled manner as it relates to post-
conflict situations so that it is not diverted from its
main function of maintaining international peace and
security. We should also like to emphasize how
important it is for the Security Council to deal with
issues without applying double standards, which often
happens in the implementation of its resolutions, and to
show more enthusiasm with regard to the situation in
countries such as Somalia and Angola and in the
Middle East. In our view, regrettably, the Security
Council does not fully assume its responsibilities when
it comes to the Middle East.

We believe that this is an important point, since
this Council is authorized by the Member States to
maintain international peace and security. It is
unacceptable to allow the Security Council to fail in
performing such functions, or for it to consider issues
that, though recognized as being important, the Council
does not have a recognized mandate to deal with or to
control.

Thirdly, we noted in many cases that the failure
of efforts to build peace in post-conflict situations can
be attributed to the incorrect handling of a number of
elements during the period in which the Council
intervenes on behalf of the international community to
settle the dispute and to maintain peace and security
after bringing the conflict under control. A case in
point is the failure in helping Angola to return to a
state of peace and stability after the difficulties that the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme faced there. The fact that this programme
has failed to gain the support of the opposition
movement there is one of the reasons that led to the
failure of the endeavours of the United Nations and to
its almost total withdrawal from the Angolan scene.

Fourthly, we believe that the Council could attach
the necessary importance and give the necessary
follow-up to the issue of disarming combatants and
reintegrating them into post-conflict societies. This is a
very important element that allows - if implemented
properly, as the case of Mozambique clearly shows -
a whole society to reach a safe haven. The Security
Council could take up a coordinating role, along with
the Secretariat, the relevant agencies and bodies and
the neighbouring countries, in dealing with the issue of
refugees and displaced persons from the point of view
of its possible impact on the continuation of a conflict
or its rekindling after a period of calm, I must refer
here to the oldest existing refugee issue in the world:
the question of the Palestinian refugees and the
imperative of settling this question with methods that
are in line with international legitimacy so that it
becomes a complementary element to a comprehensive
settlement in the Middle East instead of being an
element that prevents the reaching of any such
settlement.

As for the other proposed points, such as
sustainable development, the eradication of poverty,
supporting the rule of law and democratic institutions,
they are all matters that have a prominent position in
any strategy for building peace. We could not even
conceive of building a truly permanent peace in any
country emerging from conflict without seriously
dealing with these elements. Egypt believes that these
basic matters should be dealt with through the other
main bodies of the United Nations. However, the
Security Council could take these very important
dimensions into consideration when intervening in any
conflict. Then it should work to provide the appropriate
climate for restoring peace as soon as possible so that
the main bodies and the specialized agencies of the
Organization, regional organizations and neighbouring
countries could take up their responsibility.

We do not want our Security Council to be
transformed into an Economic and Social Council or
into a private, miniature General Assembly,
particularly since there is a high degree of
politicization in its work that contradicts the nature and
the working methods of the two other bodies
mentioned. The mandate and competence of the
Council, in accordance with the Charter, are not
comprehensive; they are in fact limited. There is no
doubt that this limitation of its mandate by the
founding fathers of the United Nations was intentional.
This intention should be upheld and respected by the
Member States.

This does not mean that we are not satisfied to
see the Security Council show interest in post-conflict
phases and situations and strategies for building peace.
Concerning the way the Council could contribute in
this domain, we believe that there is an attempt by the
Council, within the framework of interpreting the text
of the Charter and of dealing with the text with a large
degree of flexibility, to contribute in some form
towards encouraging and assisting the international
community to focus on how to ensure that societies do
not return once again to conflict after conflicts have
been brought under control through serious effort for
the maintenance of peace and security. Therefore, the
Council should recommend a loose framework for how
to determine the general priorities of what the other
principal bodies should focus on - within the
framework of their mandate and their competence, in a
way that brings about some balance between these
different bodies so that there is no overlapping in their
functions and so that they will work towards one clear
and agreed upon strategy to rebuild failed or destroyed
communities after conflict or communities that have
been exposed to special circumstances, such as in
Kosovo and East Timor.

We believe that it is important not to forget that
peace in itself is a difficult goal to attain. There are
many communities and societies around the world that
look to the Security Council to bring about the
attainment of that objective. Somalia does not enjoy
the necessary degree of attention yet. Angola, as we
stated earlier, has returned to the vicious spiral of
violence after 4 years of calm. And the United Nations
stands before the problems in the Congo in
astonishment and surprise, as if it does not have the
necessary mechanisms and tools to restore stability to
that vast African State.

Here I do not wish to deal with the Middle East,
considering that the issue will force some members of
the Council not to undertake their responsibilities, as
we have seen recently.

Finally, there are many conflicts and struggles
that fall within the mandate and the competence of the
Council. The international community looks forward to
the Council's dealing with these issues seriously and
decisively so as to restore peace and stability to the
world.

