The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Germany and Italy, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Kastrap
(Germany) and Mr. Fulci (Italy) took the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council Chamber.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following documents: S/ 1999/50, letter
dated 16 January 1999 from the Permanent Representative
of Albania to the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council; S/1999/51, letter dated 17 January
1999 from the Charge d'affaires ad interim the Permanent
Mission of Yugoslavia to the United Nations addressed to
the Secretary-General; and S/1999/52, letter dated 18
January 1999 from the Permanent Representative of
Albania to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council strongly condemns the
massacre of Kosovo Albanians in the village of
Racak in southern Kosovo, Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, on 15 January 1999, as reported by the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) Kosovo Verification Mission (KVM). It
notes with deep concern that the report of the KVM
states that the Victims were civilians, including
women and at least one child. The Council also
takes note of the statement by the Head of the KVM
that the responsibility for the massacre lay with
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia security forces, and
that uniformed members of both the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia armed forces and Serbian
special police had been involved. The Council
emphasizes the need for an urgent and full
investigation of the facts and urgently calls upon the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to work with the
International Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia and
KVM. to ensure that those responsible are brought to
justice.

"The Security Council deplores the decision by
Belgrade to declare KVM. Head of Mission Walker
persona non grata and reaffirms its full support for
Mr. Walker and the efforts of the OSCE to facilitate
a peaceful settlement. It calls upon Belgrade to
rescind this decision and to cooperate fully with Mr.
Walker and the KVM.

"The Security Council deplores the decision by
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to refuse access
to the Prosecutor of the International Tribunal and
calls upon the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to
cooperate fully with the International Tribunal in
carrying out an investigation in Kosovo, in line with
the call for cooperation with the International
Tribunal in its resolutions 1160 (1998) of 31 March
1998, 1199 (1998) of 23 September 1998 and 1203
(1998) of 24 October 1998.

"The Security Council notes that, against clear
KVM. advice, Serb forces returned to Racak on 17
January 1999 and that fighting broke out.

"The Security Council considers that the events
in Racak constitute the latest in a series of threats to

 

the efforts to settle this conflict through negotiation
and peaceful means.

"The Security Council condemns the shooting of
personnel of the KVM. on 15 January 1999 and all
actions endangering KVM. and international personnel.
It reaffirms its full commitment to the safety and
security of the KVM. personnel. It reiterates its
demands that the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and
the Kosovo Albanians cooperate fully with the KVM.

"The Security Council calls upon the parties to
cease immediately all acts of violence and to engage
in talks on a lasting settlement.

"The Security Council also strongly warns the
'Kosovo Liberation Army' against actions which are
contributing to tensions.

"The Security Council considers all of these
events to be violations of its resolutions and of
relevant agreements and commitments calling for
restraint. It calls upon all parties to respect fully their
commitments under the relevant resolutions and
affirms once again its full support for international
efforts to facilitate a peaceful settlement on the basis
of equality for all citizens and ethnic communities in
Kosovo. The Council reaffirms its commitment to
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia.

"The Security Council takes note with concern
of the report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees that five and a half
thousand civilians fled the Racak area following the
massacre, showing how rapidly a humanitarian crisis
could again develop if steps are not taken by the
parties to reduce tensions.

"The Security Council will remain actively
seized of the matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/1999/2.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 10.25 pm.

