Mrs. Haley (United States of America): The news
out ofSyria this morning is following a troubling pattern.
There are reports of yet another chemical-weapon attack
on Sunday. Victims of What appears to be chlorine gas
are pouring into hospitals. Few things have horrified
my country and the world as much as the Al-Assad
regime's use of chemical weapons against its people.
The Security Council has been outspoken on ending
Syria's use of chemical weapons, and yet they continue.

Under the Chemical Weapons Convention and
resolution 2118 (2013), the Al-Assad regime's obligations
are clear: it must immediately stop using all chemical
weapons. It must address the gaps and inconsistencies
in its Chemical Weapons Convention declaration. And
it must destroy all of its remaining chemical weapons
under the supervision of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW). These are
worthy goals. These are urgent goals. Yet we spent
much of last year in the Council watching one country
protect the Al-Assad regime's use of chemical weapons
by refusing to hold them responsible.

What do the American people see? What do people
of all countries see? They see a Council that cannot
agree to take action, even after the OPCW-United
Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism, created by the
Council, found that the Al-Assad regime used chemical
weapons. Now we have reports that the Al-Assad
regime has used chlorine gas against its people multiple
times in recent weeks, including just yesterday. There is
obvious evidence from dozens of victims, and therefore
we proposed a draft press statement by the Security
Council condemning these attacks. So far, Russia has
delayed the adoption of the draft statement - a simple
condemnation of Syrian children being suffocated by
chlorine gas. I hope Russia takes the appropriate step
to adopt the draft text, thus showing that the Council is
unified in condemning chemical-weapon attacks.

Accountability is a fundamental principle, but it is
just the first step. Our goal must be to end the use of
these evil, unjustifiable weapons. When actions have
consequences - when perpetrators are identified and
punished - we come closer to reaching our goal. But
if we cannot even take the first step of establishing
accountability for the use of chemical weapons,
we have to seriously ask ourselves why we are here.
The requirements for establishing accountability for
the use of chemical weapons have not changed since
the Council voted unanimously to create the Joint
Investigative Mechanism, in 2015. They have not
changed since Russia acted alone to kill the Mechanism
last year. Such a mechanism must be independent
and impartial. It must be free of politics. It must be
controlled by experts, not politicians or diplomats. And
it must be definitive.

The latest Russian draft resolution does not
meet any of those criteria. Russia's draft resolution
completely ignores the findings ofthe Joint Investigative
Mechanism, which was an investigation that Russia
supported until the investigators found the Al-Assad
regime to be responsible. That should already be enough
to make us sceptical. However, there are other deep
problems. For their new investigation, Russia wants to
be able to cherry-pick the investigators. It wants to insert
unnecessary and arbitrary investigative standards.
And it wants the Security Council to be able to review
all the findings of this investigation and decide what
makes it into the final report. That is not an impartial
mechanism; it is a way to whitewash the findings of the
last investigation that Russia desperately wants to bury.
No one should believe that the draft resolution is a good
basis for discussion, when it is designed to undermine
our core principles on chemical weapons. We cannot
hope to end the use of chemical weapons if those who
use them escape the consequences of their actions.

Therefore, while we regret the need for its
creation, we applaud the efforts of France to launch
the International Partnership against Impunity for the
Use of Chemical Weapons. That is yet another way to
hold accountable the Al-Assad regime and any group
that uses chemical weapons. The United States has also
announced that we will contribute to the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International
Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since
March 2011. The United States strongly supports the
Mechanism as a valuable tool to hold the Al-Assad
regime accountable for its atrocities, including its
repeated and ongoing use of chemical weapons.

It is a true tragedy that Russia has sent us back
to square one in the effort to end the use of chemical
weapons in Syria. But we will not cease in our efforts
to know the truth of the Al-Assad regime - and ensure
that the truth is known and acted on by the international
community. That is why we hosted all 15 members of
the Council at the United States Holocaust Museum last
week. The exhibit was called "Syria: Please Don't Forget
Us". All of us saw undeniable evidence of the Al-Assad
regime's atrocities and human rights violations. We
cannot, and should not, forget the Syrian people. The
United States will not forget them. While the Council
has not yet been able to act to provide real accountability
for the use of chemical weapons in Syria, the United
States will not give up on the responsibility to do so.
That is the sincere wish of the American people, and
I know that it is shared by many on the Council. We
are not motivated by score-settling, payback or power
politics. We are motivated by the urgent need to end the
unique and horrible suffering that chemical weapons
have inflicted on innocent men, women and children in
Syria. The Syrian people are counting on us.

