Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I very much regret the result of the procedural vote just now and the failure to have Mr. Bustani brief the Council. As I stated earlier, outsiders, some of whom were absolutely no match for Mr. Bustani in terms of professionalism and representativeness, have been regularly invited to brief the Council in previous meetings, in accordance with rule 39 of the rules of procedure Nevertheless, some countries, including Germany, have been very positive about inviting these people, but today blocked Mr. Bustani from briefing us. The flagrant hypocrisy on the part of the representative of Germany and others is truly astounding. Just now, the Chinese delegation suggested to you, Mr. President, that the challenge posed by the United Kingdom be put to a vote, but you did not listen to our view. Instead, you made a decision as President to immediately put to a vote whether Mr. Bustani should be allowed to brief the Council. The President of the Security Council has the right to rule on procedural matters, and China respects that. China did so in order to maintain the authority of the President and to save time to allow the Council to expeditiously proceed with its meetings as normal. I hope that other delegations, in future Council deliberations, will also show respect and cooperation in their attitude, openness and inclusiveness with regard to other issues and maintain consistency in their positions before and after. I must say that, in his remarks, the German representative did not raise the question of chemical weapons in Syria at all. His statement consisted entirely of attacks on other members of the Council. He treated the Council as a venue for venting his sentiments and dissatisfaction. Such practices are not at all constructive. At least the representative of the United Kingdom, after expressing his disagreements, stated his position on the question of chemical weapons in Syria. If countries come here to attack other countries rather than discuss the issue at hand, how can we talk about solidarity in the work of the Council? How else can the Council play a role? I thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for her briefing. China notes that the Syrian Government has maintained good communication and cooperation with the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW). According to the OPCW's latest monthly report (S/2020/961, annex), the Syrian Government recently provided information on 8 of the 22 outstanding issues and made two amendments to its initial declaration. The OPCW, the United Nations Office for Project Services and the Syrian Government have extended their tripartite cooperation agreement by six months. These positive developments deserve recognition. China understands Syria's concern over the deterioration of related samples in the OPCW's laboratory. It is hoped that the Technical Secretariat will properly resolve this issue with Syria through, inter alia, continued technical meetings. The question of chemical weapons is one of great importance. China supports the OPCW in carrying out its mandate based on the Chemical Weapons Convention and a full, objective and fair investigation of the alleged use of chemical weapons, and in producing, on the basis of established facts, some conclusions that withstand the test of history and are free from political interference and prejudgment. At the Arria Formula meeting held last week, the three briefers at that meeting cast doubt on different aspects of the report of the investigation. It is hoped that the OPCW will pay attention to the information and views shared by the three experts and give a professional, scientific and convincing response. I must emphasize that only when facts and science are respected can the truth be found, can there be real implementation of resolution 2118 (2013) and can the authority of the OPCW be safeguarded. China is against jumping to conclusions where there is a lack of well-established evidence and where there is a plethora of doubts. This will not help with the resolution of the Syrian chemical-weapons issue. It will also undercut the mutual confidence among the Syrian parties and adversely affect the momentum towards finding a political solution to the Syrian question. Meanwhile, the Director General of the OPCW and the Technical Secretariat should push for enhanceddialogue and consultation among the States parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention and observe the tradition of basing decisions on consensus. Pushing for a vote when there are big differences among the parties would aggravate the confrontation among the States parties, undermine the atmosphere of cooperation and damage the authority and long-term interests of the OPCW.
