Mr. Jele (South Africa): My delegation commends
the Secretary-General for the comprehensive report on the
progress made towards consolidating the peace process in
Angola. We also commend the ongoing efforts of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, the
representatives of the troika of observer States and all
parties engaged in efforts towards achieving peace in
Angola.

My delegation is gratified by the observation in the
report that substantial progress has recently been made in
carrying out the major tasks outlined in Security Council
resolution 1075 (1996).

For us in southern Africa, the pain and suffering of
the people of Angola are our pain and suffering. The
peoples of southern Africa believe that the sustaining of
the democratization which is taking place in the region
following the independence of Namibia, the liberation of
South Africa, and peace in Mozambique, depends on the
achievement of durable peace and stability in Angola.

The report covers a number of important issues on
which the Government and UNITA need to reach
agreement in terms of the Lusaka Protocol. The progress
reported on some of the key issues is gratifying. My
delegation is particularly appreciative of the progress
made with regard to disarming the civilian population, the
surrender of weapons by quartered troops, the opening up
for United Nations verification of the phased-out regional
command structures of UNITA, and the dismantling of
illegal checkpoints.

These developments are important and need to be
sustained. However, the reversal of the gains achieved
cannot be discounted as long as the ceasefire continues to
be violated and the country remains volatile because of
attacks on civilians and the perpetration of crimes near
assembly areas.

 

It is, therefore, worth emphasizing that the
cessation of hostilities by both parties is crucial to the
creation of a climate conducive to the evolution of peace in
Angola.

My delegation believes that a meeting between
President dos Santos and Mr. Savimbi is long overdue. This
meeting would serve as a welcome opportunity for the two
leaders to map their way forward. We note with
appreciation that the Joint Commission will soon consider
the proposals made by the Angolan Government and
UNITA on the special status of the President of UNITA.
These proposals deserve the encouragement of the
international community, as they represent a significant
movement towards progress.

We also welcome the Angolan Government's
announced readiness to commence the incorporation of the
UNITA generals into the Angolan Armed Forces. We also
welcome UNITA's declaration that it has assembled some
of its troops and handed over weapons. We believe that this
declaration will facilitate the enhancement of the peace
process. It is our fervent hope that other measures will be
undertaken which are central to the establishment of the
Government of National Unity and Reconciliation.

My delegation supports the Secretary-General's
recommendation that the mandate of UNAVEM. Ill be
extended until 28 February 1997, and that after the
withdrawal, steps should be taken to ensure that the gains
already achieved remain in place.

We wish to renew our appeal to the international
donor community to continue to contribute generously to
programmes for demobilization, rehabilitation, relief
assistance in quartering areas, mine clearance and road
construction. We believe that this assistance will contribute
greatly to the promotion of peace and stability in Angola.

