Mr. Bui The Giang (Viet Nam): At the outset, I
would like to welcome His Excellency Mr. Vuk
Jeremie, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic
of Serbia, to today's meeting of the Security Council,
and thank him for sharing his perspectives on the
situation in Kosovo with us. I acknowledge the
presence of Mr. Skender Hyseni at this meeting and
thank him for his statement. I also thank Mr. Lamberto
Zannier, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, for his important briefing.

My delegation is encouraged by the relatively
calm security situation in Kosovo during the reporting
period. We welcome the continued, productive efforts
by the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) to lend its good offices to all
communities residing in the north of Kosovo and in
northern Mitrovica with a view to promoting
sustainable and peaceful solutions based on dialogue
and compromise. We take note of the assumption of
full operational capability by the European Union Rule
of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) in the rule of law
sector, under the overall authority of the United
Nations and within the status-neutral framework of
resolution 1244 (1999). In this regard, we commend
the regular exchange of information and coordination
on issues of mutual concern between UNMIK and
EULEX and hope that such interaction will continue.

However, in the light of a series of incidents that
has occurred in northern Mitrovica, we remained
concerned about the ongoing inter-ethnic violence in
many parts of Kosovo and attempts to conclude
UNMIK's mission without the green light of the
Security Council. The continued presence of UNMIK
with good faith cooperation from both Belgrade and
Pristina and in close coordination with EULEX and the
International Security Force in Kosovo (KFOR) is key
to maintaining peace and stability on the ground.

We would like to reconfirm our view that the
reconfiguration and downsizing of UNMIK should be
conducted in a transparent manner and in respect for

the United Nations position of strict neutrality
regarding Kosovo's status and in ways that enable
UNMIK to perform its functions, especially those that
enhance the continuous mediation between
communities and support minority communities
throughout Kosovo.

We therefore call upon all parties concerned to
fully and constructively cooperate with UNMIK in its
areas of responsibility and strengthen confidence-
building measures in order to achieve a comprehensive
and long-term solution, taking into account the
legitimate interests of all communities. We expect the
Security Council and the Secretary-General to continue
to play a vigorous and proactive role in this endeavour.

We are also mindful that the number of voluntary
returns in 2009 remains disappointingly low and
continues to lag behind the 2008 figures. It is our view
that the lack of real progress in safeguarding the rights
and ensuring the security of national minorities will
only exacerbate the mistrust and lead to inter-ethnic
tensions. In this context, we call upon all parties
concerned to refrain from any rhetoric or action that
may ignite violence. At the same time, we strongly
urge UNMIK and EULEX to redouble their efforts to
promote the establishment of a safe and stable
environment conducive to the return of refugees and
internally displaced persons throughout Kosovo.

Last but not least, we call for even greater efforts
to minimize tensions in and around Kosovo and to
reach negotiated solutions to differences through
peaceful means.

