Mr. Cardi (Italy): Let me thank the Secretary-
General; the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
the Great Lakes Region, Said Djinnit; the Commissioner
for Peace and Security of the African Union, Smail

Chergui; and Vijay Pillay of the World Bank for their
insightful remarks.

Italy aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
on behalf of the European Union.

Italy welcomes today's debate and connends Angola
for this initiative. As Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
said last month during the Private Sector Investment
Conference for the Great Lakes Region in Kinshasa,

"We are in the heart of Africa. This region can be
an engine for development and economic growth."

Africa today is a land of opportunities. We see the
progress that is being made in West Africa, in the Horn
of Africa and elsewhere. The African continent needs
economic cooperation and economic partnerships. That
is also true for the Great Lakes region, where we must
support the countries of the area to build an environment
conducive to better prosperity based on the rule of
law and accountability in upholding the rights of the
individual, the prevention and management of violence
and tensions, support for the plight of refugees and
internally displaced persons and economic powerment
at the local level.

Today's debate is rightly focused on conflict
prevention and resolution - the link between
peace, security and development and the promotion
of sustainable business models that will create
opportunities. Italy's partnership with Africa is built
on the same pillars. That partnership will be further
consolidated during the Italy-Africa ministerial
conference to be held in Rome in May.

Political stability is paramount if the Great Lakes
region is to achieve sustainable peace without relapsing
into conflict. Although each situation is different, there
are some common principles.

First and foremost is national ownership, without
which no sustainable solution can be achieved or
imposed from the outside.

Secondly, with regard to strengthening the role
and the commitment of regional and subregional
organizations, we welcome the appointment of the
African Union Envoy to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Edem Kodjo. We stand ready to support
his efforts to facilitate a political dialogue that will
lead to inclusive and transparent elections within the
framework of the Constitution. With respect to the
situation in Burundi, Italy supports the initiatives of
the United Nations, the African Union, the East African
Community and the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region, all of which could help foster a
political solution in the spirit of the Arusha Agreements
and help the country in its stabilization efforts.

Thirdly, on prevention, revitalizing and
implementing Chapter VI of the Charter of the United
Nations is the key. The two visits by Security Council
members to the region in the past 12 months were a
positive step towards building a culture of prevention
rather than reaction. The Peace Building Commission
also has a positive role to play in promoting peace in
the region. Among the preventive tools at the disposal
of the Council, let me also mention the ad hoc Working
Group on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in Africa,
which is chaired by Angola and which we support.
Political and regional stability will, in turn, allow to tap
into all of the available resources to achieve sustainable
development in the region. The 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and the African Union
Agenda 2063 are the blueprint.

With respect to economic development, the
management of natural resources must be sustainable
and benefit communities. Extractive industries in
particular should be managed soundly. By doing so,
we will also combat international criminal networks
that are profiting from illegal trafficking. In turn, that
phenomenon fuels other illegal activities, such as the
trade in small arms and light wapons. Eliminating the
one of thee causes of conflict while increasing State
revenues is crucial. For these reasons, Italy supports the
initiative of the Angolan mission in the framework of
the Kimberley Process and was pleased to co-sponsor
resolution 70/252, which is a significant General
Assembly resolution on the matter.

In conclusion, Italy welcomes the United Nations
Regional Strategic Framework for the Great Lakes.
Together with the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region, it is the best road map for common
progress, with local ownership and a clear set of
commitments and benchmarks at the international,
regional and national levels.

