Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We congratulate
you, Mr. President, and India, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council. We also thank Ambassador
Rosenthal and his delegation for their able stewardship
of the Council last month.

I would like to thank the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, for her briefing. We have taken note of the
ICC Prosecutor's fourth report to the Security Council
in relation to resolution 1970 (2011).

Pakistan is not a signatory to the Rome Statute,
and thus is not a member of the International Criminal
Court. However, we recognize the rights and obligations
of the States members of the ICC.

The situation in Libya has evolved significantly
since the last briefing to the Council by the ICC
Prosecutor (see S/PV.6772).

We congratulate the Libyan people on the elections
and the formation of a new Government. That marks an
important step towards the recovery and rehabilitation
of the country from the conflict of the past year.

Libya continues to face some daunting challenges.
We are confident that the new elected Government,
with the broad support of the people, will be able to
overcome those challenges.

The Government needs to forge consensus for a
national security architecture, to disarm and reintegrate
the revolutionary brigades, to deal with cases of
conflict-related detainees and to contain the adverse
impact of weapons proliferation.

The path ahead for Libya is reconciliation, not
retribution or revenge. The international community
must continue to extend all possible assistance in that
regard.

The Libyan people have expressed their intent to
try Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi
before Libyan courts. We hope that the request of
the Libyan authorities to try those individuals will
be considered positively, in accordance with the
complementary nature of the Court's jurisdiction.

Pending a decision on the admissibility challenge,
investigations by the Office ofthe Prosecutor in the case
of Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi remain suspended. Libya
is undergoing a transition phase, and its Government
may need time to submit the necessary information.

We appreciate the engagement of the Libyan
Government in the judicial process of the ICC. Sharing
information about its legal system with the Court
would strengthen its own position on the admissibility
challenge. The Government must also ensure that the
trials of those individuals, if they are conducted in
Libya, be in accordance with due process and Libya's
international obligations.

The Office ofthe Prosecutor has made some progress
in investigating other alleged crimes committed in
Libya. In that context, we underline the importance
of conducting thorough and impartial investigations,
regardless of which side perpetrated the crimes.

The ICC is a court of last resort. Strengthening
the judicial system at the national level is a better and
more sustainable way to end impunity. Formulating a
comprehensive justice strategy to address the crimes
that occurred in Libya would underpin efforts to ensure
peace and stability in the country. At the same time,
healing wounds, fostering national unity and ensuring
social and political stability are important imperatives.

In conclusion, we underscore Pakistan's fullest

support for the well-being and prosperity of the people
of Libya.

