I wish to reiterate South Africa's call for a cessation of all hostilities across Syria and for safe, unimpeded and impartial delivery of humanitarian aid throughout the country and assistance to all who require it, no matter where they are. My delegation also wishes again to commend the United Nations agencies, the International Committee of the Red Cross, other aid organizations as well as donors for their important work and contributions in respect of the provision of humanitarian assistance to the people of Syria. The prolonged conflict has left lasting effects throughout Syria and a permanent scar on its people. Children born in the past decade have known no peace. They have known only war and seen devastation around them. As we have seen from the Secretary-General's latest report (S/2020/576), the humanitarian situation in Syria remains dire, with women and children bearing the worst of the conflict and deteriorating humanitarian circumstances. South Africa is deeply concerned that the number of people throughout Syria who are now food insecure has reached 9.3 million in the past six months, the highest number ever recorded in Syria. The spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) also remains a threat in Syria, with a significant increase in positive cases in the past month and the potential for a further increase in the coming months. Preparedness and response planning are an essential component of any humanitarian response. This is even more critical in a situation where the health system is fragile and there are large groups of people staying in overcrowded spaces, such as refugees and internally displaced persons, the elderly and people with underlying health conditions, who are particularly vulnerable to COVID-19. We also note the dire economic situation in Syria, which has led to rising food prices and growing food insecurity and is further exacerbating the humanitarian situation in the country. Efforts should therefore be made across the board to address the overall humanitarian situation in the country, especially in the context of an economically debilitating pandemic that has adversely impacted all countries. In that regard, my delegation wishes to reiterate that the unilateral sanctions imposed on Syria have had a further deteriorating impact on the economic and humanitarian situation in the country. Those measures have compounded the conflict and have led to a further deterioration of the economy, thus affecting the livelihoods and food security of ordinary Syrians throughout the country. We question the intended impact of the sanctions, as it surely is not to resolve the conflict. Measures adopted by the international community and individual Member States should aim to save lives and improve the humanitarian situation, rather than lead to further hardship. The Secretary-General has clearly stated in his most recent report that "(t]he provision of humanitarian assistance requires timely, safe, sustained and unimpeded access by the United Nations and all humanitarian partners to people in need across the Syrian Arab Republic" (SS/2020/576, para. 28). South Africa fully supports the Secretary-General's call and will continue to advocate for the provision of humanitarian assistance to all Syrians in need through all available and direct means and modalities, including cross-border and cross-line deliveries. We commend the United Nations, the World Health Organization and other aid organizations that are working with the Syrian Government to facilitate cross-line humanitarian assistance. At the same time, we note, per the report, that cross-line assistance has to be bolstered by cross-border assistance. It is for these reasons that South Africa will be voting in favour of the draft resolution before us (S/2020/658), as we did when the draft resolution on cross- border crossings (S/2020/667) was submitted yesterday. It is unfortunate that the renewal of the Council's provisions to address the plight of the Syrian people must again be subjected to political manoeuvring within the Council, thus undermining its ability to respond effectively to the needs of the affected people. South Africa remains concerned that political differences among the members of the Security Council is impacting the provision of safe, unimpeded and impartial humanitarian assistance, including urgent medical assistance, to Syrians in need. For South Africa, the humanitarian interests of the Syrian people are the core driver for its engagement and action in the Council on this particular issue. Accordingly, we will act to ensure that the Syrian people receive the maximum support possible. It is therefore our sincere hope that members of the Security Council will be able to set aside their political differences and agree on a resolution to improve the humanitarian situation in Syria, including the provision of humanitarian access. Finally, we wish to reiterate that the situation in Syria can be resolved only through negotiation and dialogue. We therefore again call on all parties to make every effort to fully implement resolution 2254 (2015) so as to further avoid the displacement of Syrians and the loss of innocent lives.
