Mr. Pedersen: Let me start with the very worrisome
situation in and around the Idlib de-escalation zone.
Regrettably, the fighting continues, with reports of air
strikes, shelling, rockets and mortar attacks that all too
often involve the indiscriminate use of force. Civilians
continue to be killed, and hundreds of thousands have
been displaced. Front lines have not shifted, at least
not significantly.

The Security Council-designated terrorist group
Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham is a significant presence within
the de-escalation zone. Its attacks must cease. All
due protection must be afforded to the up to 3 million
civilians in Idlib, many of whom fled there from earlier
fighting, and to civilians in the surrounding areas as
well. As the Secretary-General said last week, even
in the fight against terrorism, there needs to be full
compliance with international human rights law and
humanitarian law. Strikes against civilians and civilian
infrastructure, including de-conflicted health facilities
and humanitarian workers, are absolutely unacceptable.
They must cease without delay.

Reports of close military exchanges between the
Syrian Government and Turkish observation posts
are also of grave concern. They remind us that Idlib
is not just a humanitarian issue - or is it an issue that
is exclusively about Syria - rather, it is a potential
powder keg of regional escalation. Undoubtedly, there
is no easy solution for Idlib. But the only way to find
one is for hostilities to stop and for key stakeholders to
engage in a cooperative approach towards countering
terrorism, an approach that safeguards the protection
of civilians.

Both Turkey, which I visited earlier in the month,
and the Russian Federation, which I will visit next
week, have reassured me that they remain committed
to the September 2018 memorandum of understanding
and have set up a working group. But we must see that
assurance reflected on the ground. I strongly reiterate
the Secretary-General's appeal to Russia and Turkey
to stabilize the situation without delay. We must in
fact pursue a nationwide ceasefire, as envisaged in
resolution 2254 (2015).

We see the importance of that when we see unrest
across Syria. There are exchanges of fire and fatalities
in northern rural Aleppo and continued signs of
instability in the south-west. The fate of the north-east
remains unresolved, which demands a solution. There
are immense humanitarian and protection needs across
the country, and outside too. There is grinding poverty,
exacerbated by commodity shortages and rising
prices in many parts of Syria. We have seen a terrible
spate of fires ravaging wheat fields and jeopardizing
Syria's food security. The internally displaced are
acutely vulnerable.

In addition to Idlib, two grave humanitarian
situations, in Rukban and Al-Hol, remain at the top of
our agenda. Emergency Relief Coordinator Lowcock
briefed the Council on this two days ago (see S/PV.8561).
Today, my Senior Humanitarian Adviser, Ms. Najat
Rochdi, urged the Syria Humanitarian Task Force, here
in Geneva, to support the Organization's efforts for
humanitarian access, support the protection of civilians
and civilian infrastructure and find durable solutions.
The current escalation and unrest also send exactly the
wrong signal to Syrian refugees. It reinforces only their
doubts about the security conditions, conscription and
livelihoods in Syria.

We must stabilize the situation in Idlib. If that
is achieved, we must then avoid the risk of a no-war/
no-peace scenario - with front lines mostly frozen
but periodic conflict and unrest lingering and five
international armies in perpetual risk of confrontation;
with the continual violation of Syria's sovereignty,
territorial integrity and independence; with internally
displaced persons and refugees still not returning, at
least not in any critical mass; with the tragedy of the
detained, abducted and missing still unresolved; with a
strengthened insurgency of the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant, with terrorist groups and foreign fighters
still regrouping and posing a challenge; and still no
political solution.

We all agree that there is no military solution to
this conflict. I have sought to revive a Syrian-led and
-owned political process based on resolution 2254
(2015). An immediate priority has been to launch a
credible, balanced and inclusive Syrian-led and -owned
United Nations-facilitated constitutional committee
that fully respects Syria's sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity, if at all possible. That has
been a key item in my sustained dialogue with the two
parties - the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
and the opposition Syrian Negotiation Commission. I
have also ensured the continued support for a common
way forward among the Sochi conveners and others,
including the small group, which I saw in Paris earlier
this week. The Secretary-General himself discussed
the issue with the Russian leadership during his recent
trip to Saint Petersburg.

I believe the path to concluding the constitutional
committee's composition and the rules of procedure
may now be open. In my upcoming engagements, I
look forward to testing directly whether a formula
that I have been careful to ensure has the buy-in of
all can advance the establishment of the committee.
I appreciate recent engagement by senior Russian
officials to support the efforts of the United Nations.
I look forward to consultations with the Government
in Damascus in the near future and with the leadership
of the Syrian Negotiation Commission. It is time to
finalize outstanding issues to enable the United Nations
to facilitate the work of the constitutional committee
in Geneva. The constitutional committee can indeed
open doors, but it will not alone solve the conflict or the
challenges facing Syria. That can come about only ifwe
begin to see real trust and confidence developing via
tangible and reciprocal steps, including on the ground.

I strongly believe that progress on detainees,
abductees and missing persons, if done in a meaningful
way and at a meaningful scale, could make a large
impact. I have prioritized action on the unilateral
release of women, children, the sick and elderly.
Improving access to information and communication
is another step. The Government and the opposition
should compile and consolidate lists of individuals
they hold, have information on or seek. Deputy Special
Envoy Khawla Matar and I will continue to engage in
earnest on this very difficult but critical file. In parallel,
we will also continue to press Russia, Turkey and
Iran - countries participating with us in the working
group on this issue - to exert the efforts needed to
try to achieve more concrete results on this file. My
invitation for the working group to hold its next meeting
in Geneva stands.

In truth, a series of steps will be needed if a cycle
of trust and confidence is to develop. That has been
impressed upon me by Syrians from many walks of
life. I have met with many civil society actors and
networks recently, including through the Civil Society
Support Room. All of the Syrians, from both inside and
outside and irrespective of their political orientations
or backgrounds, are eager - even desperate - for a
political solution. But it strikes me that they do not
really believe that a real process that could lead to a
solution is likely.

This week, I also engaged with the Syrian Women's
Advisory Board, which met in Geneva to deepen its
understanding of how constitutional processes can
protect and advance women's rights. They and many
others stress the critical importance of a constitutional
committee made up of at least 30 per cent women. But
they too emphasized their lack of faith that Syrians,
men and women, have in the political process.

This is why a political process must be about more
than just meeting in Geneva. It must include concrete
actions on the ground to inspire trust and confidence.
I will therefore continue to intensively consult a wider
spectrum of Syrians on what they see as practical and
constructive entry points for trust-building actions.

But ultimately, of course, it falls upon the parties
to take those actions. Unblocking the impasse will
be difficult. There is much mistrust. Positions are
entrenched. But I believe that international discussions
and cooperation can help Syrians overcome these
obstacles. That is not to undermine the Syrian-led and
-owned nature of the process. It is simply a recognition
of the extent of international involvement in Syria and
the centrality of international support for any viable
future for the country. Real steps on the ground could
and should see national actions too. That would build
trust and confidence among Syrians and between Syria
and the international community.

At present, no currently active international
grouping brings together all key international players,
whose support can guarantee concrete and reciprocal
steps across all dimensions. I believe my efforts would
be helped by bringing together the will embodied in
the Astana format, the small group format and the
permanent membership of the Council. That is why I
continue to work on inviting a group of key players to
a common forum to support a Syrian-led and -owned
process in Geneva in a very practical way.

Tomorrow, at the Group of 20 Summit, world
leaders will have many items on their agenda. The
Secretary-General and I have urged that Syria should
be high among them. We hope that Russia and Turkey
can work at the highest level to stabilize the situation
in Idlib. We also hope that Russia and the United States
can build on recent talks and deepen their dialogue,
because cooperation between them will be a key element
for international cooperation on Syria. Finally, we hope
that cooperation can be built in a way that all other key
players are involved in supporting a Syrian-led and
-owned process facilitated by the United Nations in the
discharge of its Council mandate.

Since the beginning of my tenure, the Council has
offered its full support for my mission, and I have greatly
appreciated that. Six months into the job, I appreciate
just how complex and difficult it is, but I also see the
possibilities to chart a path out of this conflict.

It is now time for the Idlib situation to be stabilized
and a nationwide ceasefire pursued. It is in fact past
time to launch a constitutional committee. It is also
time to try to develop a climate of confidence-building
measures, and we clearly need renewed international
support. These are the kinds of actions that would signal
that we are at least moving along a political path that
is in keeping with resolution 2254 (2015) - through a
constitutional committee unfolding in a safe, calm and
neutral environment, paving the way for free and fair
United Nations-supervised elections, as envisaged in
the resolution, and a lasting political settlement.

