President Tadie (Serbia) (spoke in Serbian; English text provided by the delegation): The
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government of the
southern Serbian province of Kosovo and Metohija,
under interim United Nations administration,
unilaterally and illegally declared their independence
on Sunday, 17 February. This illegal declaration of
independence by the Kosovo Albanians constitutes a
flagrant Violation of Security Council resolution 1244
(1999), which reaffirms the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the Republic of Serbia, including Kosovo
and Metohija. Serbia, let me recall, is a founding State
Member of the United Nations.

If a small, peace-loving and democratic country
in Europe that is a United Nations Member State can
be deprived of its territory illegally and against its will,
a historic injustice will have occurred, because a
legitimate democracy has never before been punished
in that way.

The Serbian State was born in Kosovo, and it
represents the central part of our identity. I shall be
frank with the Council: this is a situation in which a
peace-loving country where a proud and European
people lives is having a part of its identity, tradition
and history snatched away. This act annuls
international law, tramples upon justice and enthrones
injustice.

The representatives of some countries present at
this table keep telling us openly that Slobodan
Milosevic is the culprit behind the situation in Kosovo
and that it is because of his mistakes that it is being
granted independence. Let me tell them that today is
19 February 2008, that Slobodan Milosevic is no
longer there and that in 1999, when he was in power in
Serbia, Kosovo was not granted independence.

Here, I wish to recall before this United Nations
body that the Albanians demanded independence and
worked actively for secession from Serbia for decades,
even before Slobodan Milosevic. With the Council's
permission, I shall also recall that it was in the very
same year, 1999, that the citizens of Serbia were
unjustly and severely punished by three months of
bombing. Eight years later, a now democratic and
peace-loving Serbia is once again being punished, by
being deprived of a part of its territory. Indeed, that
kind of logic and that kind of justice are impossible to
explain or comprehend.

Independence is being granted to an ethnic
community in our province that has been administered
by the United Nations and the Kosovo Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government for eight years now. In
all those years, they have done nothing to enable the
remaining Serbs and other non-Albanians to live lives
worthy of human dignity. Independence is being
conferred on those who, at the beginning of the twenty-
first century, created Serbian ghettos in Europe -
ghettos girdled with barbed wire and surrounded with
cannon barrels and soldiers armed to the teeth. A
reward is being bestowed on those who have taken part
in the segregation of Serbs and who deny them
freedom of movement and force them to live in
darkness and in constant fear for their lives.

Since 1999, 250,000 Serbs and other
non-Albanians have been expelled from Kosovo. In
mid-March 2004, militant and extremist members of
the Albanian community in Kosovo burned 35
churches and monasteries and 800 houses in only three
days, while another 5,000 Serbs and other non-
Albanians fled their homes. Is the independence of
Kosovo a just reward for all the things that I have
enumerated?

Another argument that has been invoked in
favour of granting independence to the Albanians has
been the contention that they would otherwise resort to
Violence. Whoever may support Kosovo's
independence must realize that this act legalizes the
threat of Violence as a means of creating new States
and promoting one's own political agendas and
interests.

If the members of the Security Council allow this
illegal act to stand, they will demonstrate that right and
justice can be disrespected in the world. They will
demonstrate that, unfortunately, this body of the world
Organization is losing its authority.

After this act, the world will no longer be the
same. Serbia, a European State, will continue to fight
for law and justice in a dignified, peaceful and
civilized way in such a world as well. We shall never
give up our legitimate interests and shall continue our
peaceful and diplomatic struggle in pursuit of our
legitimate European perspective.
08-24256
All United Nations Member States are
represented in this building. A large number of
countries all over the world are plagued by problems
similar to Serbia's. Imagine, members of the Council,
that you were in my place: that of the President of a
country which is being deprived of a part of its
territory against its will. How would you feel, and how
would you respond? I am asking this question because
if you turn a blind eye to this illegal act, who
guarantees to you that parts of your own countries will
not declare independence in the same illegal way? Who
can guarantee to you that a blind eye will not be turned
to the Violation of the Charter of the United Nations,
which guarantees the sovereignty and integrity of each
State, when your country's turn comes?

The question before the Council is this: Are we
all aware of the precedent that is being set, and are we
aware of the catastrophic consequences that it may lead
to?

The Security Council and all United Nations
Member States are bound by Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations to respect the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of
Serbia. This is provided for by Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999), and Serbia, as a sovereign
country, requests that the Security Council abide by
international law, the principles of international justice,
the principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations and the provisions of the Council's resolution.

The Republic of Serbia will not accept the
violation of its sovereignty and territorial integrity. The
Government of Serbia and the National Assembly of
the Republic of Serbia have declared the decision of
the Pristina authorities null and void. Likewise, we are
taking all diplomatic and political measures to prevent
the secession of a part of our territory. As a responsible
member of the international community committed to
the peaceful and negotiated settlement of disputes, the
Republic of Serbia will not resort to force. No crisis
has ever been resolved successfully by force. Only
human lives are destroyed by force.

On the other hand, this arbitrary decision represents
a precedent which will cause irreparable damage to the
international order. The unilateral and illegal declaration
of the independence of Kosovo runs afoul of the first
principle of the Charter of the United Nations - the
sovereign equality of all Member States - in the most
direct way.
I repeat: there are dozens of other Kosovos in the
world, and all of them are lying in wait for Kosovo's
act of secession to become a reality and to be
established as an acceptable norm. I warn Council
members most seriously of the danger of the escalation
of many existing conflicts, the flaring up of frozen
conflicts and the instigation of new ones.

My country requests that the Security Council
take effective measures in order to ensure that all the
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and of
Council resolution 1244 (1999) are fully respected.

We request the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban
Ki-moon, to issue, in pursuance of the previous
decisions of the Security Council, including resolution
1244 (1999), a clear and unequivocal instruction to his
Special Representative for Kosovo, Joachim Rucker, to
use his powers within the shortest possible period of
time and declare the unilateral and illegal act of the
secession of Kosovo from the Republic of Serbia null
and void. We also request that Special Representative
Riicker dissolve the Kosovo Assembly, because it
declared independence contrary to Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999). The Special Representative has
binding powers, and they have been used before. I
request that he use them again.

Pursuant to paragraph 9 of Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999), the international security
presence in Kosovo, KFOR, must remain status-
neutral. It is responsible for the protection of the lives
and property of the Serbs and of all other non-Albanian
communities in the province. KFOR must show special
care for the most vulnerable, for the Kosovo Serbs, as
well as for the clergy of the Serbian Orthodox Church
and our churches and monasteries, some of which have
been placed on UNESCO's list of world heritage in
danger. These holy places are the crucibles of Serbian
identity, tradition and history. The Republic of Serbia
wishes to believe that KFOR is capable of preventing
all violence against the Serbian population and the
"cleansing" of our religious heritage.

At this moment, we are faced with the challenge
of a unilateral declaration of independence and the
decision of some countries to recognize the illegal
establishment of a State on the territory of a sovereign
State. This will, let me reiterate, have unfathomable
consequences. I consider that such a decision legalizes
the ethnic cleansing carried out against the Serbs in
1999 after the arrival of KFOR and UNMIK in Kosovo
and Metohija. The States that recognize the
independence of this Serbian province would, by such
an act, bear responsibility for a possible new ethnic
cleansing campaign directed against Serbs remaining in
Kosovo and Metohij a.

All the Albanians who were in Kosovo in 1999
are there today. But 250,000 Serbs who lived in
Kosovo prior to 1999 do not live in their homes
anymore; they live in refugee camps in central Serbia.
How many Serbs will return to their homes in Kosovo
and Metohija if it becomes independent? Are Council
members aware that this illegal decision sends them a
message not to return because they are not wanted
there?

I believe in regional peace and stability. I believe
that long-lasting peace and stability can be achieved
only by negotiations and compromise solutions. I am
convinced that only a peaceful and stable Balkans can
bring economic prosperity to all its citizens. Unilateral
decisions like the one taken in Pristina cannot
contribute to a legitimate solution and do not favour
that perspective of regional peace and security. We all
must understand this, and we must invest additional
efforts to bring about a legitimate solution.

I would like to point out once again that Serbia
threatens Violence to no one. On the contrary, our
strength is in the pursuit of the policy of peace. Our
strength is in the powerful arguments by which we
fight for right and justice. At this moment, historically
important for Serbia, our strength is in our resolve to
embrace and protect the life of each and every man and
woman and to preserve our integrity, as well as the
integrity of all other countries. Our strength is in our
determination to preserve the stability and dignity of
our country and the prospects of the region in which
we live. We owe this to ourselves, as well as to the
generations that are yet to be born. All peoples of the
Balkans need peace, stability and development. All our
children need it, and we must achieve it.

Here, in the Security Council of the United
Nations, I say clearly and unequivocally: Serbia will
never recognize the independence of Kosovo. We shall
never renounce Kosovo, and we shall not give up the
struggle for our legitimate interests. For the citizens of
Serbia and its institutions, Kosovo will forever remain
a part of Serbia.

