Mr. Hallak (Syrian Arab Republic) (interpretation from Arabic): Allow me at the outset to congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Council
for this month. I am confident that your well-known
wisdom and efficiency will enable the Council to make
headway. I should like also to express appreciation to your
predecessor, His Excellency Ambassador Legwaila J.
Legwaila, for the exemplary manner in which he steered the
deliberations of the Council last month.

The Security Council is meeting today, at the request
of the Arab Group, to consider the tragic situation facing
the Palestinian population in the occupied Arab territories.

There is cause for concern in the deterioration of the
situation, with Israel's escalation of acts of detention and
oppression, confiscation of land, the establishment of
settlements, the demolition of houses, the imposition of a
siege on the West Bank and Gaza and the total isolation of
Jerusalem to persuade the Palestinian population through
starvation to accept a fait accompli, thus enabling Israel to
continue its de facto occupation of the Palestinian territories
and its denial of the legitimate rights of the Palestinian
people.

Silence on Israel's refusal to implement resolutions of
international legality and the deflection of the peace process
from its objectives has encouraged Israel to be arrogant and
intransigent. This has led to a serious deterioration of the
situation and to the expansion and escalation of Israeli
aggression in southern Lebanon, targeting civilians in scores
of villages and towns as well as Beirut, the capital. As a
result of this flagrant aggression, hundreds of thousands
of civilians have been displaced and dozens of innocent
civilians have been killed or wounded.

Security cannot be achieved unless Israel withdraws
from all the occupied territories, and a just and
comprehensive peace cannot be achieved by further
aggression, by starving the population, by massacres such
as that at Al-Ibrahimi Mosque in Hebron, by further
aggression against the Lebanese people, by the
displacement of hundreds of thousands of people or by
the killing of dozens of innocent civilians.

It is high time that the Council shouldered its
responsibilities in the face of Israel's persistent refusal to
withdraw from the occupied territories. The Council is
called upon now more than ever to take a strict and
categorical position in order to impose respect for
international legality and halt Israel's attempts to sabotage
the prospects for a comprehensive, just peace based on
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and
425 (1978) and the principle of land for peace, as well as
to enable the Palestinian people to exercise its legitimate
rights to return to its homeland, to self-determination, and
to establish its own independent State on its national soil
with its capital at Al-Quds.

