Mr. Bennouna (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic):
Mr. President, allow me at the outset to extend to you
and to the other members of the Council our thanks for
your immediate response to the request made by the
Arab Group to convene an urgent meeting of the
Security Council to discuss the tragic situation
prevailing in the occupied Palestinian territories.
Let me also extend to you our warmest
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency

S/PV.4478

 

of the Security Council for this month. We are
confident that your skill and wisdom will enable you
ably to conduct the deliberations of the Council on this
matter of grave and important significance to
international security.

We also wish to extend our thanks to your
predecessor for his efforts last month. By the same
token, I wish to express appreciation to the Security
Council for its decision to discuss recent developments
relating to the question of the Middle East at least once
a month. However, events have shown that this
question deserves to be discussed daily in the Council,
given the deterioration in the Palestinian arena and the
setbacks plaguing peace efforts in the region.

The Security Council is meeting today under
special and extraordinary circumstances, marked by
grave danger and by the serious deterioration of the
situation in the occupied Palestinian territories due to
the continued and intensified Israeli aggression and
practices.

Our delegation condemns Israel's continued and
systematic escalation of its military campaign against
the defenceless Palestinian people, its resort to
collective punishment, the destruction of official
buildings of the Palestinian National Authority and its
socio-economic infrastructures, its policy of
assassinations that target symbols of the Palestinian
Authority, and the economic and military siege of
Palestinian villages and towns. These practices
constitute a blatant violation of international
resolutions and the norms of international humanitarian
law, as well as of relevant international instruments,
including the Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War.

It is no secret, neither to you, Mr. President, nor
to the Council, that such practices have resulted in
tremendous, pent-up despair and frustration for the
Palestinian people, in tandem with the faltering peace
process and the continuation of occupation, as well as
Israel's disregard for international legitimacy.

Morocco has contributed to international efforts
to end the conflict in the region. It rejects all Israeli
attempts to undermine the Palestinian National
Authority and to marginalize its legitimate President,
Mr. Yasser Arafat. We emphasize that the Palestinian
National Authority is the only legitimate and sole
authority able to play the role of peace partner with a
View to achieving a just and comprehensive peace in
the region. Any attempt to undermine this authority
would pose a grave danger to security and stability in
the region.

The policy of the current Israeli Government will
aggravate the situation and lead to the continuation of
the cycle of violence and to more victims. It will also
endanger stability and peace in the region and the
future of the peace process. Israel's handling of this
crisis on the basis of security alone will only escalate
acts of violence.

This conflict will not be settled through the use of
force or through the intensification of security and
coercive measures. It can be accomplished only
through immediate, unconditional resumption of
negotiations undertaken with goodwill and courage to
make the process succeed.

There is no doubt that Israel's occupation of the
Palestinian territories lies at the heart of the crisis and
of the entire question of the Middle East. Anyone who
follows current events and developments will clearly
realize that it is the intention of the Israeli Government
to perpetuate its occupation of the Palestinian
territories. My delegation believes that there is no
future for occupation, no matter how powerful the
occupier. We believe also that a just and equitable
peace is the foundation of stability and security in the
region.

Morocco remains convinced that the option of
peace and of keeping to the path of negotiations on the
basis of international legitimacy continues to be the
only way to extricate the Middle East from the
whirlwind of violence and counter-violence. In that
connection, Morocco welcomes recent initiatives that
have been announced, intended to free the region from
the logic of violence and to revive negotiations,
particularly the initiative of Crown Prince Abdullah of
Saudi Arabia, which has been accepted and eagerly
encouraged by the international community.

One month ago the Al-Quds Committee met at
Marrakesh under the chairmanship of His Majesty
Mohammed VI. His Majesty appealed to all members
of the international community to focus the necessary
awareness and sense of responsibility on this explosive
situation. Events in the Middle East have direct
repercussions for international peace and stability. He
further said that immediate resolute intervention by the
international community, particularly the Security
Council and the co-sponsors of the peace process, is

S/PV.4478

 

urgently needed to rescue the entire region, and the
world, from an avoidable tragedy; the international
community must compel Israel to comply with the
decisions of international legitimacy.

More than ever before, the Security Council is
called upon to restore the rights of those who are
entitled to them, and to shoulder its responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security in
the region by calling for an immediate halt to Israeli
aggression and by sending international observers to
provide the Palestinian people with the international
protection they need and to monitor the establishment
of security in accordance with international resolutions
and conventions. The Council should urge Israel to
implement the Mitchell and Tenet recommendations
with a view to creating the objective circumstances
needed for the resumption of the peace process.

The Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Kofi
Annan, said as much to the Security Council less than a
week ago:

"A reduction in the violence is the most
immediate priority. It has to be addressed
alongside key political issues, particularly the
question of land, and economic and social issues,
including the increasingly critical, desperate
conditions of the Palestinians.

"Failure to address these issues together
will only spawn new and perhaps deadlier
exchanges of reciprocal violence. It is
imperative that both parties exercise maximum
restraint, particularly with regard to attacks
against civilians." (S/PV.4474, p. 3)

In spite of the difficult situation with regard to
halting violence in the region, the Kingdom of
Morocco is hopeful that this can be achieved. It is also
of the firm view that peace is the only viable option; it
should be founded on Israel's withdrawal from the
occupied Palestinian territories, the establishment of a
Palestinian State with Al-Quds as its capital, the return
of the Golan Heights to Syria, and the return to
Lebanon of its remaining occupied territories, in
accordance with relevant United Nations resolutions,
particularly Security Council resolutions 242 (1967)
and 338 (1973).

