I welcome you, Mr. Foreign Minister, to the Security Council to preside over today's meeting. I thank Assistant Secretary-General Jenea and Mr. Magagi for their briefings. I also listened attentively to Ms. Pasisi's briefing. Humans and nature share a community of life. What hurts nature hurts humans. Climate change poses a major obstacle to sustainable development. The outbreak of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) reminds us again that no country or individual is immune to global challenges, and solidarity and cooperation are what is most needed. Climate change endangers the future of humankind and requires joint efforts by all of us. In this context, China wishes to stress the following. First, we should honour commitments and effectively implement the multilateral consensus on climate change. Every country should firmly support multilateralism instead of putting itself first, implement the obligations under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and the Paris Agreement on Climate Change, especially the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities, and build a fair, equitable and win-win global climate-governance system. The biggest challenge facing the multilateral climate process is the significant financing gap. Developed countries should fulfil their commitments to provide $100 billion in climate financing annually by 2020, set a new collective quantified goal and enhance the transparency of financial support. Secondly, we should prioritize development and advance the cause of sustainable development. Climate change is, in essence, a development issue rather than a security issue; there is no direct linkage between the two. The solution to climate change lies in sustainable development. Progress on the development front is conductive to effectively addressing climate change and security risks exacerbated by climate change. The international community should give priority to development in the coordination of global macroeconomic policy. Countries should promote green and low-carbon transformation and enhance resilience in the face of climate change. Thirdly, we should put people first and ensure that no one and no country is left behind. African countries and small island developing States are confronted with underdevelopment, resource shortages and weak technology. Developed countries should actively transfer climate-friendly technologies to help developing countries enhance capacity for adaptation and mitigation and accelerate green development. Fourthly, we should encourage United Nations agencies to better discharge their respective responsibilities and work in a coordinated manner to form synergy. The UNFCCC secretariat, the United Nations development system and Resident Coordinators should, in accordance with their mandates, mobilize the efforts of all sides to provide targeted support for climate change response and economic and social development. The Security Council, as the organ handling international peace and security issues, should act in line with the mandates of the relevant resolutions, analyse security challenges and the security implications of climate change for the countries concerned and discuss and handle relevant issues on a country-specific basis. China has been actively tackling climate change and implementing the Paris Agreement on Climate Change while fighting COVID-19 and promoting economic recovery. We pursue green development, put people first and make every effort to address environmental issues to meet our people's aspiration for a better life. China's carbon dioxide emissions in 2018 were 45.8 per cent lower than in 2005, thus meeting the emissions-reduction target two years ahead of schedule. In 2018, the share of non-fossil fuels in China's total energy consumption reached 14.3 per cent. New energy vehicle ownership in China accounts for more than half of the world's total. We earnestly implement the basic State policy of resource conservation and environmental protection and promote ecological progress to build a beautiful China. A quarter of the world's newly afforested area since 2000 is in China. China is working to treat 50 per cent of its treatable desert land by the end of this year. We are vigorously promoting international climate cooperation. China is advancing the development of a green Silk Road. We jointly initiated the Belt and Road Initiative international green development coalition with the United Nations Environment Programme and have helped relevant countries develop renewable energy projects, such as hydro, wind and photovoltaic power, to achieve an energy transition and green development. With China's efforts, the Group of 20 issued its first presidential statement on climate change in 2016. For two consecutive years, China, France and the United Nations held trilateral high-level meetings and issued communiques on climate change, setting an example for the international community. As aco-lead of the nature-based solution track of the Climate Action Summit, China pushed for nearly 200 initiatives, ensuring positive outcomes for the Summit. Looking at today's world, we can see that a given country's irresponsible and crazy act of unilateralism and bullying practices are causing greater danger. Should this go unchecked, international rule of law, equity, justice, equality and mutual trust will no longer exist, and the world will descend into absolute chaos. We must stand together and fight back. I wish to emphasize that, no matter how the world may evolve, China will always side with multilateralism and international justice, firmly uphold the international order based on international law, reject hegemonism and bullying practices and oppose self-proclaimed supremacy and power politics. China will work with other members of the international community to build an open, inclusive, clean and beautiful world that enjoys lasting peace, security and prosperity for all.
