Mr. Okio (Congo) (spoke in French): Allow me
to welcome Mr. Ould Abdallah, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia,
and to salute his efforts in the country in a particularly
difficult context. I would also like to thank the
Permanent Representative of Somalia for his
contribution to the debate.

As regards the latest developments in Somalia,
the least that can be said is that the situation remains
serious. All the main elements noted in the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2007/658) remain current,
both with respect to the security and political situation
and as regards, of course, the peace process. In this
context, the humanitarian situation continues to
deteriorate. The number of displaced persons is
reaching record numbers, and the number of people
needing humanitarian assistance is constantly growing.
All these figures give us the scale of the disaster.

At the same time, the Monitoring Group on
Somalia notes continuing violations of the arms
embargo imposed by resolution 751 (1992). These
weapons, which come from countries in the region,
continue to arrive in Mogadishu and to supply the
extremist groups. Moreover, acts of piracy are
continuing. In that connection, we would like to
welcome once again the very courageous initiative
taken by France that has made it possible to improve
the shipment of humanitarian assistance. We regret that

it has not raised the expected support. Since it will be
concluding soon, pirates will have fine days ahead,
unless new initiatives are planned.

If I could compare Somalia to a sick person, I
would say that the deterioration in its state of health
requires not just shock treatment, but also the
involvement of several specialists. Neither the States of
the subregion nor the African Union, through the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), can
stem this illness alone. That is why my delegation
repeats its appeal for a ceasefire and for national
reconciliation in the context of an inter-Somali
political dialogue, without which no progress can be
achieved.

With respect to supporting the Secretary-General's
proposal for the establishment of a multinational force,
we would like to recall that overlapping sociological,
historical and other factors among the Somali people
and those of other countries in the subregion should
lead us to taking increasingly into account regional
aspects of the Somali crisis, not only in regard to
approaches to a solution and but also to foreseeable
consequences if a political solution is not found.

In the immediate future, we feel that the Council
should support the new Government and the Prime
Minister, Mr. Nur Hassan Hussein, and invite his
Government to continue its efforts toward national
reconciliation by relying upon the progress made by
the National Reconciliation Congress held from
15 July to 30 August 2007. If the Congress decisions
referred to by the Secretary-General in paragraph 5 of
his report could be implemented, then a big step could
be taken towards stabilization of the situation in this
country.

In our View, the Security Council should also
ensure that the United Nations Political Office for
Somalia is strengthened so that it can play a leading
role in coordinating efforts made by parties, supporting
the efforts of AMISOM, seriously envisaging the
deployment of a multinational force, taking appropriate
measures to contain acts of piracy, considering the
establishment of an investigation commission with a
view to holding accountable the serious violators of
international human rights and humanitarian law.

Mr. President, my delegation knows how much
your country supports initiatives for a return of peace
in Somalia. We have counted on your continued
support to help this country.
Congo, in conclusion, condemns the kidnapping of
the French journalist and calls for his immediate release.

