Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): I
should first like to welcome the presence here today of
Mr. Nikola Spirie, Chairman of the Council of
Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, whom we would
also like to thank for his important statement. I should
also like to thank Mr. Valentin Inzko, who has just
assumed his new functions as High Representative for
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Special Representative of
the European Union, for introducing his report. We
wish him every success in his office.

We would also like to welcome the progress that
has been made in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in
particular since the signing of the Prud Agreement.
That reflects the willingness of political leaders to
reach compromise, in particular in the area of
constitutional and budgetary reform.

We nevertheless deplore certain extreme
nationalistic attitudes, which could jeopardize the
ongoing political momentum and even the very
foundations of the State. My country therefore strongly
supports every effort aimed at fully implementing the
Dayton Agreement, as well as the steps taken to
improve the functioning of State institutions. We urge
all political actors to work to safeguard the territorial
integrity of the country and to provide a secure and
stable democratic future for their citizens.

Moreover, it should be possible to find a just
solution to the issue of apportioning public goods
between the State and the various entities. We are
encouraged to note that the Council of Ministers has
already begun that process.

We are concerned by the difficult economic
situation in the country, which has been exacerbated by
the world economic and financial crisis, whose effects
threaten to undermine a political process that is already
fragile as a result of political tensions. It is also urgent
to increase economic integration among the country's
main groups.

As we urge the international community to extend
its technical and financial support to Bosnia and
Herzegovina, we also call on the country's political
leaders to facilitate the reforms necessary to improve
good governance and the country's institutional
capacity.

We welcome the efforts that have been made to
entrench the rule of law, in particular the adoption, on
29 December 2008, of the Bosnia and Herzegovina
War Crimes Strategy, as well as the implementation of
the National Justice Sector Reform Strategy. Those
developments should have an impact on cooperation
with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and, eventually, on dealing with various
issues as the Tribunal concludes its work.

There are also other reforms under way that will
have an impact in the economic, public administration
and defence sectors. We hope that the problems
encountered in that regard will be speedily resolved so
that the country can resolutely embark upon European
integration and open itself up to even greater prospects.

Bosnia and Herzegovina must also make
altogether more meaningful progress in respecting
international human rights standards and press
freedoms and in the treatment of refugees and
minorities. Integration into European and international
institutions will depend upon improvements in that
regard.

In an unpredictable environment such as that in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, cooperation with NATO and
its Stabilization Force (SFOR), as well as between
EUFOR and European police, have been of crucial
importance not only in properly implementing reforms
in the defence and security sectors, but also and above
all in ensuring national security. Given the many
challenges that remain to be overcome, it is essential
that the international community, including the
Security Council, continue to support Bosnia and
Herzegovina along the path of recovery and national
reconstruction.

