Mr. Manalo (Philippines): Sir, it is my pleasure
to address this important meeting under your
presidency. We are more than confident that the
Council will have a productive month under your
delegation's stewardship. We also wish to commend
the delegation of Pakistan and Ambassador Munir
Akram for its active and excellent presidency last
month.

We welcome the Russian presidency's initiative
to discuss the situation in Afghanistan in order to
sustain the international community's continuing
commitment to Afghanistan. My delegation also
appreciates the briefings given earlier today by Under-
Secretary-General Guehenno and Mr. Antonio Maria
Costa on the drug situation in Afghanistan.

Eighteen months after the historic meeting in
Bonn, the international community continues to
support the rebuilding of Afghanistan and its
integration into the international community as a free
and democratic country. In that span of time, we have
witnessed significant strides in the implementation of
the Bonn agenda, specifically, the convening of the
Loya Jirga, the establishment of the Transitional
Government under President Karzai, the creation of a
national currency and the establishment of the Afghan
national army. As we speak today, consultations on a
draft constitution and preparations for the convening of
the Constitutional Loya Jirga in October this year to
pave the way for the elections in June 2004 are under
way.

My delegation notes that the Afghan
reconstruction process is on course; this is a tribute to
the efforts of the international community, particularly
to the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the major actors who are
taking the lead in key areas, such as narcotics - the
United Nations; police reform - Germany;
establishment of the rule of law - Italy; strengthening
of the Afghan national army - France and the United
States; and security through the International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF) under the commands of the
United Kingdom, Turkey and, now, Germany and the
Netherlands. Japan's contribution to the reconstruction
efforts is also noteworthy.

However, the task of rebuilding Afghanistan is far
from complete. Establishing security and
reconstructing the economy and infrastructure of a
country devastated by war for more than two decades
requires a sustained commitment, going beyond what
has so far been in place, and going beyond
compassionate rhetoric.

In recent months, the Afghan people have been
manifesting their growing restlessness and a measure
of disappointment over the seeming lack of progress in
their country and in their daily lives. Peace dividends
have not touched the lives of many Afghans. At the
same time, the Taliban is now waging conflict in the
southern part of the country, to the detriment of
reconstruction projects. Poppy cultivation has
increased. While we note the progress in the
channelling of revenues to the central Government,
warlords or regional Chieftains continue to undermine
the authority of the central Government, especially in
the provinces. One effective means for addressing the
problem of the warlords would be to strengthen
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
measures. We thus welcome Japan's efforts in that
regard.

It is disquieting that poppy cultivation in
Afghanistan was again on the rise last year despite the
issuance of decrees banning such cultivation. It may be
recalled that opium cultivation in Afghanistan declined

by 91 per cent in 2001 compared to the previous year,
which resulted in a corresponding drop in global poppy
cultivation by about 30 per cent, according to the
Office for Drug Control and Crime Prevention.
However, figures now indicate that poppy cultivation
in Afghanistan reached approximately 3,500 tons in
2002, leading to a fivefold to tenfold increase in
income derived from opium and heroin trafficking.

Thus, while efforts to curtail poppy cultivation
are important, it should also be emphasized that a root
cause of the dependence on such cultivation is the lack
of alternative productive employment opportunities for
the Afghan people in general. In this regard, the
reconstruction process plays a vital role. Unless its
pace is accelerated and economic growth is sustained
and widespread, there may be no viable alternative to
continuing poppy cultivation.

On the issue of security, my delegation welcomes
the decision of the North Atlantic Council to continue
and enhance its support to ISAF beginning in August
2003. However, it is apparent that security outside
Kabul needs to be urgently addressed. The Taliban's
regaining strength in the south needs priority attention.

On funding for reconstruction, reported figures
indicate that only half of the Tokyo pledges have been
forthcoming. Efforts in meeting the goals and pledges
of the Tokyo Conference must be accelerated. It should
be underlined that reconstruction funds are additional
to the funds provided by donors for humanitarian
assistance. The funds needed for long-term
reconstruction programmes and for the immediate
needs of the Transitional Administration are reportedly
behind target by at least 50 per cent.

President Karzai recently estimated that $15
billion to $20 billion will be needed for the
reconstruction of Afghanistan for the next five years.
While this might appear to be a huge amount in
addition to other funding requirements for Afghanistan,
particularly for humanitarian assistance, the
international community, we believe, should view this
requirement in the light of its trade-off for peace and
security and a substantial eradication of the drug
menace and related organized crime.

The international community has travelled a great
distance in supporting Afghanistan. Its support must,
however, be sustained and strengthened. The Afghan
Government has drawn up its national drug strategy,
and we believe that every effort must be taken to
implement this strategy effectively.

