President Da Silva (spoke in Portuguese; English text provided by the delegation): I would like
to congratulate you, Madam President, on the initiative
of convening this meeting, which is being held at a
critical juncture for the future of the United Nations.
Efforts to strengthen the United Nations and its main
bodies are being intensified. We need to adapt the
Security Council to the political and economic
requirements of a world that is undergoing a profound
transformation.

This is only the third summit of the Security
Council in its 60 years of existence. In 1992, we met to
celebrate the end of the East-West confrontation, as
new prospects dawned for the Council to act to
promote international stability. There were reasons to
believe in the future of collective security. In 2000, our
summit meeting coincided with brutal acts of violence
fuelled by racial and religious intolerance. At that time,
we were striving to learn lessons from the civil wars in
former Yugoslavia and Rwanda and to restore the
Organization's capacity to counter massive human
rights abuses. Today, we face threats of growing
complexity. Both of the resolutions we have just
adopted are attempts to respond to those challenges.

Barbaric acts of terrorism continue to be
perpetrated against innocent and defenceless people.
Combating this scourge demands resolve, yet
repression alone will not defeat it. We must prevent
terror from breeding in hotbeds of hopelessness. We
must reject prejudice and discrimination, whatever
their guise or pretext. In combating irrational violence,
the best means at our disposal are the promotion of a
culture of dialogue, the promotion of development and
the unyielding protection of human rights.

The Council must also continue to devote
attention to African issues. During my visits to 14
African countries, as well as in contacts maintained
with many African leaders in Brasilia, I have witnessed
major institutional and economic progress in the
region. The firm political will of African leaders to
overcome today's conflicts and to cope with a legacy
of dependency has culminated in the establishment of
the African Union. Their example should inspire parts
of the world that are working towards integration with
the international community in a sovereign and
peaceful manner.

In Haiti, Latin America wants to prove that the
United Nations is not condemned to merely clean up
the wreckage of conflicts it could not prevent. The
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti offers a
new paradigm for responding to the challenges of
conflict resolution and national reconstruction. We are
contributing to the long-term stabilization of the
country without resorting to the excessive use of force
or to any imposed solution. We encourage dialogue
among all political actors and support institutional and
economic reconstruction.

The establishment of a Peacebuilding
Commission demonstrates that the international
community shares that view. Better coordination
between the Security Council and the Economic and
Social Council would ensure that situations such as
those in Haiti and Guinea-Bissau are adequately
addressed. Those are deep crises in societies that seek
to find their way back to development.

With regard to issues such as these, United
Nations action is irreplaceable. That is certainly the
case with the Middle East conflict, where sensitive
political issues need to be resolved with credibility and
transparency. In that spirit, Brazil supports the efforts
of the Quartet to promote the implementation of the
road map to peace.

United Nations reform, now being discussed,
cannot be dissociated from restructuring of the Security
Council. New responsibilities - many of them not
anticipated in the Charter of the United Nations -
have arisen as a result of a broader agenda. The
Council must stop running such a deficit in
transparency and representativity. The values of good
governance and the democratic principles that we so
cherish at home should lead us to embrace
multilateralism and collective decision-making in
multilateral institutions. We have before us an historic
opportunity to expand the Council in an equitable
manner. For the majority of United Nations Member
countries, that means expanding the number of Council
seats, with developing countries from all regions as
both permanent and non-permanent Council members.

I am convinced that there will be no peace or
security in the world as long as a billion people are
oppressed by hunger. I insist that that evil can be
considered the most devastating of all weapons of mass
destruction. Hunger and poverty affect people's
capacity to work, as well as their health, their dignity
and their hopes; they also break down families, tear
apart societies and weaken economies. Hunger and
poverty fuel a vicious circle of frustration and
humiliation that sets the stage for violence, crises and
conflicts of all sorts.

I would like to reiterate that, as far as Brazil is
concerned, the Council must continue to be the
principal international body for the promotion of
international peace and security, as defined by the
Charter. Brazil will not shirk its responsibilities in
promoting the reforms needed to strengthen this
institution. A reformed Council will be better equipped
to take the lead in facing the complex decisions
required at this historic moment.

