Ms. Banks (New Zealand): I thank you,
Mr. President, for those kind words as I prepare to
leave New York.

New Zealand welcomes these reports from the
United Nations counter-terrorism committees. In
responding to the threat of global terrorism, the United
Nations, through the work of the General Assembly,
the Security Council and the agencies, is best placed to
coordinate international efforts. It does this in the
framework of the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy, the 16 international counter-
terrorism instruments, and Security Council resolutions
1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004).

New Zealand is encouraged by the significant
work the 1267 Committee has done pursuant to
resolution 1822 (2008) to improve the procedures for
listing and de-listing terrorist entities. In particular,
New Zealand welcomes the concrete steps that have
been put in place to review all names on the
consolidated list by mid-2010 and the work that is
under way to make narrative summaries of the reasons
for listing entities available on the Committee's
website. These initiatives, along with the other
measures mandated by resolution 1822 (2008), will do
much to improve the listing process, and to increase
public confidence in the United Nations counter-
terrorism framework.

New Zealand's approach to countering terrorism
continues to be guided closely by the United Nations
framework. The spread of terrorist attacks and the
globalization of terrorist networks show that no region
or country can be complacent about measures to
combat terrorism. That principle underlies New
Zealand's commitment to building counter-terrorism
capability in the small island States of the Pacific
region.

Pacific island countries face particular challenges
in meeting international counter-terrorism obligations.
The political will is firm, but resources are limited.
New Zealand continues to assist those countries meet
the requirements of the international counter-terrorism
agenda, and we are encouraged by the progress that
they have made in improving counter-terrorism
legislation, policy and operational capability in the
Pacific.

We very much welcome the work of United
Nations counter-terrorism agencies in the Pacific. In
the past month, New Zealand has co-sponsored two
regional workshops arranged by the United Nations
Office for Disarmament Affairs, on 1540
implementation, and by the Terrorism Prevention
Branch of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, on maritime counter-terrorism. New Zealand
also hosted a workshop on radioactive source security
and safety under the Global Initiative to Combat
Nuclear Terrorism, which complemented the event of
the 1540 Committee. Next week, we will convene the
annual meeting of the Pacific Working Group on
Counter-Terrorism, which is the primary forum for
counter-terrorism policy discussion in our region. We
hope to have the participation of the Counter-Terrorism
Executive Directorate, the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime and the 1540 Committee.

In South-East Asia, New Zealand continues to
support a number of counter-terrorism capacity-
building initiatives. We are also continuing our
programme of counter-radicalization activities, in
particular in the areas of media, education and youth,
aimed at preventing recruitment into terrorism.

Domestically, New Zealand remains determined
to take all necessary measures to prevent and combat
terrorism to ensure that our country is neither a target
nor a source for terrorist activity. We continue to
improve our legislative, policy and operational
capabilities in line with international standards and
obligations, including prioritizing work to ratify all 16
international counter-terrorism instruments.

Last month, New Zealand welcomed a team of
experts from the Financial Action Task Force. We look
forward to a visit to New Zealand in July by the
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate, which will
provide a valuable opportunity to ensure that New
Zealand's domestic and international counter-terrorism
efforts are coordinated with the United Nations
framework.

The threat of international terrorism requires a
comprehensive, multilayered and long-term response.
New Zealand remains steadfast in its commitment to
that response, along with our regional partners on the
frontline of this struggle.

