Ms. Rice (United States of America): We are
grateful for the convening of this important debate.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General and
President Song and Mr. Mochochoko of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) for their briefings.

Strengthening the global system of accountability
for the worst atrocities remains an important priority
for the United States. President Obama has emphasized
that preventing mass atrocities and genocide is a core
national security interest and core moral responsibility
for our nation. We are committed to bringing pressure
to bear against perpetrators of atrocities, to ensuring
accountability for crimes committed, and to prioritizing
the rule of law and transitional justice in our efforts to
respond to conflict.

Accountability and peace begin with Governments
taking care of their people. But the international
community must continue to support rule of law
capacity-building initiatives to advance transitional
justice, including the creation of hybrid structures
where appropriate. From the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to Cote d'Ivoire to Cambodia, the United
States is supporting efforts to build fair, impartial and
capable national justice systems.

At the same time, more can be done to strengthen
accountability mechanisms at the international level.
The United States has strongly backed the ad hoc
international criminal tribunals and other judicial
institutions in Rwanda, the former Yugoslavia, Sierra
Leone and Cambodia. Such tribunals and courts have
been critical to ending impunity and helping those
countries move forward. As those judicial institutions
complete their mandates in the coming years, the
International Criminal Court may become an even
more important safeguard against impunity.

Although the United States is not a party to the Rome
Statute, we recognize that the ICC can be an important
tool for accountability. We have actively engaged with
the ICC Prosecutor and Registrar to consider how we
can support specific prosecutions already under way,
and we responded positively to informal requests for
assistance. We will continue working with the ICC
to identify practical ways to cooperate, particularly
in areas such as information-sharing and witness
protection on a case-by-case basis, as consistent with
United States policy and law.

Last year, the Council made its first unanimous
referral to the ICC of the situation in Libya. Resolution
1970 (2011) has kept the principle of accountability
central to Libya's transition from authoritarianism to
democracy. Moving forward, it is critical that Libya
cooperate with the ICC and ensure that the detention
of and any domestic proceedings against alleged
perpetrators of atrocities are in full compliance with
its international obligations. We are exploring ways to
assist Libya in pursuing justice sector reform, and we
reaffirm that there must be accountability in Libya for
violations and abuses on all sides.

The Security Council also acted in response to
the atrocities in Darfur, but justice has still not been
served, and the lack of accountability continues to fuel
resentment, reprisals and conflict in Darfur and beyond.
Despite constant calls on all parties to the conflict to
cooperate fully with the ICC, the Sudan has failed to
meet its obligations under resolution 1593 (2005) and
individuals subject to outstanding arrest warrants
remain at large. We continue to urge all States to refrain
from providing political or financial support to those
individuals. We applaud the example Malawi set by
refusing to host President Al-Bashir.

The Council should review additional steps that
can be undertaken to complete the ICC's work in
Darfur. We should take inspiration from the concerted
European Union efforts that resulted in the arrest and
detention of the final fugitives from the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.
We should consider ways to improve cooperation
and communication between the Security Council and
the Court. For example, the Council should monitor
developments in situations it refers to the Courts, since
the ICC may face dangers in conducting its work.
However, we must also recognize that the ICC is an
independent organization. That status raises concerns
about proposals to cover its expenses with United
Nations assessed funding.

The interests of peace, security and international
criminal justice are best served when the Security
Council and the ICC operate within their own realms
but work in ways that are mutually reinforcing. We
should not accept the false choice between the interests
of justice and the interests of peace. As we work
to strengthen accountability, we support the States
parties' decision to delay until 2017 a final decision on
the Court's exercise of jurisdiction over the crime of
aggression. That delay would allow for consideration
of issues about the aggression amendments that require
attention and enable the Court to consolidate its progress
in the investigation and prosecution of atrocity crimes.

How we act to halt violence against civilian
populations and hold accountable those who perpetrate
such crimes is a fundamental test of our time. The
United States continues to press for accountability
in the Syrian Arab Republic, without prejudging the
ultimate venue for it. As the independent international
commission of inquiry has recognized, the Syrian
people should have a leading voice in determining how
to deal, in a manner consistent with international law,
with those responsible for atrocities. We continue to
help Syrians document abuses and collect evidence to
ensure that the perpetrators of horrific violence against
the Syrian people are ultimately held accountable.

In conclusion, we must rededicate ourselves to
preventing atrocities from happening and ensuring
accountability in their aftermath. We have made
progress on both fronts, but much work remains. The
United States will not rest until those responsible for
perpetrating mass atrocities face justice and those who
would commit such crimes know that they will never
enjoy impunity.

