Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): The Security Council - the body entrusted
with the maintenance of international peace and
security- is meeting against the backdrop of war
crimes and crimes against humanity being perpetrated
by Israel against the territory and the people of
Lebanon and of Palestine. Those crimes have not
spared Arab nationals, foreign tourists or even a soldier
working for the international force deployed on the
border between Lebanon and Israel. Those whose lives
were not directly threatened by the actions of the
terrorist State have been denied the right to live in
conditions of peace, safety and stability and prevented
from satisfying the most basic daily needs, including
attending school and university and seeking treatment
in hospitals.

Today more than ever, the Security Council is
called upon to hold Israel accountable for its crimes
and to bring their perpetrators and masterminds to
international justice. The degree to which Israel and
those who cover for it and support it distort facts and
manipulate words is shocking, while the value
accorded to the human lives that are being wasted
depends on circumstance. An Israeli life has a different
value and a different degree of dignity from others,
especially if the others are Arab or Muslim. The right
to life is not considered to be the same in both cases.
According to that distorted view, therefore, the Israeli
prisoner's suffering is not the same as the suffering of
each of the 700,000 Arab and Palestinian prisoners - I
repeat, the 700,000 Arab and Palestinian prisoners -
thrown into Israeli prisons since 1967. The suffering of
hundreds of thousands of Arabs is not equal to that of
one Israeli prisoner. The suffering of a single Israeli
individual is greater than the suffering of the whole
population in Palestine, Lebanon and Syrian.

The distortion of facts does not stop with ethical
or moral considerations, but extends to include legal
aspects. Israeli claims, and the claims of those who
support it in its hostile right to self-defence, lay that
distortion bare. It is Israel that has occupied the lands
of others by force since 1967. It establishes illegitimate
and internationally condemned settlements thereon. It
forces out the population and deprives them of the
most basic rights provided for in international law and
international humanitarian law. Those two laws are
considered the biggest victims of Israel's State
terrorism.

How can the occupiers, the aggressors - those
who have perpetrated carnage against civilians for
decades - be in a position of self-defence? Can any
member of the Security Council, or other Members of
this international Organization, understand the reason
why Israeli fighter jets and warships would destroy the
Rafik Al-Hariri Airport in Beirut and the infrastructure
in Tripoli, Sidon, Tyre, Baalbek and other Lebanese
towns?

Can we understand why Israel would kill scores
or even hundreds of children, women and other
innocent civilians in Lebanon and Palestine? Can we
understand the meaning or the scale of the bombing by
Israel of the Damascus - Beirut highway used by
Arabs and foreigners, including diplomats, residing in
Lebanon, who were seeking a safe refuge and fleeing
the indiscriminate Israeli war machine?
My country has received hundreds of thousands
of Lebanese, as well as foreign diplomats and Arab and
foreign tourists seeking a safe haven, away from the
indiscriminate Israeli destruction machine.
Nevertheless, the Israeli war machine has made that
road to Damascus fraught with danger. Israel did not
even spare buses and other vehicles transporting those
people, let alone Arab humanitarian convoys.
Unfortunately, volunteers have fallen victim to the
Israeli acts of aggression.

While we understand the efforts made by some
internationally influential countries to transport their
citizens out of Lebanon, we ask about the validity of
the concept that discriminates between peoples' lives.
Were not those countries supposed to be bringing
pressure to bear on Israel in the Security Council to
cease firing and to put an end to the bloodbath that is
currently under way?

The barbaric Israeli acts of aggression are notjust
targeting Lebanon, or even international peace and
security. They are designed to undermine the
credibility of the United Nations itself. Throughout its
long history, the United Nations and its resolutions
have never been ignored as they have been in the case
of Israel.

More than a thousand resolutions have been
adopted calling on Israel to comply with resolutions of
international legitimacy. However, those resolutions
have never been implemented or seen the light of day.
Some act as if the law is to be respected by the weak
only. That leads us to question the degree of
commitment by the mighty to the law and the need for
it. What about its credibility or usefulness? Applying
such a double standard to international norms would
lead to the hegemony of the law of the jungle. We and
the people of the world ask: "Where are we going?"

While Israel declares that it reserves the right to
interpret the question of self-defence unilaterally, it
ignores the right of others to defend themselves, too,
against foreign occupation, colonization and
aggression, as stipulated in the Charter. Israel, and
those who protect it, will always seek, while
continuously attempting to distort facts, to abridge the
Arab-Israeli conflict - to minimize it - and to ignore
the fact that the problem is primarily one of occupation
of and settlement in occupied Arab territories since
1967. It is also a problem of displacement of peoples of
the region, depriving them of their most basic rights to
return to their homeland, in a flagrant violation of
international law.

Lebanon suffered considerably over the past
years as a result of Israel's defiance of international
legitimacy. The repeated Israeli invasions of
Lebanon- in 1978, 1982 and 1996 - and the
occupation of southern Lebanon for over 20 years are
stark examples of how Israel flouts this legitimacy.
Obstructing the role of the Security Council by this or
that country - for reasons related to a well-known
political agenda, reasons far removed from its role in
maintaining international peace and security -
contributes to beating the drums of war, gives a green
light to Israel to continue its aggression and covers its
criminal acts. It also blocks the international
community's desire to achieve a just and
comprehensive settlement in the region.

We therefore question the benchmark against
which we can measure the weight of statements made
by a representative of a superpower that is supposedly
entrusted, under the Charter, with the responsibility to
maintain international peace and security when this
representative uses the veto privilege against a draft
international resolution to protect the Palestinians,
when he calls explicitly for continued aggression
against the Palestinians and the Lebanese and rejects a
ceasefire. That flagrantly contradicts the concept of the
maintenance of international peace and security and
constitutes a deliberate obstruction to international
legitimacy in carrying out this responsibility.

The Syrian Arab Republic calls on the Security
Council to assume the responsibilities entrusted to it by
virtue of the Charter, to put an immediate end to the
Israeli aggression against the Lebanese and the
Palestinian peoples. We hope that the Council's
measures will be independent and compatible with the
Charter and based on protecting Lebanon's sovereignty
and territorial integrity from Israeli aggression, rather
than on interference in its internal affairs.

Whoever defends this aggression and shields its
continuation is obstructing the Security Council's role
to achieve a peaceful and just settlement of a dispute
that is as old as the United Nations. In obstructing the
Council's role it thus continues to adopt its agendas
and unsuccessful policies in the region, and increases
the sufferings of the peoples there.

Instability in the region is caused by Israel's
continued occupation of Arab territories and the

impunity given to Israel by certain influential Powers,
allowing it to act as if it was above the law, to the
detriment of our legitimate rights in Palestine, Lebanon
and the Golan. Furthermore, the unfair and biased
policies pursued in our region by superpowers further
increase instability and tension there. We therefore
wonder: is the new Middle East promised by some
superpowers in the region based on granting Israel a
licence to kill and to commit aggression against the
peoples of the region, and on providing justification,
cover-up and protection in order to allow the
aggression to continue?

The foreign ministers of the Arab States decided
that it was necessary for the peace process to be
restored to the United Nations, because Israel and its
supporters killed every prospect for peace in the
Middle East. The peace that they themselves perceived
and tried to impose on certain peoples of the region is
agonizing and can no longer be enforced. We do not
want the United Nations to be sacrificed on the altar of
tragic and irresponsible policies.

My country, the Syrian Arab Republic, was
among the founding fathers of the United Nations and
among those who contributed to the San Francisco
Charter. We will remain committed to the United
Nations, because it is our only option in the face of
those who break the law and perpetrate State terror,
and against those aggressors who destroy the standards
of human existence itself. The Syrian Arab Republic
has persistently stressed its readiness to achieve a just
and comprehensive peace, as well as stability and
security in the Middle East region, through the Israeli
withdrawal from the occupied Palestinian, Syrian and
Lebanese territories.

In the face of the Israeli aggression campaign
against Lebanon and Palestine, the Syrian Arab
Republic urges the Council to exert pressure on Israel
for an immediate ceasefire and put an end to the
destruction of the two countries. We also call on the
Council to hold Israel responsible for this aggression
and for compensation for the ensuing casualties and
losses.
The Syrian Arab Republic is making genuine
efforts to pave the way for a serious opportunity for
diplomatic action aimed at ending aggression and
establishing a just and comprehensive peace in the
region.
The statement by the representative of the United
States, accusing my country of supporting terrorism, is
totally unfounded and far from the truth, both in letter
and in spirit. The representative of the United States of
America wilfully ignores the fact that the Syrian Arab
Republic was the first - even before his country - to
address collectively the threat of terrorism. Since 1986
Syria has persistently called for the convening of an
international conference to define terrorism. It has
worked with many delegations here at the United
Nations to submit a resolution to the General Assembly
to that effect. Since the early 1990s, the United States
of America persistently voted against that resolution.

The Syrian Arab Republic works with a high
sense of responsibility with the Security Council ad
hoc committees established pursuant to Council
resolutions to counter terrorism. The chairpersons of
those committees have continuously commended
Syria's cooperation. Furthermore, Syria has even
cooperated with the United States of America to
counter terrorism. The information provided by my
country to the American side saved the lives of many
Americans. Therefore, many senior officials in the
former American Administration expressed
appreciation for this cooperation. It has become
necessary, on both moral and legal grounds, and in
every possible humanitarian consideration, to avoid the
issue of counter-terrorism in pursuit of certain political
agendas aimed at covering up aggression.

Syria abides by internationally agreed legal
norms. We in my country idolize President George
Washington because he chose to liberate his country.
We do not consider him a terrorist. We also respect the
principles embraced by President Wilson and teach
them to our schoolchildren. We also consider Gandhi to
be a nationalist fighter who resisted foreign
occupation. We view Jeanne d'Arc of France as a
national heroine who fought against foreign
occupation. Then there is Djamila Bouhired of Algeria,
a national heroine who also resisted foreign
occupation. And let us not forget Nelson Mandela.

We view with respect - and I believe others do
the same - all who resist foreign occupation and
defend the dignity of their homeland. Let me recall
here that part of my homeland - the Syrian Golan -
has been under Israeli occupation since 1967. The
Security Council has adopted a number of resolutions
condemning that occupation and calling for its end.
Where is the terrorism in the examples that I have
cited? How can we consider it that in the light of the
experiences of our people? We have to stop confusing
the two issues. Counter-terrorism efforts should be
based on purely legal considerations and norms, not
political agendas that undermine the credibility of the
Council and raise questions as to its legitimacy.

As for the accusations levelled against my
country in the statement made by the representative of
Israel, I think that the same thing can be said about
their credibility. However, in that respect, we have to
recall yet again that the State terrorism perpetrated by
Israel has included many distinguished figures from the
United Nations itself. I do not think I would be wrong
if I were to say that Count Bernadotte was the first
martyr of this international Organization to fall victim
to Israeli State terrorism and acts of aggression.

Israel has refused to receive numerous
commissions of inquiry established by the United
Nations, the last of which was entrusted with
investigating the Jenin massacre.

What we are really seeing is a cancer - State
terrorism perpetrated by Israel against the peoples of
the region, including the Israeli people. The heads of
Zionist gangs have become prime ministers in Israel
and are known as such in many parts of the world.
Therefore those Israeli leaders responsible for war
crimes and collective massacres of the Palestinian and
Lebanese people, such as the Jenin, Nablus and Qana
massacres, as well as the Marwahin massacre a few
days ago, have inherited the propensity to do so from
their forefathers, who perpetrated the Deir Yassin, Kafr
Qasim and Bahr Al-Baqr massacres, among many
others.

The real terrorism in the region is the continued
occupation by Israel of Arab lands. It is Israel's hostile
acts that are given infinite support by some influential
countries that have tried to cover up their failed
policies by blaming others for their own failures.

In conclusion, let me say that, like Martin Luther
King, I have a dream. I have a dream that the Israeli
acts of aggression will come to an end. Like Martin
Luther King, I have a dream - that peace will prevail
in our region and that our people will know stability,
peace and development, instead of war, threats of war
and the drums of war.
