Mr. Manis (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): Permit me
at the outset, Mr. President, to convey to you the
apologies of your colleague Foreign Minister Lam
Akol Ajawin, who owing to time constraints was
unable to attend today's meeting.

I wish, Sir, to express our pleasure at seeing you
presiding over the Security Council today, as you
represent a sisterly African country which enjoys good-
neighbourly relations with the Sudan and which is also
current Chairman of the African Union and has been at
the forefront of the Abuja peace talks. I also take this
opportunity to express our appreciation to the United
Nations and the Security Council for the role they have
played and for the attention they have devoted to the
situation in the Sudan.

Today, following an appalling war, the parties
have reached agreement. Our deep gratitude goes to all
those who contributed to the historic achievement in
Abuja, particularly the African Union, whose forces
have remained on the ground in Darfur, making every
possible effort to promote peace and stability and
undertaking tireless humanitarian endeavours.
Moreover, it made dedicated and sincere political
efforts leading to the signing of the agreement. We
thank in particular the chief mediator, Mr. Salim
Ahmed Salim, who since the day of his appointment as
African Union envoy displayed determination and
fortitude in carrying out a mission that seemed next to
impossible, given the divergent positions of the parties
at the time.

Our warmest thanks go to His Excellency
President Olusegun Obasanjo of sisterly Nigeria for his
personal efforts and for hosting the talks from the
outset. We also thank His Excellency President Denis
Sassou Nguesso of the Congo, Chairman of the African
Union. When President Al-Bashir passed the AU
chairmanship on to President Sassou Nguesso, he
promised his full cooperation in settling the Darfur
crisis. Time has proven the truth of that promise.

We wish also to thank the partners who have
played an effective role in reconciling the parties so
that they could achieve this peace and to express our
gratitude for their generous support throughout the
negotiations; I refer in particular to the United States of
America and the United Kingdom. We hail the League
of Arab States, the European Union and Mr. Jan Pronk,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Sudan, for the role they have played. We thank all
those who supported us in Abuja or through their
assistance in meeting humanitarian and security needs
on the ground in Darfur.

Here, I welcome the announcement by the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands that her
country would be hosting a pledging conference in
September. That will enhance the Abuja peace
agreement.

There can be no doubt that members of the
Council will vividly recall the historic meeting hosted
by the late Mr. John Garang, former head of the Sudan
People's Liberation Movement/Army and First Vice-
President, and by then Vice President Ali Osman Taha
following the signing of the Nairobi peace agreement.
They said on that occasion that there would be a
comprehensive peace only when the Darfur crisis had
been settled. Ever since then, that has been the
strategic objective of our Government. The
Government and every other party are duty-bound to
accelerate the achievement of a political settlement,
because peace is indivisible. Anyone who has followed
the progress of the Abuja negotiations knows that our
Government is serious and eager to achieve that
objective.

Let me reaffirm that a political settlement is the
key to a solution, because it would focus on
eliminating the root causes of the crisis. For that
reason, it remains the top priority. At the same time,
my Government has made parallel efforts to address
humanitarian issues. Let me mention my Government's
initiatives intended to facilitate the delivery of
humanitarian assistance and the agreements between
my Government and the United Nations in that
connection. I would also mention other efforts to
improve the security situation, which will pave the way
for the voluntary return of refugees and internally
displaced persons, as well as other strenuous efforts to
mend the social fabric through inclusive dialogue
among the citizens of Darfur with a view to restoring
peaceful coexistence among the tribes, which was the
situation before.

The Abuja agreement would have been
impossible without the sincere determination and
dedicated efforts of the mediators and of our partners. I
therefore wish, on behalf of the Government of
National Unity, to pledge to the Council our full
commitment to implement the agreement in every
detail. The Government, indeed, began implementing
the agreement yesterday.

The agreement was not achieved by
happenstance; it was the result of hard work and
meticulous endeavours to reconcile the parties and
encourage negotiations. It is therefore unthinkable that
it should be abandoned: it has put an end to the crisis.
We look to the Security Council to send to the parties
which have not yet signed the agreement a strong and
unambiguous message that they should demonstrate a
sense of responsibility, reconsider their position and
sign the agreement without any further delay. They
must bear in mind the suffering of innocent Darfur
civilians and place this above contentious demands and
the quest for gains: for the sake of those civilians, they
must join the march to peace.

In conclusion, I would like to stress the important
fact that the Government of the Sudan has a very
positive record of cooperation with the United Nations
and with the Security Council. For example, with
regard to the Comprehensive Peace Agreement with
the Sudan Liberation Movement, the two parties
hastened to request the Council to dispatch a mission to
support its implementation.

The Abuja agreement - a historic
accomplishment - will thrive only with the support of
the international community. Efforts must be
undertaken to foster the fledgling peace, rebuild from
the ravages of war, resettle internally displaced persons
and refugees and revive the tradition of coexistence
among the elements of Darfurian society. We have
every confidence that the international community -
which has stood by the Sudan throughout the Darfur
crisis, with all its humanitarian consequences - will
demonstrate the same resolve and cooperation as it
embarks on the challenging journey towards
reconstruction.

