Mr. Poukre-Kono (Central African Republic) (spoke in French): I should like at the outset to convey
to you, Mr. President, my warm congratulations on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for March, which you are conducting so
skilfully. I would like to pay tribute to the welcome
initiative of holding a public meeting on the topic of
illicit arms trafficking and its impact on peace and
security in the Central African subregion. I do so with
pleasure, because Gabon is well known for its role as a
mediator in Africa, and in the Central African Republic
in particular for its involvement in the search for
solutions to the Central African crisis. My delegation is
grateful for all his efforts on the ground.

I am also grateful to the Deputy Secretary-
General; the Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, Mr. Costa; the Secretary-
General of the Economic Community of Central
African States (ECCAS), Mr. Sylvain-Goma; and
Mr. Duarte, the High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, for their involvement in seeking solutions to
the issue of small arms.

At a time when the international community has
achieved notable progress in some parts of the world
through its praiseworthy and courageous efforts to
reduce if not to eradicate illicit trafficking in small
arms and light weapons, which has led to so much loss
of life, it is powerless to address that issue in the rest
of the world, especially Africa and, more specifically,
Central Africa. Many actions have been taken -
including confiscation, collection and incineration -
and yet all have amounted to a drop in the bucket. The
circulation of small arms and light weapons has gone
from bad to worse, sometimes thanks to public and
international services.

The possible reasons for such failures include
porous borders between neighbouring countries; a lack
of defence and security capacity; a lack of trust among
the population; the stockpiling of unneeded weapons;
trafficking in natural resources, such as precious
stones, elephant ivory and animal pelts; attempts at
destabilization; and so forth. My delegation can only
welcome the consideration of the topic at hand, since
our country is emerging from conflict with difficulty in
the face of constraints beyond its control, such as the

circulation of illicit weapons throughout our territory,
held by rebel groups, bandits and road blockers.

There is no need to describe the effects of this
scourge on the country's people and development. In
2003, the Government of the Central African Republic,
in the context of its comprehensive defence policy,
placed the individual at the centre of security issues
and reaffirmed its firm commitment to peace and
stability efforts in Central Africa and the Great Lakes
region, for the security issue in the Central African
Republic cannot be analysed without taking the
regional perspective into account.

Since reducing the presence of arms is essential
to development, a national programme to support
development by strengthening security has been
launched, based on an approach integrating community
policies and the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) process. Community policies are
aimed at reducing insecurity through rehabilitation
activities, post-crisis support to victims of such crises,
and reducing the small arms and light weapons held
illegally by civilians. DDR is aimed specifically at the
ex-combatants who continue to pose a threat to civilian
peace and security. We have to turn them from
destructive forces to forces that can build the nation.

Consequently the restoration of security runs in
tandem with civic responsibility and with DDR. From
this point of view, the fight against the proliferation of
small arms and light weapons is an issue not only of
security but of human rights as well. A number of
disarmament initiatives have been launched by the
Government with the assistance of the international
community, which in 2001 adopted the Programme of
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects, accompanied by concrete measures.

What is the result of all those recommendations?
At the subregional level, the decisions of the United
Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security
Questions in Central Africa are sufficiently persuasive
to endorse the initiatives taken at the subregional level.
In fact, the member States of that Committee are on the
verge of concluding the consideration of an advance
draft legal instrument on the control, in Central Africa,
of small arms and light weapons, their ammunition and
all equipment that can be used for their manufacture.
That instrument takes into account all aspects of arms
from their manufacture to their sale in the markets.
Moreover, it will strengthen comprehensive
cooperation among Member States in the fight against
the circulation of arms, transboundary crime,
widespread banditry and so on.

At the national level, the Central African
Republic has developed strategies that range from
strengthening security cooperation with the
neighbouring States to adopting laws, raising public
awareness, establishing the Anti-Corruption
Commission, training, and strengthening the national
disarmament and reintegration programme, which was
launched with the financial and technical support of the
United Nations Development Programme and the
United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in the
Central African Republic. Because of the financing
difficulties facing the Central African Republic, the
implementation of such a programme requires
mobilizing the financial resources of the State itself,
which, unfortunately, it cannot do owing to the crisis in
which it has been thrown.

To end the illicit sale of firearms, international
partners should help the States of the Central African
region by providing them with workable monitoring
means and adequate logistical resources, that is, the
requisite material means to eradicate the pandemic of
small arms and light weapons in Central Africa, which
means are lacking. As the States of the subregion are
undertaking serious commitments on future binding
legal instruments to control light weapons, the
international community should help the subregion to
achieve that objective.

My delegation fully associates itself with the
draft presidential statement to be adopted at the
conclusion of this meeting.

