Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to greet the Council as it meets to
address the crucial and vital issue of the situation in the
Middle East, which is of great importance to all of us.
This is not the first time that the Security Council has
addressed the situation in the Middle East and the
challenge that it represents to the entire international
community. Everyone hopes that our collective efforts
to address this challenge will be commensurate with its
magnitude.

I take this opportunity to address a substantive
and important issue that no one can overlook, as it is
the main obstacle to the attainment of peace and the
relaunching of negotiations between the Palestinians
and the Israelis, namely, the construction and
expansion of Israeli settlements in the West Bank,
including East Jerusalem. The United Nations has
adopted many resolutions calling on Israel to abide by
international law and the Fourth Geneva Convention,
to put an end to the illegal practices that jeopardize the
rights of the Palestinian people, and to halt the building
and expansion of settlements. The United Nations
considers these settlements to be null and void. In this
connection, we would like to stress the following
points.

First, the international community, including the
Member States represented in the Council and
unanimous international public opinion, agrees that the
Israeli settlements in the West Bank and East Jerusalem
represent a flagrant violation of international law and
the United Nations Charter. It defies the will of the
international community and relevant international
resolutions, especially resolution 446 (1979), which
considered the construction of settlements of no legal
value, as it represents a serious obstacle to the
attainment of a comprehensive and just peace in the
Middle East.

Secondly, the International Court of Justice, in its
Advisory Opinion of 2004 on the building of the
separation wall, concluded that the wall represents a
violation of fundamental human rights.
Thirdly, Israel's ongoing construction and
expansion of settlements and its defiance of the will of
the international community undermine the negotiation
process aimed at achieving a two-State solution on the
basis of United Nations resolutions, the Road Map, the
Arab Peace Initiative and other terms of reference.

Fourthly, the expansion of settlements prevents
the resumption of negotiations between the two parties
and thus hampers the prospects for peace and a
peaceful settlement of the question of the Middle East,
the lack of which threatens peace and security in the
region.

As it witnesses the expansion of settlements in
the occupied Palestinian territories, including
Jerusalem, and the resulting dire consequences
following the wide-ranging international rejection of
these illegal activities, the Security Council, as the
organ entrusted with the maintenance of international
peace and security, should fully shoulder its
responsibilities. It should oblige Israel to freeze and
put an end to its settlement activities so as to pave the
way for the resumption of negotiations in order to
reach a two-State solution, and establish an
independent Palestinian State within the borders of
1967, with Jerusalem as its capital.

In conclusion, I would like to state that my
country, which is a sponsor and supporter of the draft
resolution under consideration, calls upon all the
members of the Security Council to adopt it if they
truly desire peace and security in the Middle East.

