President Obasanjo: I want to thank all the
members of the Council for their interest in and the
insight they have shown about the situation generally
in Africa and in Darfur in particular. While I cannot
address their questions one by one, I will probably deal
with most of them in a general way and take a few of
them specifically because they are specific.

Let us look at the question of what the Security
Council can do in Africa. As members have kindly
pointed out, 60 per cent of the time of the Council is
now being devoted to African issues. If that is the case,
how can we ensure that whatever time is thus devoted
is fruitfully devoted? If possible, can we also reduce
the amount of time of this body that is being devoted to
African issues?

What, really, are the African issues today? Let us
not go into what brought them about. The African
issues today are issues of conflict, issues of poverty,
issues of development and issues of employment. How
did those issues come about? Those issues came about
because, for too long, Africa was living in an unequal
world and Africa did not realize early enough that it
was living in an unequal world. To me, that is putting it
as it is. If that is the case, how can we make a little bit
more available to Africa to correct the situation in
Africa as it stands today?

When we look at the conflicts, what are the main
causes? One cause is governance and what I call, for
lack of a better way of describing it, hopelessness -
hopelessness in the political area, hopelessness in the
economic area, hopelessness in the social area. A group
of people may feel that, no matter what they do, they
will not be able to raise themselves up, so they give up
in desperation and say to themselves: "Well, if that is
the case, let us give it up and die". I believe therefore
that we need to look at these problems, ask ourselves
where we can put our finger to make Africa do what it
needs to do for itself, then help Africa to do what it
needs to do for itself.

As was mentioned by one representative here, we
have started. The African Union (AU) itself is an
acknowledgement by us in Africa that the continental
organization that took us thus far could not lead us
beyond where it took us. We need, if you will, a
reformed organization or a new organization that has
greater teeth and a greater ability to take us beyond
where we reached with the Organization of African
Unity. Then we have a programme that took us time to
build up and which came up at about the same time as
the African Union: the New Partnership for Africa's
Development (NEPAD). So we have a new continental
organization in the African Union and a continental
programme in NEPAD to bring us forward.

If we talk about a new Africa politically, what
reform do we need? Continentally, subregionally,
internally in our countries - what reform do we need
economically, continentally, subregionally? We need
regional economic communities and national economic
communities in our countries. We need to have a
package of desirable reforms that would lead us away
from where we are.

I see that we already have a number of measures
here at the United Nations. My belief is that the
Council should support those measures. For example,
an office of the Secretary-General is assigned to the
situation in Africa on a permanent basis. This office
needs to be equipped so that it can not only report, but
also be proactive. The point about early warning and
proactive measures was made earlier. We need early
warnings ourselves at the African Union level, at the
subregional level and at the national level. The Council
needs those early warnings here as well, to be able to
observe that it knows of one or two countries, for
example, where, if things continue to deteriorate, we
may have another Somalia on our hands. If we are
aware of such situations, then what must we do - at
our own level, at that of the AU and that of the
Council - to prevent a crisis? This is what I have to
say about what can be done.

As we know, the New Partnership for Africa's
Development (NEPAD) was adopted by the United
Nations, by the G-8, by the World Bank, by the
International Monetary Fund (IMF) and by the African
Development Bank (ADB). But adoption is not
enough. It must be actualized. NEPAD must be
embraced and brought to fruition under the auspices of
the AU socio-economic programme for development.

As for Sudan, what do we need there? The point
has been made that the negotiations that started on
resolving the conflict in the south have not been
completed. They must be completed. I believe that the
completion of those negotiations, which have been
halted - I hope they will start again early next
month - will have a salutary effect on Darfur. A
solution will also have a salutary effect on other areas
of Sudan. After more than 20 years, a solution is being
found for the south in a comprehensive form that will
make that country more united and, at the same time,
possibly better governed.

I see that, in one form or the other, there was also
a similar exercise in a defence context in the Nuba
mountains. Another similar exercise in a different form
has been achieved in the southern Blue Nile region.
Maybe, in whatever form, that sort of solution may
have to be applied in Darfur. Speaking generally, that
is the situation in Sudan. The political problem there
must be resolved. We must be ready to support that
country's efforts to raise its living standard. We have to
help with the economic and social aspects of the lives
of the average Sudanese, because, as I said earlier on,
the cause of conflict may be, in a word, governance. It
might be poor or inadequate, sometimes tied up with an
inadequate availability of resources.

Having talked generally about actions in Sudan,
let me turn to specifics on Darfur. Council members
have rightly said that the immediate objective is to stop
the killing. There cannot be any further procrastination
or delay. We have to stop the killing by, first of all,
holding the Government of Sudan responsible to its
population. For the function of any Government is the
welfare and well-being of all its citizens. It should
provide security and protection to all its citizens. This
is a Government's primary responsibility. And the
Sudanese Government cannot be exempt from that rule.
Whatever else we may do, as the AU or the United
Nations or the Security Council itself, it is up to us to
help the Sudanese Government in taking responsibility
for its people. The Sudanese Government must accept
that. It must see a role, in that sense, and then there is
no question of our being intruders. I do not see myself
as an intruder in Sudan. And, in any case, we in the AU
now have a Constitutive Act that does not regard an
African troop anywhere in Africa as a foreign troop.
This must, of course, be respected.

Having said this, we must make sure that we are
even-handed. A situation where some of us are seen as
backing the rebels and others backing the Government
is not acceptable. That erodes our credibility,
collectively or individually. I believe that we must be
able to tell them all, evenhandedly and collectively,
where they are wrong. We must say to them: "Where
you are wrong, you are wrong. And where you are
wrong, you will be punished, unless you change. You
will be encouraged to change. And where you fail to
change, you will be punished." I believe that this is
very important.

We, the African Union, have agreed to move in.
Now, you ask how many people we are. We are about
3,500 - maybe a few more. That number includes
what we call a protection force. This protection force
will include both military troops and police. Maybe it
will be a little larger, but I think Jan Pronk's report was
recommended about 5,000. Initially, we were talking
about 3,000. We definitely will require between 3,000
and 5,000. This will include soldiers and possibly some
form of fixed-wing aircraft or helicopters. There will
be some police, some observers and some civilian
personnel. All this will be under the auspices of the
AU.

For us, the number is not the issue. I hope that the
Government of Sudan will understand that the number
is not the issue. For us, there are two issues: first,
where we will get the numbers from, and, secondly, the
resources - the logistics - to back up those numbers.

We believe also that we cannot engage in an
interminable operation in the Sudan or in Darfur. We
should have these troops - or forces, or police - until
such time as a permanent political arrangement is
agreed upon and implemented. Once the
implementation has started, the Government of the
Sudan must take responsibility for the welfare, well-
being, protection and security of all its people.

That brings me to another issue. This is a
challenge for us in Africa and for the African Union.
We have never undertaken anything like this before,
and therefore we are not underestimating what it
involves: command and control. We have never done
this before - troops from four, five or six missions
operating together under a unified command in Africa.
We have never done this before, so it will tax all our
resources and capacities. It will require all our
experience to do this.

We have been saying to the world: "Give us the
tools, and we will do the job". Now you are putting us
to the test, saying, "We will give you the tools; you do
the job." We have to make sure that that job is properly
done, because, otherwise, we will hear, "Well, we have
given you the tools, and you have made it a mess of it."
We do not want to do that, so we want adequate tools
and the organization that will match the work we have
to do, and we want to be able to do that work smartly
and expeditiously, and then say to the world, "We have
done the job. Thank you for helping us to do the job
and to achieve what we have achieved."

As to what else can be done, I wish to thank
Brazil, who rightly noted that we must have early
warning and that we must be proactive. There must be
enhanced cooperation between the Council and the new
Africa. Should it be on a case-by-case basis? I will say
that we need both a structured relationship, and, where

necessary, a case-by-case approach. But there is
definitely a need for a structured relationship.

The question was asked if the Security Council
should visit Darfur. I do not see any reason why, and I
do not see any reason why not.

The idea of a joint meeting between our own
Peace and Security Council in Africa and this body has
been mentioned. I believe that it would be a useful
meeting, but it must have an agenda: what it aims to
achieve. If the goal is just for us to come here to have a
wonderful time in New York, I would say no. If the
goal is just for you to come to Addis Ababa and have a
wonderful time with us, I would say no. It must be well
prepared. What do we want to achieve? What areas do
we want to cover, and what is the objective at the end
of the day?

Concerning the time table for a political
settlement at the end of this exercise, I do not believe
that one can really set a time table and say, "This is
when it will be over". I was talking to the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission yesterday, when we
were looking at the general programme and seeing
what we could do and so on, and I said - as I said
earlier in this meeting - that we cannot have a
prolonged presence of AU troops or an AU protection
force in Darfur.

Without wanting to be accused of mentioning
timing or a programme, I am looking at a period of six
months to get everything done, to be able to normalize
and to get the AU forces thinned out. We cannot afford
the usual - United Nations forces starting out for six
months and remaining for six decades. We just cannot
afford that. We do not have the means, and it is not in
our best interest in Africa.

As concerns the lifting of sanctions on timber and
diamonds in Liberia, I do not see why those sanctions
should not be lifted. I think that the reasons for which
the sanctions had been imposed have now been
overtaken. But if there are others reasons of which I am
not aware, I would like to know about them. But I
believe that the sanctions can be lifted.

I think that I have covered everything. If I have
left anything out, please forgive me. Council members
have said so much and they have asked so many
questions, all of which are very good and very useful. I
have taken such copious notes that I have even missed
some out.

Let me end on a light note. My friend from
Romania gave the meaning of my name in my
language, and it is almost correct. He said that I should
include the people of Darfur among my subjects - if
President Al-Bashir of the Sudan has no objection.
Normally we in Nigeria have no territorial ambitions,
but, if anyone wants to cede part of his country to us,
we will consider it.

