Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I join others in
welcoming the Indonesian Foreign Minister, who is
a very good friend of the United Nations. I also join
the American representative in expressing our deepest
condolences to Chad for the loss of its peacekeepers.
We send our condolences also to the victims' families.

As other speakers have noted, there are a range
of issues in the Middle East today that deserve the
Council's concern, but, as Mr. Mladenov was our
briefer, I will confine my remarks today to the issues
that he covered. I want to start by echoing the German
representative's statement that Israel's security should
not be put in doubt. We condemn unreservedly the
rocket launches from Syria and Gaza into Israel.

I thank Mr. Mladenov for his briefing. As he set
out, the situation in Israel and the occupied Palestinian
territories remains deeply concerning. Mr. Mladenov's
statement about the erosion ofprospects for establishing
a Palestinian State as a result of the facts on the ground
really should guide the Council's consideration. What
he said about 25 years from Oslo is also a very salutary
reminder of the fact that we do not have the luxury of
time in which to make progress on the Middle East
peace process.

Turning to the situation on the ground, and,
again, as others have noted, the last three months of
2018 saw a dreadful increase in violence in the West
Bank. Three Israelis, including a baby, were killed in
Palestinian terror attacks for which Hamas has claimed
responsibility. There is no justification for such acts
of violence. During the same time in the West Bank
and Gaza, 70 Palestinians were killed. On 14 January,
a 14-year-old Palestinian boy died as a result of injuries
sustained from live fire following a protest at the Gaza
fence. We fully support Israel's right to defend itself, but
the Israeli security forces should refrain from the use of
excessive force against unarmed civilians. Lethal use of
force should be exercised with maximum restraint and
only as a last resort to protect life.

Turning to Gaza, the security remains precarious.
Sporadic rocket attacks by militants continue,
and a miscalculation could easily lead to renewed
confrontation. We need to do everything we can
to avoid another devastating war, which would
compound the already dire humanitarian and security
conditions in Gaza and threaten the security of Israeli
border communities.

I wanted to draw the Council's attention to Gaza's
health sector, which remains under significant strain,
and to the problems with the shortage of essential drugs
and limited access to clean water. Israel's movement
restrictions, we believe, continue to affect the health
of the population. In the longer term, renewed
political resolve is required to improve the situation.
Several speakers today have drawn attention to the
reconciliation process begun under Egyptian auspices
among the Palestinian Authority and others. We were
very concerned by the Palestinian Authority's decision
to withdraw their guards from the Rafah crossing point.
It is vital that the Council impress upon the Palestinian
factions that they need to work together to break the
deadlock. We welcome continued Egyptian efforts in
that regard.

On the West Bank, recent developments continue
to undermine the achievements of the Oslo Accords
and jeopardize the prospects for a two-State solution.
Following the violent attacks in the West Bank, there
have been a large number of incursions by Israeli
security forces into Area A, and Palestinian movement
in the West Bank has been significantly restricted
and disrupted. Full security cooperation between the
Palestinian Authority and Israel remains crucial for the
safety of both parties.

I wanted to express our disappointment at the
fact that, on 27 December, just days after the Council
discussed the implementation of resolution 2334
(2016) (see S/PV.8429), Israel advanced plans for the
construction of nearly 2,800 illegal settlement housing
units. It is doubly disappointing that more than half of
these units are located east of the separation barrier in
areas deep into the West Bank. Plans outlined by the
Israeli Government on 26 December to construct a new
settlement, Givat Eitam, close to Bethlehem represent
a further threat to the territorial integrity of the future
Palestinian State. If built, this new settlement would
prevent the growth of Bethlehem and further fragment
the West Bank.
We are closely following the developments in East
Jerusalem. The eviction notice served to the Sabah
family in Sheikh Jarrah, on 3 January, places 45
people at risk of losing their home. Therefore, I want
to encourage the Israeli Government not to enforce this
eviction, as we continue to urge it not to demolish the
Bedouin community of Khan Al-Ahmar.

Turning to Israel/Lebanon, we are concerned by
the recent rise in tensions along the Blue Line. We
condemn all violations of resolution 1701 (2006). The
United Kingdom has been clear in the Council on many
occasions that we condemn Israeli violations of Lebanese
sovereignty, whether by land or sea or air. Such actions
undermine confidence and stability, and we look for all
relevant Security Council resolutions - but notably
1559 (2004) and 1701 (2006) - to be respected in full.

For too long we have witnessed Hizbullah blatantly
disregard United Nations resolutions. Its continued
possession of weapons outside of Lebanese State
control and its reported attempts to acquire dangerous
new missile capabilities remain deeply alarming, as do
their statements threatening Israel. Without an end to
these illegal activities by Hizbullah in Lebanon and
the region, we will continue to see regional stability
threatened. We condemn Hizbullah's aggressive
activities, and we are clear that we should not allow
them to go unchecked.

In conclusion, though prospects for peace may
seem bleak, as Mr. Mladenov outlined, we should not
give up on the two-State solution. It remains the only
viable resolution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. For
this reason, the United Kingdom remains committed
to the internationally agreed parameters for a durable
peace in the Middle East. It is critical that negotiations
be resumed towards an agreement leading to a safe and
secure Israel living alongside a viable and sovereign
Palestinian State, based on 1967 borders with agreed
land swaps, Jerusalem as the shared capital of both
States, and a just, fair, agreed and realistic settlement
for refugees.

