Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, on behalf of the Government
of the Syrian Arab Republic, I would like to offer our
condolences to the Government and people of Nigeria
for the terrorist acts that have rocked Kano and two
other cities, taking the lives of hundreds of innocent
civilians, as well as to convey our sympathies to the
relatives of the victims. I wanted to begin my statement
with these condolences because, while all of us sitting
at this round table feel the enormity of terrorism, none
feel it as we Syrians do.

Some of the Member States that sponsored today's
draft resolution (S/2014/348) on the Syrian situation
remind me of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde in the Scottish
writer Robert Stevenson's novel. They are trying to play
the role of Dr. Jekyll, the good guy, by promoting noble
principles, while in reality they represent Mr. Hyde, the
evil guy. That evil role is manifest in their involvement
in supporting terrorism in Syria and contributing to
the continued bloodshed , while weeping crocodile
tears over it. Mr. Hyde's hands are stained with Syrian
blood, although he makes false claims of friendship
with the Syrian people, to the extent that a few days
ago - as mentioned by my colleague the Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation - the former
leader of the so-called Syrian Coalition, a coalition
orchestrated and manufactured by those who call
themselves friends of the Syrian people, himself
described those friends by saying that half of them are
liars, impostors and hypocrites, and they are responsible
for the conditions we are witnessing today in Syria. He
added that the West seeks to partition Syria.
That is the statement of a former leader of the Doha
coalition, manufactured in well-known capitals. There
happens to be a historical coincidence providing much
evidence to back up this fact. On this very day in 1945,
the Syrian delegation participated in the San Francisco
Conference, convened to draft the Charter of the United
Nations, at which Article 78 was formulated, thus
guaranteeing that Syria would not become a territory
under the French Mandate. On 29 May, 1945 the
occupying French forces bombed the Syrian Parliament
and killed its garrison. Since, as we have heard, war
crimes are not subject to the statute of limitations,
we demand that the Security Council hold the French
Government accountable for the crimes it committed
against Syrians and the peoples of the many countries
it once occupied and whose resources it looted. We call
on the Government of France to apologize publicly and
pay compensation to our people. We assure the Council
that the Syrian people are not going to forget the Sykes-
Picot Agreement or the fact that France subsequently
handed over Syria's Iskenderun region to Turkey.
Moreover, the people of our region will never ignore the
fact that it was France that introduced Israeli nuclear
terrorism to the region.

The international legal system is based on
fundamental pillars, of which the most important
is the fact that States have primary and exclusive
responsibility for establishing accountability and
justice in their territories. As a result of the regrettable
events in my country, the Syrian Government has
taken a series of steps designed to hold accountable the
people involved in those events and to take appropriate
legal action against them. Our national investigation
committee continues to work alongside the Syrian
judiciary, which since the crisis began has investigated
30,000 cases, issued rulings on those involved and
settled the conditions for others, confirming the Syrian
Government's desire and ability to have justice and
negating the possibility of pretexts aimed at involving
any international judicial body that might contradict
our national judiciary's powers.

The Syrian crisis has revealed the degree to
which double standards rule when it comes to using
the mechanisms of the United Nations in order to
target certain Member States in particular regions
in the name of law and justice. In an example of this
approach, a group of Member States submitted today's
draft resolution, which is political, discriminatory and
interventionist par excellence. It is designed to upset the
presidential elections in Syria and reshuffle the cards,
fuelling the crisis and achieving propaganda goals. It
seeks to involve the Security Council in the attitude
of hysterical hostility taken by some Member States
to Syria and its people. Its submission represents the
ceaseless efforts by some Member States to arrogate
to themselves the right to be the custodians of Syria's
people and their national choices, in open disregard for
the will of the Syrian people and in stark contrast to the
Security Council's repeated affirmation of its strong
commitment to the sovereignty, independence, unity
and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic
and to the call for a Syrian-led political solution to the
Syrian crisis.

Moreover, the grounds presented by the sponsors in
justification of the request for referral to the International
Criminal Court are nothing but mendacious allegations
and fabricated lies based on politicized and biased
reports that defy reason. Those reports were provided by
committees that ignored all the complaints, documents,
evidence and proof provided by the Syrian Government,
and they effectively help to serve the agendas of States
engaged in a hostile campaign against Syria.

The Syrian Arab Republic believes in international
criminal justice, and was among the States that
participated actively in the United Nations Diplomatic
Conference in Rome that adopted the Statute of
the International Criminal Court and were its first
signatories. Syria's view is based on how important
it is that justice be comprehensive, transparent and
in no way politicized, selective or subject to double
standards. Against that backdrop, Syria called for the
crime of aggression, as the chief of all crimes, to be
included in the Court's jurisdiction. That, however, was
denied, which is why my country has not ratified the
Rome Statute. Today, the Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic emphasizes that in order to achieve
justice we must have the following.

First, we must hold accountable the Governments
of Turkey, Saudi Arabia, Qatar, France, Israel and other
States that are openly inciting violence and terrorism,
including by funding, arming, sponsoring, training,
recruiting and facilitating the entry of thousands of
mercenaries and terrorists from various parts of the
world into Syria, and that not only turn a blind eye
to their crimes but also describe such terrorists as a
moderate opposition.

I would like to convey to the Council a piece ofnews
mentioned by the chief commander of the Libyan Air
Force. He said that the Al-Qaida terrorist organization
in Libya and the Muslim Brotherhood in Libya together
sent 224 flights from Libya to Turkey, and from there to
Syria, to transfer terrorist mercenaries to Syria.
The balance of international justice and the rule of
law therefore will not be set right without putting an
end to the practices of those States and their repeated
violations of international law and Council resolutions
related to combating international terrorism. Terrorism
is a crime, no matter by whom, wherever or for
whatever purposes it is committed. Just as the terrorism
practiced by the Boko Haram in Nigeria is unanimously
condemned, and must be countered, equal condemnation
should be directed towards the terrorism committed by
its counterparts who are supported by Israel in the area
of separation in the occupied Syrian Golan, backed by
Turkey in the north and armed by Western and Arab
Governments in full view of the United Nations. Those
terrorists have committed unspeakable crimes that
shame the human conscience, the most recent of which
was cutting the water supply to the city of Aleppo and
depriving nearly 3 million Syrians of drinking water
and sanitation. We would have liked to see the States
that submitted today's draft resolution instead present
a draft resolution to combat the terrorism suffered by
Syrians.

Secondly, there is a lack of accountability for the
documented war crimes, crimes against humanity
and acts of aggression and occupation committed by
the Israeli authorities in the occupied Arab territories,
including the occupied Syrian Golan, for over seven
decades. Those crimes were committed with the
support of some permanent members in the Council
that have thus far enabled the Israeli war criminals to
escape punishment and have obstructed all initiatives
aimed at holding them accountable.

Thirdly, we are concerned about attempts to
undermine justice through the immunity that some
of the great Powers have arrogated exclusively for
themselves. That immunity has helped them escape
any accountability for their human rights violations
their crimes committed in other Member States,
with the aim of implementing colonial agendas and
schemes for domination and oppression. Abu Ghraib,
Guantanamo, the bombing of the Chinese Embassy in
Belgrade, the flooding of Libya with blood, the secret
prisons, the use of drones to kill innocent civilians, the
practices of mercenary companies, such as Blackwater
in Iraq, and others - all these are vivid examples of
double standards that have escaped accountability and
punishment.

It is ironic that those countries continue to try to
impose their national legislation beyond their borders
and recently imposed sanctions on the head of the
National Relief Committee in Syria, while paying lip
service to their alleged support for the Syrian people.
Imagine, sanctions have been imposed on the head
of the National Relief Committee for humanitarian
relief in Syria. Under-Secretary-General Valerie Amos
knows the head of the National Relief Committee in
Syria, and I will refer those sanctions to her. I hope that
she will do something.

That evidence, among other evidence, highlights
the fact that justice is tailored to fit the measurements
of targeted States. A crime may be prefabricated for
some States in order to refer them to the Court, while
others are shielded by a curtain that blocks the view
of their documented crimes and violations. The draft
resolution has been formulated in a way that protects
Israeli war criminals from being held accountable
for their crimes against the Syrian people. The draft
resolution also keeps foreign terrorists and mercenaries
flowing into Syria from other countries beyond the
Court's jurisdiction. That process not only undermines
the credibility of its drafters, but it also exposes their
malicious intentions and aggressive motives.

Having mentioned the sanctions imposed on the
head of the National Relief Committee, I would also
like to remind the Council of another scandal that took
place when sanctions were imposed on the Minister of
Electricity in Syria. We referred the matter of the head
of the National Relief Committee in Syria to Valerie
Amos, and we will refer the sanctions on the Minister
of Electricity to the Court of Thomas Edison.

I reiterate that my delegation assures all Member
States that claim their concern for Syria and its people
that the way to help the Syrian people is clear and well
known. It is by exerting sincere and serious efforts to
fight terrorism, which targets Syria and its people. It is
also through supporting the efforts aimed at finding a
national solution to the Syrian crisis. The solution should
take into consideration the Geneva process, which
is based on the dialogue among Syrians themselves
in order to reach consensus on rejecting violence,
combating terrorism and establishing a national unity
Government, without attempts to impose guardianship
and interventionist agendas that do not mean any good
for Syria or its people. The Syrians who will go to the
polls to elect the President ofthe Republic will be doing
so to protect their country from "creative terrorism",
chaos and attempts to undermine the concepts of the
State and sovereignty altogether.

In conclusion, it seems that the current French
Government has misunderstood the famous phrase in
French literature "Hell is the others" in terms of the
belief that others are always an embodiment of hell,
while what the French philosopher Jean-Paul Sartre
meant by this phrase is that hell might be oneself and
one's view of others and the way one interacts with
them. Therefore, the French Government should look
first at itself so that it might see hell in its actions and
behaviours and not in others.

