Mr. Moreno Fernandez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): First and foremost, Sir, I would like to
express, on behalf of Cuba, our satisfaction at seeing
you, a representative of Mexico, our sister nation,
presiding over the Security Council. We wish you great
success in your work.

The revolution leading to the independence of
Haiti on 1 January 1804 was the first event by which
the Caribbean became known as an actor on the world
stage. The Haitian revolution, which sheltered and
encouraged many revolutionaries of the continent at
crucial moments of the Latin American fight against
colonial domination, also influenced in a special and
powerful manner the destiny and formation of the
Cuban nation.

However, Haiti, cradle of the liberation wars
against colonialism in America and the first
independent republic in Latin America and the
Caribbean, is today a country neglected by the
international community. That Caribbean country is
one of the clearest examples of the evil consequences
of colonialism and neocolonialism, of the unjust and
exclusionary current international order and of the
continuous interventionism that has characterized its
turbulent history.

When addressing the situation of Haiti in the
framework of the United Nations, attention almost
always centers on so-called security matters, which for
all practical purposes minimizes the urgent attention to
the serious structural, economic and social problems of
the country. To achieve peace, security and stability in
that nation requires, first of all, the elimination of
poverty and underdevelopment. Clearly, there can be
no development without peace and stability, but it is
even clearer that there can be no peace and stability
without development and that there can be no peace
and security for a people living in hunger, terrible
poverty, ill health and illiteracy.

We recognize that the security situation on the
ground has improved since the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti was established in 2005.
There has not been, however, nor there can be a
military solution to the question of Haiti. Almost 80
per cent of the population of that country lives in
poverty, half of the labour force is unemployed, life
expectancy is below 52 years, and 48 out of every 100
inhabitants are illiterate. The number of people
infected with HIV is the highest of all Caribbean States
and almost half of the population is malnourished.

Last year, Haiti suffered a new, devastating blow
from four consecutive hurricanes and tropical storms
that lashed the country. The death toll was huge and the
damage to the infrastructure and the economy
amounted to approximately 15 per cent of the gross
domestic product, the worst Haiti has faced since early
the early twentieth century.

Cuba, a small blockaded country with limited
resources, has continued and increased its cooperation
with that Caribbean sister nation, mainly in the health
sector, but also in others, such as energy, education,
agriculture and sports. At present, over 400 Cuban
cooperants, mainly from the health sector, are
rendering their services in the most remote places of
Haiti. Almost 200 specialists in comprehensive general
medicine and other specialties are at work in every
department of the country. Since the Cuban
collaboration with Haiti was initiated in 1998, Cuban
doctors have given over 14 million consultations,
assisted over 100,000 childbirths and performed
250,000 surgical procedures.

Almost 300 young Haitian doctors who graduated
in our country are being trained with the Cuban
medical brigade in Haiti. About 50 Haitian doctors are
studying their second specialty in Cuba. Moreover,
over 600 Haitian scholarship holders are studying in
Cuba today totally free of charge. Five hundred of
these students are connected to health specialties. Over
800 Haitian youths have graduated as professionals
from Cuban schools. In the framework of Operation
Miracle, a cooperation programme developed by Cuba
and Venezuela to offer free assistance to patients from
various countries with eye problems, 32,191 Haitian
patients had undergone surgery as of February 2009,
31,035 of whom were treated in two eye centres and
two mobile surgical units donated by the Republic of
Cuba to that Caribbean country. The implementation of
the Cuban literacy programme "Yo si Puedo" has
taught 160,490 Haitians to read and write.

Cuba's actions on behalf of Haiti are a modest
example of how much can be achieved in that country
through international cooperation and assistance,
mainly from those States with larger economic and
financial resources. Haiti has very limited resources to
face its many challenges. It is the unshirkable duty of
the international community to contribute massively,
increase its assistance and honour its financial and
human commitments to that Caribbean country.
Without the support of the international community,
even the modest Millennium Development Goals will
remain unattainable for Haiti.

I would like to conclude by reiterating that Haiti
can always count on the assistance and solidarity of the
Cuban people and Government. We are simply
fulfilling a duty and honouring our debt of gratitude to
the Caribbean peoples, which have always showed
their firm and constant friendship and solidarity with
Cuba.

