Mr. Grauls (Belgium) (spoke in French): At the
outset I would like to thank Ms. Patricia Espinosa
Cantellano, Secretary of Foreign Affairs of Mexico, for
having organized this debate. It demonstrates the
special interest that Mexico attaches to the issue of
children in armed conflict. For more than a year now,
Mr. President, your country has been chairing the
Security Council Working Group on this issue, and the
international community can only welcome the manner
in which your delegation in New York has assumed its
responsibilities. A single delegation cannot sustainably
chair such a Working Group without long-term support.
I thus take this opportunity to request the Secretary-
General to provide the Working Group as soon as
possible with the administrative support the Security
Council has called for.

I also would like to thank the Secretary-General
for his report (S/2010/181). My thanks go also to
Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Ms. Hilde Frafjord Johnson,
Deputy Executive Director of UNICEF, and Mr. Atul
Khare of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations. I
also stress the courage of Ms. Manju Gurung, who
kindly spoke to the Council this morning about her
experiences.

Belgium aligns itself with the statements made by
the representative of Spain on behalf of the European
Union and by the representative of Canada on behalf of
the Group of Friends, which includes Belgium. On
behalf of my country, I will stress a number of points
related to today's debate.

Last year, two new triggers were activated -
sexual violence; and killing and maiming - that have
strengthened the protection of children throughout the
world. This also created a new challenge, which the
Special Representative and the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict have been determined to
address vigorously.

While thus far it has been relatively easy to
define the issue of mobilized and demobilized children,
it is clearly more difficult to catalogue and document
the cases of killing, maiming and sexual violence
systematically perpetrated by parties to conflict.
Without reliable collection of data on these new
categories of violence, the monitoring and reporting
mechanism will not function properly and it will not be
possible to put credible sanctions in place. The
international community, working closely with civil
society - and we greatly appreciate its contribution -
must roll up its sleeves. A first step has just been taken:
the criteria set out in the Secretary-General's report.
These will lead to greater clarity and transparency in
the work of Ms. Coomaraswamy and the Working
Group. The second stage is capacity-building for data
collection on the ground. This should be done by
streamlining and coordinating existing United Nations
networks. But we must also be generous in providing
greater resources to the United Nations lest our desire
to act remain unrealized. In this regard, Belgium
decided this year, through UNICEF, to fund capacity-
building for monitoring and reporting on the ground,
particularly in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Afghanistan and the Sudan.

The third stage is for stringent sanctions to be
adopted. As we read in the Secretary-General's report,
in many countries there is almost total impunity with
regard to grave crimes against children. Today we call
upon the Security Council to take measures, without
delay, to punish violators who have been listed for
more than five years but have shown no intention to
cooperate with the Special Representative. As the
Secretary-General describes in his report, the Council's
Working Group and sanctions committees must work
together on this issue. I welcome the fact that in May
the Special Representative spoke to the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

And the final, critical, stage is that when children
are snatched from the jaws of war they need to be
reintegrated. For that, reliable financing is essential.
Belgium has supported a number of projects in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, addressing issues
including sexual violence. My delegation has thus
followed with interest the efforts of France and
UNICEF to mobilize donors in the area of
reintegration, in line with the Paris Principles on
children associated with armed forces or armed groups.
Preventing recruitment and ensuring reintegration must
be viewed over the long term through multi-year
programmes.

This leads me to say that the problem of children
in conflict goes beyond the scope of action of the
Security Council. As Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission's country-specific configuration on the
Central African Public, I stress the very important role
that the Commission too can play in mobilizing the
international community and in facilitating
coordination of its efforts regarding disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes and
raising awareness in the countries on its agenda.

As Chair of the country-specific configuration on
the Central African Republic, I have established
ongoing contact with Ms. Coomaraswamy and,
whenever possible, I raise this issue with the
authorities of the Central African Republic. In this
context, our country-specific configuration had
planned a December 2009 visit to a demobilization
centre for child soldiers in the Central African
Republic, but an armed opposition group prevented us
from conducting that visit.

I close by expressing Belgium's hope that this
year, the Working Group will carry out a first visit to a
country of its choice, so that the Security Council may
demonstrate once again that it wants to and can make a
difference in defending children confronted by war.

