Mr. de Decker (Belgium) (spoke in French): I
would first like to thank the United States for its very
timely convening of today's meeting.

Belgium is extremely concerned about the presence
in Iraq and Syria ofa terrorist group such as the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), which has been
responsible for kidnappings, heinous massacres and
numerous other crimes. This is not only a threat to the
region, it is a threat to us all. That is why it requires
that the international community mobilize to an
unprecedented degree. But while military intervention
may be needed to stop ISIL's progress on land, we
believe that any long-term solution must be a political
one.

The establishment of a new Government in Iraq
and the appointment of a new Prime Minister are of
course steps in the right direction. But it should be
made clear as quickly as possible to the people, in
all their diversity, that the Government's policies are
and will be inclusive at every level. Restoring social
cohesion is a crucial step that devolves primarily on the
Iraqi Government but that will require the long-term
commitment and support of the entire international
community. No political solution has yet emerged in
neighbouring Syria, and Belgium supports the work of
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan
dc Mistura, who will be responsible for designing one.

Along with this political commitment, the
international community must demonstrate greater
solidarity on the humanitarian front. Belgium has
already committed a concrete contribution to the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and to delivering aid to Erbil. We will continue, at the
national, European and international levels, to mobilize
a response adequate to the serious humanitarian crisis
in the region. We must also make genuine efforts to
combat ISIL, including by ensuring that it cannot
benefit financially from petroleum revenues. Belgium
is currently analysing how it can best play a role in that
area, in close cooperation with its partners.

As my colleague from the Netherlands emphasized
a short while ago, thousands of Western jihadists are
fighting in Iraq and Syria, and Belgium has not been
spared. Hundreds of young Belgians have joined the
conflict or are considering it, and a murderous attack
by a jihadist who had returned to Belgium took place
in the heart of Brussels in May. The cooperation that
exists between many Belgian institutions is enabling us
to develop an inclusive strategy not only to fight this
phenomenon but to address its roots as well. We are of
course cooperating in this area with many States.

Regarding actual military action, Belgium urges
that any international action's legitimacy be reinforced,
insofar as political conditions permit, by a United
Nations resolution. We expect to contribute to the
military coalition initiated by the United States in Iraq,
whether through air support missions, transportation
support, military training or other means. Given
the fact that the current Belgian Government is in
transition, that contribution will have to be approved
either by Parliament or by the new Government, which
will soon be in place. Belgium showed in Libya that it
can support its partners effectively.

It is critical for every country in the region,
including Iran, to mobilize against the terrorist threat
that ISIL represents and to contribute to the various
components of collective action. This is also a valuable
opportunity to overcome regional divisions. It will be
essential if we want to succeed in our goal of protecting
freedom, democracy, peace, respect for all our cultures
and respect for human rights.

