Mr. Mbeki: We would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for giving us this opportunity to engage
the Council on the issue of the Sudan.

As members will recall, the last time we were
here, in December 2009, we informed the Council that
the African Union (AU) had expanded our mandate to
follow up on its decisions on Darfur on the
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA) and the process of democratization
in the Sudan. Indeed, our Panel has been doing what it
can to honour that mandate. In that regard, I am happy
to inform the Council that, by common agreement, our
Panel works in close cooperation with the three
institutions that are playing a central role in assisting
the people of the Sudan to resolve their problems. I
refer here to the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), the United Nations
Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) and the AU-United
Nations Joint Chief Mediator for Darfur - all of
which are correctly represented at this meeting and
will, as the President has said, address the Council.
I am certain that there is no need for us to
convince the Council about the importance of that
cooperation, which enables our four institutions to
share information, coordinate their actions and support
one another while fully respecting their various
mandates. On behalf of our Panel, I would like to take
this opportunity once more to thank Joint Special
Representative Ibrahim Gambari, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Haile Menkerios and Joint Chief
Mediator Djibril Bassole for the opportunity that they
have given to our Panel to work with them and the
institutions they lead, which I am certain will greatly
assist in accelerating progress towards meeting the goals
on the Sudan, which are shared by the African Union and
the United Nations.

In that regard, I am certain that the Council is
aware of the fact of the Joint AU-United Nations
meeting on the Sudan held in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia,
on 7 May, and of the statement the two organizations
issued at the end of that meeting, which reflects the
scope of their shared understanding and coordinated
approach. Similarly, the Council will also be familiar
with the fact of the 8 May meeting, again held in Addis
Ababa, convened by the AU and the United Nations,
which brought together the representatives of the
Governments and intergovernmental organizations that
are actively involved in work to help resolve the
challenges that the Sudan faces and which included all
the countries neighbouring the Sudan.

We were indeed very pleased that that inclusive
meeting again reached a common agreement on the
approach towards the major challenges facing the
Sudan and agreed that the AU and the United Nations
should convene a bi-monthly consultative forum to
ensure proper coordination of the interventions of the
entirety of the international community. Once again,
we are certain that the Council is familiar with the
decisions adopted at that meeting. The joint conveners
of the consultative forum, that is, the AU and the
United Nations, are determined that the forum should
meet as was agreed and effectively carry out the
principal tasks for which it was established, namely, to
ensure the effective coordination of international action
on the Sudan.

As the Council is aware, the 8 May meeting
agreed with the AU and the United Nations that the
global political agreement on Darfur should be
concluded this year, ahead of the holding of the
Southern Sudan referendum. I am happy to say that the
10-40334
Government of the Sudan has agreed with that
proposal. Accordingly, as did the 7 May and 8 May
Addis Ababa meetings, we fully support the Doha
negotiations, which are focused specifically on
concluding a peace agreement involving all the
belligerents, as well as a framework agreement. We
therefore fully support the efforts of the Joint Chief
Mediator, supported by the Government of the State of
Qatar, to bring all the belligerents into the peace
negotiations with a view to concluding those
negotiations as speedily as possible. Similarly, we
support the efforts of the Mediator and Qatar to
mobilize Darfur civil society to support the Doha peace
process.

Again as agreed at the 7 and 8 May meetings, we
will take steps immediately to prepare for the
convening of the fully inclusive process, in the form of
a Darfur-Darfur conference targeted at concluding a
global political agreement. Again, I am happy to
inform the Council that the Government of the Sudan
has agreed to that. In that regard, I should also mention
that, when we return to the Sudan later this month, we
will engage the officials designated by the Government
of the Sudan to work on the details relating to the
implementation of the decisions of the African Union
on the issues of justice and reconciliation in Darfur.
Our intention in this context is that, by the time the
Darfur-Darfur conference considers the item of justice
and reconciliation, we should have agreed on all the
relevant details with the Government of the Sudan.

With regard to Darfur, we would also like to
mention that when we return to the Sudan later this
month, we will again join the Government and the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur to consider a detailed programme to improve
the security situation in Darfur. The meeting will also
take into account proposals on this important issue that
have been elaborated by the United States Special
Envoy, General Scott Gration.

Sustained improvement in the security situation
in Darfur would help to create the conditions to help
the refugees and internally displaced persons to realize
their wish to return to the villages from which they
were forcibly removed. In this regard, it is obvious that
such voluntary returns as may take place will have to
be accompanied by a process of reconstruction and
development to assist the returnees to resettle and build
better lives for themselves.
10-40334

With regard to matters relating to the CPA, the
Panel has convened for 21 June the first meeting of the
teams that will negotiate the post-referendum
arrangements, taking into account both possible
outcomes of the Southern Sudan referendum. This
meeting will mark the beginning of the post-
referendum negotiations. As agreed with the CPA
parties, the Panel will then be on standby to assist the
parties in the event that they require intervention to
resolve any of the matters on the post-referendum
agenda.

Again, as agreed with the parties, the Panel will
work with them to help resolve outstanding CPA
matters, in particular the finalization of matters relating
to the North-South border, as well as Abyei. We will
work on these matters together with UNMIS, as we
will with regard to supporting the newly-constituted
Southern Sudan Referendum Commission, bearing in
mind the urgency that attends all these CPA issues.
Similarly, later this month we will begin work,
especially with UNMIS and the Sudan Council of
Churches, aimed at helping to end the communal
conflicts in Southern Sudan which continue to claim
many lives.

We will also continue to work, particularly with
the political parties in Southern Sudan, as we did
during the general elections, to help prepare the
conditions to ensure that the January 2011 Southern
Sudan and Abyei referendums are free and fair. In this
regard, we are confident that UNMIS will play a vital
role to assist in organizing those referendums.

We will also continue to attend to the important
issue of the further democratization of the Sudan. In
this regard, in particular, we are working towards
convening a forum of the Sudanese political parties
that will seek to develop a national consensus on the
major challenges facing the country, including the
process of democratization.

Like the Sudanese themselves and our United
Nations partners, our Panel is fully conscious of the
complexity of all the matters I have mentioned and the
time pressures under which the correct solutions have
to be found. In this regard, and to conclude, we would
like to take this opportunity to thank the United
Nations, the European Union, other intergovernmental
organizations, and individual Governments, including
members of this Council, for the support they have
3
extended to the Panel to empower us to do the work
expected of us.

We are pleased that both this Security Council
and the African Union Peace and Security Council
remain seized of the question of the Sudan, convinced
that this will assist those of us on the AU Panel on the
Sudan, in UNAMID, UNMIS and the Darfur mediation
more effectively and expeditiously to discharge our
responsibilities.

