Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian delegation endorsed the
adoption of resolution 2387 (2017) on the extension of
the mandate of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic for one year. We were chiefly guided by
the importance of sending the citizens of the Central
African Republic a message that the international
community will not abandon them during the difficult
situation that the country finds itself in at the moment.
The security situation is extremely worrying, and the
Central African Republic State finds itself besieged
as never before. In these circumstances, the Security
Council cannot stand idly by.

We concurred with the Secretary-General's proposal
for increasing the Mission's military component by
900 persons. However, we hope that peacekeepers will
not spread their efforts too thin but rather focus on
carrying out their primary tasks - protecting civilians
and advancing the political process. The fact is the Blue
Helmets are not in a position to protect every citizen of
a country that is the size of France. However, if their
mobility is increased, as the Secretary-General's report
(S/2017/865) emphasizes, they will be able to contribute
significantly to alleviating tensions on the ground,
which will enable Bangui to focus on the peace process
and on implementing the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programme for former combatants.
The Government of the Central African Republic
should also continue rebuilding the capacity of its
national armed forces.

In deploying additional peacekeepers as part of the
Mission, we must not forget the contingents that are
already deployed in the Central African Republic. They
are carrying out difficult duties and risking their lives
in doing so. The Secretary-General did not observe
United Nations Day in the Central African Republic,
alongside our peacekeepers, in vain.

We call for a balanced approach to assessing the
contribution of troop-contributing countries. We cannot
have situations created owing to the withdrawal of a
whole contingent because of sexual crimes committed
by individual peacekeepers when replacements cannot
be found quickly, since that seriously interferes with
the Mission's operational capacity.

