Mr. Jurica (Croatia): Let me first of all welcome
the presence among us in this Chamber of His
Excellency Mr. Boris Tadie, President of the Republic
of Serbia. I also express thanks to the Secretary-
General for his statement on the situation in Kosovo.
Yesterday's events have created a new political
reality in South-East Europe. The Kosovo Assembly's
decision to declare independence should not be seen in
isolation either from the recent history of the region or
from the prospects that the future offers to both Serbia
and Kosovo. This should be our point of departure: all
along, Kosovo has been a unique, sui-generis case that
requires unique solutions.

Croatia, for one, has consistently expressed hope
for a negotiated solution. It is disappointing that, after
many rounds of talks, no substantive progress has been
reached, thus making the hope of an agreed settlement
ultimately futile. The attempts of the Security Council
to agree on a way forward have been equally
unsuccessful. However, our previous debates
demonstrated one thing: that we all share a desire to
see the region stable and prosperous.

The new political reality in South-East Europe
commands our full attention. Croatia has taken note of
Kosovo's commitment to the principles of democracy
and equality for all its citizens, and of its full
acceptance of the obligations contained in the
comprehensive proposal for a Kosovo status
settlement, including those establishing a multi-ethnic
framework and those concerning the international
supervision of Kosovo. My Government will closely
follow developments on the ground.

As a country in the process of accession to the
European Union, Croatia will continue to harmonize its
foreign policy decisions with the European Common
Foreign and Security Policy, and will take into account
the Views expressed by the international community,
including the European Council's conclusions on
Kosovo of today, 18 February 2008.

The recognition of independence is a sovereign
decision of each individual State. My Government will
initiate the procedure in accordance with the Croatian
constitution, following a thorough analysis of all
relevant facts and of the implications of Kosovo's
declaration of independence.

We believe that both parties, as well as the
international community, should seize this opportunity
to work towards advancing the development of a multi-
ethnic and democratic Kosovo, thus contributing to the
sustainable peace, prosperity and stability of the region
as a whole. The role of the international community
remains indispensable in that regard.
As we have stated previously, Croatia supports
the readiness of the European Union to play a leading
role in Kosovo and recalls that members of the
Security Council have repeatedly underscored the
unmistakably European dimension of this issue. The
recent deployment of the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo, which we see as deriving from the
provisions of Security Council resolution 1244 (1999),
should be seen in that light.

Neither the actors directly involved nor the
region itself should be left to tackle this problem alone.
It is our common responsibility to help Kosovo stay the
course charted over the past eight years.

On the other hand, there is no doubt that a
democratic and stable Serbia would be warmly
embraced by the international community, and
particularly by the European Union.

Croatia itself has every interest in living side by
side with peaceful and prosperous neighbours, and we
will strive to make a constructive contribution to the
advancement of cooperation and well-being in the
region. It is the common goal of all the countries in the
region to speak with one voice of freedom, democracy,
human rights, stability and security in the region and a
common European perspective. That is, after all, the
common future of the whole of South-East Europe.

