Mr. Yusuf (Somalia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for this opportunity to speak today. I am honoured
to address the Council on behalf of the Federal
Government of Somalia.

At the outset, allow me to congratulate you on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for the
month of May. I would also like to take this opportunity
to commend your predecessor's leadership in guiding
the work of the Council for the month of April.

The successful conclusion of the electoral process
in Somalia on 8 February marked a change and a new
direction for our country. Last week in London, we
witnessed the commitment of many of our friends and
partners to support this new direction, and we stand
ready to carry out our part. President Farmajo has
pledged to work tirelessly to improve security, to build
democratic institutions and to improve the daily lives
of Somali citizens. He has committed to spare no effort
to fight Somalia's three major enemies: terrorism,
corruption and poverty.

To deliver this ambitious agenda the President
has appointed a capable and experienced Prime
Minister, and an inclusive Cabinet that includes five
female ministers - the largest in our history - and
many young ministers representing 85 per cent of
our population who are under the age of 40. Together
with the Cabinet and the Parliament, the President has
committed to getting the politics right so as to ensure
that politics in Somalia are inclusive, participatory,
vibrant and on a level playing field. In that regard,
we are committed to solidifying our federal system of
governance to pave the way for security apparatuses and
focused State-institution building, and are championing
the overall reform agenda.

We are a step closer to this objective through the
recent historic formation of the new national security
council, which includes all federal member states. The
national security council is not only a platform for
dialogue on security issues, but on broader matters
of national importance. We are already engaged in
a dialogue on the sharing of natural and national
resources. This and other areas will be discussed in the
context of the constitutional review process.

Security remains an urgent question for Somalia.
The historic new national security architecture and
the security pact give us the tools to strengthen the
Somali national army and introduce an improved
policing model. The Council's ongoing support to our
security objectives and UNSOM's coordinating role is
invaluable to this process.

Today, our brave men and women in uniform,
together with the African Union Military Observer
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), are locked in
symmetrical battles with the terrorist group,
Al-Shabaab. Without AMISOM. forces, who are
supplied with heavy weaponry, we would not have been
able to counter Al-Shabaab's threat effectively.

The long-standing arms embargo on Somalia
severely restricts our ability to procure heavy weapons,
despite the partial lifting ofthe embargo in 2013. In that
regard, we are ready to work with our partners and the
Council to develop a clearly defined road map toward
the full lifting of the arms embargo. This would include
the improvements we must make to our weapons
management, command and control systems. Somalia
will continue to work to defeat Al-Shabaab in the next
few years. Once we recover the remaining territories
and secure supply routes, we will stabilize the country
by building local administrations, in collaboration with
the federal member states.

We are grateful to all our partners for their
unwavering and sustained security-sector support over
the years. Many provide financial support, while others
provide technical and logistical support. In particular,
Somalia dedicates special gratitude to AMISOM. Its
peacekeepers have been working with us for 10 years,
and during that time they have sacrificed many lives
in the quest to help Somalia defeat Al-Shabaab and
rebuild our security forces.

I would like to draw the Council's attention to
the desperate plight of the Somali Government and
the Somali population in the face of the ongoing
humanitarian crisis. According to United Nations
specialized agencies, the crisis is deepening and
an elevated risk of famine persists in some parts of
Somalia today. Despite the unprecedented generosity
of the past few months, we still urgently need sustained
early donor contributions and commitment to saving
the lives of our most vulnerable children, women and
elderly, who constitute 70 per cent of the victims of the
drought. Moreover, Somalia needs support in its efforts
in macroeconomic reform, which will give the country
access to financing to support State-building and long-
term development programmes. This is also critical to
breaking the cycle of recurring humanitarian crises.

As my President said at the London Conference
on Somalia, for too long the conventional wisdom has
been that Somalia's State is failing. President Farmajo's
Administration is committed to seizing this opportunity
to change that narrative and to nurture and deliver on a
better, stronger and more prosperous Somalia. Despite
the many challenges, none is insurmountable. We once
again thank the Council for its long-standing support
for peace, stability and development in Somalia. We are
certain that we will only go forward towards progress
and prosperity, as is the will of the Somali people and
the priority of its Government.

The meeting rose at 12.15 pm.
