Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Let me also begin by expressing my gratitude for the
considerable efforts and great dedication of
Ambassador Greenstock as Chairman of the
Committee. We would like also to thank him for his
briefing. I wish also to say that we endorse the
statement that will be made by Ambassador Niehaus of
Costa Rica on behalf of the Rio Group.

Colombia recognizes the progress that has been
achieved during this first phase of the work of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and supports the
programme of work established for the second phase.
My country reiterates the CTC's appeal to all States
Members of the Organization to review together and to
implement effective and appropriate mechanisms in
order to stop those who today are instilling fear in
humankind through terrorist acts and threats from
achieving their goals.

In this respect, I wish to highlight, as Mexico has
done, the very recent adoption in the American
continent of the Inter-American Convention against
Terrorism, which is an effective instrument in the
combat against this scourge. This is a welcome sign of
the importance and the effectiveness of efforts carried
out in a spirit of solidarity by a regional group acting
jointly.

It is essential for the CTC to continue to
strengthen its relations of cooperation and assistance
with international, regional and subregional
organizations, as they represent a fundamental
instrument in combating terrorism.

In the area of technical and financial assistance, I
should like to highlight the importance of the
establishment by the CTC of an on-line directory for
Member States on the resources and expertise available
in the areas covered by the resolution.

This directory has been designed to help, during
the second phase - in which the Committee will
analyse the reports - those Governments that request
information and technical assistance as well as other
forms of assistance offered by other States and by
Committee experts, in the implementation of resolution
1373 (2001).

In the second phase of processing and analyzing
State reports, the Committee must focus its activities
and programme of work on priority areas such as the
identification by its experts and subcommittee
members of the shortcomings of some States in the
area of counter-terrorism instruments. Thus
recommendations should be proposed as to the
measures that should be adopted within a particular
State, in particular in the legislative and administrative
areas, as well as in the field of law enforcement, in
order to suppress the financing of terrorism. We deem
very useful the suggestion made by the representative
of Singapore regarding the criteria for assessing and
evaluating such gaps or shortcomings.

My delegation recognizes the importance and the
effectiveness of the measures and actions that have
been adopted by the majority of Member States in
compliance with resolution 1373 (2001), as well as the
activities that have been carried out by some regional
organizations to combat terrorism.

However, given present-day events, in particular
the serious threats that have been publicly made by
terrorist individuals and organizations, such as those
relating to actions planned by Al-Qaeda, for example,
as well as the numerous terrorist acts being carried out
throughout the world, we should reflect on what else
can be done in the CTC to prevent terrorism from
continuing to sow fear, dread and uncertainty
throughout the world, causing countless deaths and the
destruction of State infrastructures. For that reason, we
must continue to seek out innovative and effective
solutions to strengthen national capacities in order to
strengthen international cooperation in the area of
terrorism.

The answers to these questions should therefore
constitute the premises that the Committee should
consider during the second phase of its work. It should
determine whether or not the measures it is taking are
sufficient and if it needs to rethink its actions or
reformulate the modalities of its work.

A number of agencies in various countries have
warned of the possibility of new and worse operations
and attacks by terrorist groups. We must promote
actions and create mechanisms in order to address
these threats in order to prevent them, or, at least,
reduce their severity, and, above all, to avert the
serious consequences of such attacks.
For that reason, one objective in the international
community's efforts to combat terrorism must be to
continue to learn sufficiently about the capacities of,
and the methods used by, terrorist organizations, so that
we can move from our primarily reactive response -
pursuing and capturing terrorists after they have
achieved their objectives - to a preventive approach,
using key indicators to predict terrorist attacks before
they happen.

We know that this is not an easy task. The CTC
must continue to move forward and cooperate with
regional organizations, Member States and other
international or private organizations in the quest for
adequate and effective solutions.

The next public debate in this Chamber will give
us an opportunity to analyse in greater depth the major
challenges posed by terrorism, which require greater
efforts on the part of the United Nations.

