We thank Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for his briefing and, through him, express our gratitude to the team that supported the Secretary- General in providing the Council with the review of United Nations humanitarian cross-line and cross-border operations (S/2020/401) in the Syrian Arab Republic. The Dominican Republic appreciates the level of detail provided in the review, complemented by the Under-Secretary-General's views today. As we read through the report, we had one main question. How can we alleviate the current and potential suffering of the people living in the north-west and north-east of Syria, trapped in the uncertainties of a pandemic and the escalation of violence at any moment? In such a context, we agree that an all-modalities approach is the only way to meet the growing needs of Syrians who are facing the dire consequences of a long conflict, an economic crisis, food insecurity and now a potential public health crisis for which they are not prepared. Conflict has been the trigger for all those calamities. Therefore, as long as there is conflict, but, above all, as long as there are humanitarian needs, we must provide the conditions for the international community to address those needs in the most direct and effective way. Protecting the dignity of those affected must be at the heart of any humanitarian operation in Syria. That requires much more from within Syria. It requires for the Syrian authorities to strengthen their capacity to work in coordination with the United Nations and humanitarian organizations on the ground; to provide, without delay, the much-needed humanitarian assistance to Syrians, whoever and wherever they are, in a timely and principled way. It also requires effective preparation for possible coronavirus disease outbreak in the north-east, where we have seen a gap in the provision of medical assistance due to the closure of the Al-Yarubiyah border-crossing point and given the difficulties with cross-line access from within Syria. We believe that the report of the Secretary- General is very clear in highlighting this gap. Now, to address it, the Security Council will need to take appropriate action, in a constructive and unpoliticized way. The position of the Dominican Republic is clear, and we stand ready to work with all Council members to respond to these pressing challenges through an all- modalities approach. In that regard, we recognize the efforts to upscale the cross-border assistance to the north-west, which has, once again, proven to be life-saving for millions of civilians. The Dominican Republic believes that this operation merits our full support, and it must be improved with the aim of serving the affected population even better. To conclude, we reiterate our call for a sustainable, lasting ceasefire across the entire Syrian Arab Republic to, first, facilitate humanitarian assistance to all those in need and, secondly, to enable the only solution to this conflict - a political solution based on the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people and facilitated by the United Nations.
