Mr. Thomson (United Kingdom): As we all
deepen our understanding of what is required to deliver
security at all stages, from conflict prevention through
peacekeeping to reconstruction and peace-building, not
least in the face of new emerging threats including the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and
international terrorism, the Security Council's task is
becoming increasingly complex and broad. We do not
underestimate the Council's existing strengths, or the
extent to which these have developed in recent
decades. But in developing its ability to protect
international peace and security, which is what is here
for, the Council needs to develop the tools to do this.

Therefore, the United Kingdom welcomes your
initiative, Mr. President, to hold this meeting and your
presence as you lead us in it. Regional and subregional
organizations are key players in operationalizing the
Council's work. It is important for the effectiveness of
the Council's decisions that we strengthen the
relationship with regional organizations and, as
appropriate, encourage strengthened relationships
between them. The Counter-Terrorism Committee's
6 March meeting with regional organizations may offer
some models.

I wanted to offer some brief questions about how
we might do these things, and shall do so under three
headings: developing information exchange,
developing capacity and developing relationships. In
asking these questions, my delegation does not wish to
suggest that nothing is happening. On the contrary, we
have already heard this morning much that is going on
among regional organizations. But we want to
encourage examination with the representatives of
regional organizations here today of whether the
Council is doing enough.

So, I turn first to information exchange, because
better flows of information should make for stronger
decision-making. With respect to the flow of
information from the Council to regional organizations,
we would like to ask how well informed regional
organizations feel about Council discussion and
decisions. Is there room for improvement? We send
Security Council resolutions to all Member States.
Should they go to regional organizations as well?

Then there is information from regional
organizations to the Council. How can regional
organizations better respond to Council requests for
information and cooperation, for example requests for
reports on the activities of troops of regional
organizations or on the implementation of United
Nations sanctions by countries belonging to a regional
organization?

And there is information flow in both directions
between the Council and regional organizations. We
think that there is scope for a more regular and more
energetic exchange of views and information. So, are
there mechanisms we should explore for better liaison,
for example more exchange between situation centres?

And finally, with respect to exchanges between
regional organizations, how can the sharing and
transfer of best practice be improved? Are there things
that the Council can appropriately do to encourage
this?

Turning to my second set of questions, on
capacity, we think it useful to understand and develop
the capacity available for Security Council action.
Similarly, we think that it is useful to understand and
develop the capacities for local and regional dispute
settlement. Do we as a Council need to broaden our
understanding of the range of regional organizations
that can help address emerging threats to international
peace and security? We as a Council have made heavy
use of the Economic Community of West African
States and NATO. But are there any entities that we are
neglecting: civil society organizations, or regional
organizations with election monitoring capacity, or
human rights organizations?

And how can the United Nations and its Member
States help develop the capacity of such regional
organizations and of the Council to work with them so
that they can do more to address emerging threats to
peace and security in their regions? Is there scope not
merely for information exchange between regional
organizations but also for capacity-building between
them. This morning we have heard the offer from the
Organization of American States to assist other
regional organizations, drawing on its experience. And
as a European, I wonder whether the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe could offer more
of its experience to organizations in other regions and
whether the civilian crisis management component of
the European Security and Defence Policy could be
replicated elsewhere around the globe.

Finally, turning to my third area of questions, on
relationships: exchanging information and building
capacity will be valuable. But beyond this, we think
there may be scope for further developing
understandings about how such capacities can be
employed. Is there scope for the United Nations to
develop general, formal understandings with regional
organizations about how they are most likely to be able
to add value to the Council's efforts? Structured
dialogue between regional organizations and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Political Affairs, for example, could
build understanding of how traditional Council
capabilities can be complemented by the resources of
regional organizations.

As a member of the European Union, the United
Kingdom has workedjointly since 1998, with France in
particular, in developing European crisis management
capability, and we very much welcome the beginnings
of a United Nations dialogue with the European Union
in this area.

