Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
appreciates the initiative of France to hold today's open
debate on the protection of civilians in peacekeeping
operations. We welcome Foreign Minister Ayrault's
presence in New York to preside over the meeting. We
also welcome His Excellency Mr. Faustin Archange
Touadera, President of the Central African Republic.
We also thank His Excellency Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his briefing. And we listened attentively
to the briefing by Mr. Peter Maurer, President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross.

The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali suffered terrorist bomb
attacks on 31 May, in which the young Chinese
peacekeeper Sheng Liangliang unfortunately lost his
life. He had devoted his precious life to the cause of
peace. His body returned to his home country yesterday,
where he will forever rest in the soil of his fatherland.

Nevertheless, China's commitment to the
peacekeeping cause is unflinching, and our support for
United Nations peacekeeping operations will remain
unswerving. United Nations peacekeeping operations
are an important means of safeguarding world peace,
security and stability. The Security Council adopted
resolution 1265 (1999) in 1999, while more recently it
has adopted many other resolutions and presidential
statements on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, thereby establishing a legal framework for
protecting civilians in armed conflict. Protecting
civilians has also become a mandate conferred on United
Nations peacekeeping operations. China supports the
Council's discussing the topic of protecting civilians in
peacekeeping operations. We would like to highlight
several points.

First, peacekeeping operations, when implementing
the mandate of protecting civilians, should, on the
premise of respecting the ownership of host countries,
clarify their perimeters, conditions and limits; maintain
objectivity and neutrality; ensure the recognition and
support of the host countries and the international
community; and form useful complementarity with the
operations of host countries. Peacekeeping operations
cannot replace the responsibilities and duties of host
country Governments or parties to the conflict to
protect civilians, and they should try to avoid becoming
a party to the conflict.

Secondly, when formulating the mandate to protect
civilians, the Council should comprehensively take
into account the prevailing circumstances and specific
needs of host countries,as well as the conditions and
capacities of the peacekeeping missions, and ensure
that related mandates are specific, clear, realistic and
viable. The Council should assess the implementation
of the mandates by the mission in a dynamic manner
and make timely adjustments in accordance with the
changing circumstances. The international community
should strengthen the capacity-building of the troop-
contributing countries (TCCs) and ensure that
peacekeeping missions acquire the equipment and
resources needed for completing their mandate.

Thirdly, advancing the political settlement of
hotspot issues is the fundamental way to attain the goal
of protecting civilians. The international community
should strengthen the sense of urgency and the
political settlement of regional hotspot issues, and
ensure sustained protection for civilians in conflict
areas. Peacekeeping operations should fully use their
own advantages to actively promote the peaceful
settlement of disputes, work with the related efforts
of the international community to seek political
settlement of hotspot issues, and create conditions and
an environment conducive to advancing the process of
political settlement of the hotspot issues.

Fourthly, protecting civilians requires emphasis
to be placed on the role of the African Union and
other regional organizations. Nearly 60 per cent
of peacekeeping operations are deployed on the
African continent. The African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States, the Economic
Community of Central African States and other regional
and subregional organizations know best the realities
of Africa and can therefore come up with responsive
recommendations designed to protect civilians.
Peacekeeping operations should pay attention to
strengthening communication with the African Union
and other regional and subregional organizations, fully
use the role of these organizations and, with respect
to the protection of civilians, listen carefully to their
opinions and recommendations so as to support the
resolution of African problems in an African manner.

Fifthly, it is essential to prioritize addressing
sexual exploitation and abuse by peacekeepers.
Peacekeepers are devoted to the noble cause of
maintaining international peace and security, yet in
the course of doing so a handful have been implicated
in sexual exploitation and abuse in some countries,
seriously damaging the reputation and contravening the
purposes of peacekeeping operations. The Council, the
Secretariat, TCCs and host countries should strengthen
their cooperation, resolutely implement a zero-tolerance
policy, firmly punish acts of sexual exploitation and
abuse by permiiting no impunity, bring perpetrators to
account, restore justice to the Victims and uphold the
image and reputation of peacekeeping operations.

