Mr. Spatafora (Italy): First of all, let me
welcome the High Representative, Ambassador Lajcak,
and the Chairman of the Council of Ministers of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Spirie. Let me also join
others in thanking the High Representative for his very
clear and focused report on the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and let me express Italy's strong
appreciation and strong support for his past and future
efforts.

Italy fully aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later by the Permanent Representative of
Slovenia on behalf of the European Union. I would just
like to add a few remarks, drawing on our national
experience.

There have indeed been significant developments
during the time frame examined in the report. Despite the
many and very relevant difficulties highlighted so
eloquently in the report of High Representative Lajcak *
especially in the second and third parts, regarding where
we are and the challenges ahead - as well as in the
statement by Chairman Spirie, the country is moving
ahead. Peaceful and constructive coexistence and
interaction among all the components of Bosnia and
Herzegovina society have been strengthened. In a
nutshell, I would say that, as highlighted by Ambassador
Laj cak, "the situation has improved noticeably" and "The
country has taken a significant step towards the
stabilization of the political situation." These are two
points that form the backdrop against which we have to
move.
While some had feared the impact that Kosovo's
declaration of independence would have on Bosnia and
Herzegovina's political and institutional architecture,
Sarajevo has achieved landmark results in this period.

The parties have reached an agreement on political
reform, as has been recalled, and a Stabilization and
Association Agreement has been initialled and will
soon be signed, showing once again that the European
Union accession process is our best tool for generating
yet more progress. The NATO summit in Bucharest
launched the intensified dialogue with Bosnia and
Herzegovina in the lead-up to the membership action
plan. And last but not least, a fruitful compromise has
been reached on the delicate issue of municipal
elections in Srebrenica, for which I wish once again to
commend the brokering role of High Representative
Lajcak. Bosnia and Herzegovina is moving steadily in
the right direction, and the international community
has contributed to consolidating this process.

But despite all this important progress, many
concerns still need to be addressed. And the Chairman
was very clear on this. Tensions continue to flair
periodically, and the political forces have questioned
the arrangements of the Dayton Peace Agreement.
Constitutional reform is a priority for the establishment
of a functional State in Bosnia and Herzegovina, but it
does not seem to at hand, at least according to what we
have heard. The closure of the Office of the High
Representative and the transition towards the European
Union Special Representative phase were postponed.
As a Peace Implementation Council Steering Board
member, Italy joined in that decision, which we
believed was wise.

At the same time, we remain convinced that the
principle of ownership must be upheld and that it must
produce tangible results when the situation on the
ground is right. The reform process can be kept on
track, we believe, through accurate management and
effective synergies between local authorities and
political forces on one hand, and the international
community on the other. Decisive progress can be
achieved in the next few months on the five objectives
and the two conditions that the Peace Implementation
Council Steering Board has identified for the transition
of the Office of the High Representative to the
European Union Special Representative. I wish to
stress once again that now that signing the Stabilization
and Association Agreement has been given the green
light, a positive assessment of the overall situation by
the Peace Implementation Council seems closer.

In the past six months there have been moments
of growing political tension and divisive confrontation
followed by phases of constructive and fruitful

dialogue that have produced excellent results, as I have
outlined above and as we have heard this morning. I
hope that the virtues of dialogue and compromise will
prevail in the upcoming months to benefit not only the
political forces but especially of the people of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

I would like to conclude by recalling a vision that
was put forward by the Chairman, Mr. Spirie, when he
said "Building the rule of law is the only guarantee that
Bosnia and Herzegovina will be a reliable partner for
the international community." That is the central point.

