The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of the Republic of Korea, in which he
requests to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite that representative to participate
in the consideration of the item without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Park
In-kook (Republic of Korea) took a seat at the
Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in response to a letter dated 25 May
2009 from the Permanent Representative of Japan to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council contained in document S/2009/271.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2009/301, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by France, Japan, the
Republic of Korea, the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, and the United States of
America.

I wish to draw the attention of the members to
document S/2009/274, containing a letter dated 26 May
2009 from the Permanent Representative of Mongolia
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
2
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Austria, Burkina Faso, China, Costa Rica,
Croatia, France, Japan, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Mexico, Russian Federation, Turkey, Uganda,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Viet Nam


The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1874 (2009).

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council that wish to make a statement on the resolution
just adopted.


