Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to you, Mr. President, for
your leadership ofthe Security Council during this past
month.
The Council's work in July took place against the
backdrop ofa number ofregional crises. Unfortunately,
the Security Council was not able to play the role that
the international community rightfully expects of
it. Operations in the Gaza Strip continue, causing a
significant number of casualties among the Palestinians.
Rockets continue to be fired against Israel.

The presidential statement adopted on 28 July on
the situation around Gaza (S/PRST/2014/ 13), although
accurate, is not up to the situation and came just a tad
late. It is clear that the Council's effectiveness in such
cases hinges largely on the proactive work ofpenholders
and delegations from the region.

As experience has shown, crises between Israelis
and Palestinians often erupt as a result of the fact
that unilateral efforts by the United States aimed at
reconciling the parties have yet again failed. We have
repeatedly pointed out that secretive methods of work
have outlived their usefulness. The need to devise
more effective mechanisms for a settlement is long
overdue. We expect that in September, on the margins
of the political discussion in the General Assembly,
an in-depth consideration in this respect will take
place, including extensive discussion of prospects for a
settlement in the Middle East within the framework of
a ministerial meeting of the Quartet.

We would propose that in August we hold an
informal brainstorming session in the Security
Council, inviting high-level representatives from
Washington, DC, who are directly involved in the
process of the Middle East settlement, for a detailed
discussion of the current situation and the obstacles
hampering progress within the framework of the peace
process. Clearly, the primary task today is the rapid
achievement of a sustainable ceasefire between Israelis
and the Gaza Strip.

On 17 July, we all were shocked by the terrible
tragedy that took place in the skies above Ukraine in
which all 298 individuals aboard the Malaysia Airlines
flight perished. The Security Council rapidly adopted
resolution 2166 (2014), requiring a full, painstaking and
independent international investigation into that event,
in keeping with the guiding principles of international
civil aviation, with an appropriate role being played by
the International Civil Aviation Organization.

One of the important provisions of the resolution
that was incorporated at the insistence of the Russian
delegation is the requirement to immediately cease, in
the region directly adjoining the crash zone, all military
activities so as to secure and safeguard the area during
the conduct of the international investigation. The
President of Ukraine stated that military operations
would cease within a radius of 40 kilometres around
the crash site. That promise was, however, immediately
broken, and Ukrainian officials quite publicly spoke
of a new task - cleansing the territory of militias
and taking it over. Such actions are a direct violation
of Security Council resolution 2166 (2014) and are
fraught with the most dangerous of consequences for
the conduct of an objective and impartial international
investigation. We fear that the authorities in Kyiv are
driven by a desire to destroy any evidence that would
point to their role in the Malaysia airlines disaster.

On 28 July, the Russian delegation proposed that
the members of the Security Council adopt a simple,
unambiguous press statement that would bolster the
provisions of resolution 2166 (2014) on the ceasefire.
However, it was quite unceremoniously blocked by
some Security Council members which were clearly not
interested in seeing that resolution implemented fully.

We welcome today's statement by the Secretary-
General calling for an immediate cessation of
combat activities around the crash site. We note that
the Netherlands, Australia and Malaysia mobilized
significant resources to carry out investigations at the
crash site and deployed groups of experts to Kyiv and
Donetsk. Many of them have established solid contacts
with the militias. For example, the special envoy of the
Prime Minister of Australia, Angus Houston, noted the
militia members' professionalism and their constructive
attitude regarding cooperation and the investigation.

In that respect, I would ask the representative of
Luxembourg to familiarize herself a little better with
those statements and the statements of those who are
present on the ground, so as to ensure that she does
not come here with claims regarding what is taking
place over there. The statement made here by the
representative of Lithuania is something on which I
simply will not comment. No objectivity or impartiality
can be expected from that delegation. And thus, as
before, the investigators were unable to reach the site
of the disaster.

Russia is cooperating in every way with the
investigation. Our relevant organization, Rosaviatsiya,
on the basis of its wealth of experience, has come up
with a series of questions that must be clarified in order
to elicit a full picture of the tragedy. Our specialists
began working as soon as they were asked to by
Holland, taking on a leadership role in the conduct of the
international investigations. We have handed over our
monitoring data from the disaster area to international
organizations, including the United Nations and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE). We hope that others too will take such
concrete and constructive action instead of spreading
unsubstantiated accusations and insinuations.

Early in the month there were glimmers of hope
that the vicious circle of violence in Ukraine might
finally be broken. On 2 July the Foreign Ministers of
Russia, Germany, France and Ukraine issued the Berlin
declaration. In a remarkable statement, President
Poroshenko said that the hardworking and peaceful
people who make up the majority of the residents of
the Donetsk and Luhansk regions had their sympathy,
love and respect; that the Ukrainian armed forces and
its national guard and other units would never permit
themselves to use force against civilians or attack
residential neighbourhoods; that Ukrainian soldiers and
guards would risk their own lives rather than threaten
women, children and elderly men. Such, he said, had
always been the chivalrous nature of Ukraine's armies.

Beautiful, no? In practice, however, the cruelty of
the Kyiv authorities' attacks simply spiraled. Donetsk,
Luhansk, Horlivka and many other residential areas
have suffered massive bombardments, including
indiscriminate firing of Grad rockets and aerial
bombing. Strikes are hitting civilian targets, including
transport and public routes, hospitals and residential
areas. In Horlivka alone, dozens of civilians have died.
And in most cases there are no militias to be found
anywhere near. Does the information that we have
been seeing on the use of Ukrainian military ballistic
missiles not speak to rampant military escalation?
All of this fully supports our description of the Kyiv
authorities' actions as a punitive operation against its
own people.

Even according to the official data, the number
of casualties among the civilian population already
exceeds 1,000, and unofficially there are many more.
At least 19 people have died just today. A stream of
refugees continue to arrive on Russian territory, with
more than 150,000 so far seeking temporary asylum,
residence permits or citizenship. The number of those
who are crossing the border and staying in the Russian
Federation has reached the hundreds of thousands.
Rockets launched by Ukrainian forces continue to
fall on Russian territory. On 29 July, Russian customs
personnel at the Gukovo border crossing were again
deliberately fired on. It appears that Kyiv does not want
the OSCE observer mission to conduct its normal work
monitoring the situation on the Russian-Ukrainian
border. We demand that Kyiv stop firing on Russian
territory and ensure the international observers' safety.

We have repeatedly warned against the disastrous
attempts to solve the political crisis in Ukraine by force
and called for establishing a mutually respectful and
inclusive dialogue between all the principal political
forces and between Kyiv and the regions. The priority
now should become a speedy cessation of hostilities
and the establishment of a peaceful negotiation process
on the basis of the Geneva process of 17 April and the
Berlin declaration of 2 July.

Among other topics, the international community
took an important step in the fight against terrorism on
28 July with the Russian-initiated presidential statement
condemning the illegal trading in oil with terrorist
groups occurring in Syria and Iraq (S/PRST/2014/l4).
We hope that the successful implementation of
resolution 2165 (2014), adopted on 14 July, will enable
us in some way to alleviate the suffering of Syria's
civilian population.

The statements on 17 July by Special Representative
Mitri and Mr. Mohamed Abdulaziz, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Libya, confirmed that the situation
in that country is deteriorating rapidly. We cannot rule
out the possibility that it will splinter into warring
territorial entities. Extremists who feel free there to act
as they wish have laid channels of communication with
their comrades throughout the Middle East and North
Africa. The closing of the United Nations mission and
the evacuation of the staff of a number of Western
embassies are clear evidence of the escalation of the
current situation. We may want to rethink the nature
and objectives of the United Nations presence in Libya.

The situation in Iraq remains deeply worrying.
The external support being given to terrorists in Syria
has become a catalyst for the current worsening of the
situation, though its roots lie considerably deeper, at
least as far back as the events of 2003. Now Islamists
are threatening the entire Middle East and beyond. The
process of creating new State authorities should belong
entirely to Iraq. That is the only way that national
reconciliation can be achieved.

We note the meeting held on 28 July at the initiative
of the Rwandan presidency on the issue of interaction
between the United Nations and regional organizations
in the area of peacekeeping (S/PV.7228). We support
the intensification of such cooperation on the basis of
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.

In conclusion, we would like to wish the delegation
of the United Kingdom, which will lead the Council in
August, every possible success.
