Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): The
resolution we have just adopted highlights the
importance which the international community attaches
to the political process in Western Sahara. The status
quo is unacceptable in the long term. We call on all the
parties to display greater political will to reach a
solution that is fair, lasting and mutually acceptable.

In that regard, my delegation recalls the
importance of the autonomy proposal put forward by
the Kingdom of Morocco in 2007, which allowed
negotiations to resume and which, in our opinion,
constitutes the basis for credible, open and constructive
negotiations that respect the principle of self-
determination. The proposal therefore deserves to be
carefully considered by the various parties.

This year, the Personal Envoy of the Secretary-
General held two informal negotiating sessions and
made two visits to the region. The dialogue has been
patiently renewed. The process is slow but moving
forward. We commend the skill with which
Mr. Christopher Ross has shepherded progress and
trust in his capacity to move ahead with our full
support. However, he will be able to do nothing
without the full commitment of the parties, which must
participate seriously in the negotiations, display a
sense of realism and a spirit of compromise, and
abstain from all provocation. The settlement of this
issue is necessary to the people of Western Sahara and
to the security, stability and integration of the Maghreb
region.

Resolution 1920 (2010) also sends a critical
message about confidence-building measures, in
particular family visits. Visits by air, which have been
halted since March, must be re-established, and visits
by land must be inaugurated as soon as possible. It not
acceptable that civilian populations be held hostage by
political considerations. Everything must be done to
alleviate their daily struggles, and we welcome the role
played by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees in that regard.

We also support all measures to be taken in the
political and humanitarian spheres, with the agreement
of the parties, to promote mutual trust.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to
highlight one particular issue and recall how important
it is that the Council be able to ensure better financial
tracking for all peacekeeping operations, including
MINURSO, in line with the initiative launched jointly
with the United Kingdom. This means that the reports
of the Secretary-General published prior to mandate
renewals should contain financial estimates for the
recommendations made in them.

We note also that the MINURSO budget has
grown considerably since two years ago, while the
mandate and format of the Mission have not changed
substantially. We hope that the discussions that will
take place in the Fifth Committee will make possible a
convincing argument for the validity of the premises
underpinning the 2010-2011 budget.

