Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French):
First of all, I would like to express our thanks to
Mr. Farid Zarif, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Kosovo, for his briefing on the
latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2012/275) and
the recent developments in the issue of Kosovo.

Morocco regrets that the security situation in
Kosovo did not improve during the period covered by
the Secretary-General's report. Quite the contrary, it
regressed compared to the previous period, thereby
risking the destabilization of the Balkan region.
Indeed, there are still hotbeds of tension in northern
Kosovo, despite the efforts of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and other missions present on the ground, such as the
Kosovo Force and the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo, aimed at easing tensions and
avoiding an escalation of violence among the
communities. This situation, unfortunately, will not
bring the two parties closer or help them to reconcile
their positions on many pending fundamental questions
that concern both the present and the future of both
countries.

At the political level, we commend the real
prospects for an improvement in relations between the
European Union (EU), on the one hand, and Serbia and
Kosovo, on the other, and we note that the two parties
have reached an agreement on Kosovo's regional
representation and cooperation, under EU auspices.
This clearly shows that cooperation between Serbia
and Kosovo is possible, even on sensitive issues, when
there is political will. The same goes for the conclusion
of a technical protocol for the implementation of the
agreement on integrated management of crossing
points by Serbian and Kosovo forces, the objective of
which is to provide for better control and security for
all.

This human aspect is essential and should
encourage the two parties to avoid rhetoric and prevent
any act threatening the integrity, safety and security of
individuals. In that regard, we commend the efforts of
UNMIK that has contributed to the arrests of those
responsible for organized crime in order to hand them
over to the competent judicial authorities. On the other
hand, we remain concerned by allegations of
trafficking in human organs, and convinced of the
importance of shedding full light on those serious
allegations.

The tension between the communities in Kosovo
could degenerate if the two parties do not make a
steadfast commitment to maintaining dialogue and
working together to strengthen their mutual trust and
interests through the implementation of the parameters
established in resolution 1244 (1999).

