Mr. Mbi: It is an honour for the World Bank to
participate in this public meeting of the Security
Council on the important question of the strengthening
of cooperation for peace and security in Central Africa.

Over the last couple of years, developments in
Central Africa - Angola, Burundi, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Republic of the Congo and
Rwanda - have created a window of opportunity for
the return of peace and stability in the region. Events
have accelerated over the last months with the signing
of the two agreements of Luanda and Pretoria between
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Uganda and
Rwanda. Now, more than ever, effective coordination
among all parties interested in supporting the
consolidation of peace and stability in the region is of
utmost importance.

In this context, I would like to make three broad
remarks on the World Bank's engagement in Central
Africa. My first broad point is an observation: in
Central Africa, as well as in other regions, conflict and
development are intrinsically linked.

The conflicts in Central Africa illustrate a finding
of recent World Bank research: deep political and
economic development failures are among the key root
causes of conflict. Political exclusion and
mismanagement of economic rents, combined with
widespread poverty, have created explosive situations
that are easily ignited by relatively minor incidents.
Often, in Central Africa as elsewhere, the fundamental
problem is a failure to develop political institutions to
accommodate the diversity of society in a context of
rapid demographic growth, large rural/urban migrations
and extreme poverty. The conflicts in Central Africa
also show how conflict has become a major
development issue for Africa. The human suffering
caused by conflict is immense.

But conflicts also wipe out decades of
development efforts. In Rwanda and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the gross domestic product per
capita today is lower than it was in 1990, 12 years ago.
Throughout Central Africa, physical damage is
intensive and extensive; markets have become highly
fragmented and inefficient, which has forced many
communities to return to autarky; many institutions
have collapsed; social services are no longer delivered;
and HIV/AIDS is spreading.

Moreover, conflicts are taking a heavy toll on
neighbouring countries' development efforts.
Population movements and the inflow of refugees,
border instability, disruptions of trade flows, all
threaten the stability of neighbouring countries.

Conflicts tend to follow cyclical patterns, as we
have seen in many Central African countries. Research
shows that there is a probability of 0.5 that countries
that have had a conflict will return to war within five
years of a peace agreement. Unless peace dividends are
rapidly provided, post-conflict Governments are often
too weak to maintain political and social stability. In
the uncertain and unstable period that characterizes
most post-conflict situations, international efforts can
tip the scale and effective post-conflict recovery can go
a long way towards preventing further conflicts from
erupting. This is a critical lesson for our work today in
countries like the Central African Republic, Rwanda,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo or the Republic
of Congo, to name a few. It is in this context that the
World Bank has been called to play an increasing role
in a number of Central African countries.

My second broad point is that the World Bank
intervenes through a variety of complementary
instruments and approaches. The Bank has devoted
considerable attention to addressing post-conflict
situations worldwide and in Africa. Currently, the Bank
is engaged in 16 conflict-affected countries in Africa,
with programmes focusing on economic stabilization,
for example, in Congo-Brazzaville, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Rwanda; infrastructure
reconstruction in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo; support to private sector and agriculture in
Rwanda; social services delivery in Burundi;
HIV/AIDS prevention in the Central African Republic;
demobilization and reintegration in Rwanda; and
community-based rehabilitation in Burundi, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda.
Overall, the portfolio in all 16 conflict-affected
countries now totals some 80 projects with a value of
about $5 billion. The recent rules on our funding will
soon make it possible to provide a relatively large part
of our new support in the form of grants.

Let me make a brief comment on these
programmes. What we have learned over the years is
that, in post-conflict countries, priorities based on
general experience may be misplaced and conventional
wisdom may not work. Some reforms might be
atypically important because the economy is atypically
sensitive to them. Others that are usually critical for
reducing poverty may be counterproductive. We are
therefore paying particular attention to the political
economy of recovery in post-conflict countries.

Let me also add that our lending programme is
only part of our work. We are also providing
substantial technical assistance and capacity-building
support. Such support is often critical, as was
demonstrated by the success of early policy advice in
Rwanda after the 1994 genocide and in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in 2001. We are also helping in
designing consistent, comprehensive and
implementable recovery programmes and in mobilizing
donors to support it.

But these efforts are only one component of a
broader effort undertaken by the international
community to restore peace and stability. Consolidating
peace requires intervening across a broad range of
activities - political, military, economic and
humanitarian. Economic assistance can make an
important contribution to peace and stability, but it
cannot ensure them. Aid can be only one element of a
broader, holistic strategy aimed at ensuring a
comprehensive and coordinated treatment of all key
dimensions of recovery. In this context, we are looking
towards the United Nations system, and in particular
the Security Council, to provide the type of leadership
needed to create an environment in which we can make
a contribution to a peace process in Central Africa.

I would like to underline that, even at a technical
level, no single agency can hope to provide the needed
support on its own. The Bank is therefore committed to
working in partnership with others and in particular to
developing a strong collaboration on the ground with
the United Nations agencies, and in particular the
United Nations Development Programme.

My third broad point is to call attention to a
special programme that we have developed over the
past year, which I believe complements the efforts
made by the United Nations, and in particular by its
peacekeeping forces. This is the Multi-Country
Demobilization and Reintegration Programme (MDRP)
for the Greater Great Lakes Region of Africa.

It is very much the spirit of partnership that
shapes the Greater Great Lakes Regional Strategy for
Demobilization and Reintegration, which seeks to
enhance the prospects for stabilization and recovery in
the region. The Strategy was designed on the premises
that no single donor or agency can address the
complexity of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration issues in the region, and that the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of ex-
combatants are necessary to establishing peace and
restoring security, which are themselves preconditions
for sustainable growth and poverty reduction.
Governments of the region also recognize the regional
dimension of these challenges and have expressed their
support for a regional disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration framework.

Extensive efforts by regional bodies and the
international community are under way in the security,
political and economic recovery spheres. The Regional
Strategy for disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration needs to be seen within the broader
context of these efforts. It aims to complement national
and regional peace initiatives by providing support for
the social and economic reintegration of ex-combatants
and cannot substitute for political solutions to the
conflicts.

The Multi-Country Demobilization and
Reintegration Programme was then developed to
operationalize the Strategy I just mentioned. The
MDRP brings together, in a first instance, nine
countries - Angola, Burundi, the Central African
Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Namibia, the Republic of the Congo, Rwanda, Uganda
and Zimbabwe - involved in or affected by the
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as
well as over 30 partners from regional organizations,
donor countries, United Nations agencies and the
international financial institutions, many of which I am
pleased to see represented here today.

The Programme objectives are, first, to provide a
comprehensive framework for disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) efforts;
secondly, to establish a consistent mechanism for donor
coordination and resource mobilization; and thirdly, to
serve as a platform for national consultative processes.
The Programme will be implemented over a period of
five years, from 2002 to 2006. Preliminary figures
indicate that there is a potential for 350,000
ex-combatants to be demobilized and reintegrated
under the MDRP. This figure includes both former
members of national armies and members of irregular
armed groups.

Countries in the greater Great Lakes region would
qualify for support from the MDRP on the basis of
several general and country-level eligibility criteria.
Foremost among these are Government participation in
the regional peace process and the adoption of key
policy measures. In View of the importance of
flexibility and timeliness of financing to exploit
emerging opportunities, the country-level criteria focus
on the establishment of appropriate institutional
arrangements and the elaboration of a national
programme in consultation with the international
community.

Two committees have been established to
facilitate the participation of national, regional and
international stakeholders: one to address policy issues
under the Programme, and one to address for financing
issues. In addition, a regional technical coordination
group consisting of national programme managers was
created to assist in harmonizing individual DDR
efforts. Continued dialogue among stakeholder focal
points ensures regular cooperation at the technical
level.

The specific contributions of partners - that is,
donors, United Nations agencies, and local and
international non-governmental organizations - to the
DDR process would be based on their respective
comparative advantages and may differ from country to
country. The World Bank's role in implementing the
strategy and Programme is three-fold: first, as manager
of the MDRP secretariat; secondly, as administrator of
the Multi-Donor Trust Fund; and thirdly, as co-
financier of national programmes.

The MDRP was launched in April 2002. To date,
it has supported the preparation of demobilization and
reintegration programmes for Rwanda and Angola, the
first meeting of Technical Coordination Group in
Luanda in August 2002, a technical workshop between
the Governments of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and of Rwanda in relation to the implementation
of the Pretoria Agreement in September, and a joint
mission during which four teams visited Angola,
Burundi, the Central African Republic, Congo, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and
Uganda from 23 September to 4 October 2002.

Today offers yet another opportunity to reiterate
the critical need to ensure that our individual and
collective efforts in support of peace and security in
Central Africa not be devised separately and in
abstraction, but that they complement each other and
further the regional approach we have all endorsed.

