Mr. Legwaila (Botswana): There is no doubt that
the proposed length of the period of suspension is a clear
recognition by the Security Council of the positive role
that the authorities in Belgrade have played in the
Yugoslav peace process over the past few weeks. When
the Security Council adopted resolution 943 (1994) last
October, the idea was to isolate the Serb forces in Bosnia
and pressure them into accepting the Contact Group peace
plan. That pressure has contributed in no small measure
to the current developments in the peace process in
Bosnia. My delegation attaches great importance to the
Geneva basic principles for a peaceful settlement of the
war in Bosnia, brokered by United States Assistant
Secretary of State Holbrooke, and it is our hope that all
parties in Bosnia will halt all military action in favour of
the peace process.

My delegation none the less welcomes the agreement
signed yesterday for the withdrawal of the Bosnian Serb
heavy weapons from Sarajevo, thus relieving the city of
the shelling that for three years has been maiming
innocent civilians. It is our hope that this agreement will
serve as a foundation for a durable peace, not only for the
residents of Sarajevo, but for all three ethnic groups in
that war-ravaged country. We remain convinced that there
is only one sensible and realistic path to salvation and

 

peace in Bosnia: the path of mutual accommodation and
acceptance by all three peoples of Bosnia.

Finally, as we celebrate all this progress, I wish to
caution against the appearance of partiality by the United
Nations in the Balkan conflict. The horror of the Serb
shelling of a marketplace in Sarajevo, which resulted in the
death of 37 innocent civilians, constituted a cynical
provocation directed at the authority of the United Nations,
and therefore deserved a strong response. However, the
United Nations should avoid the appearance - I repeat
"appearance" - of taking sides in that conflict. The United
Nations cannot be an honest peace broker and a peace
enforcer at the same time. Far be it from me to think our
response was intended to weaken the Bosnian Serbs to a
point where they could be defeated militarily by the
Bosnian and Croat coalition. No such thought has ever
crossed my mind. I am, however, mindful of the fact that
the line separating peace and war is at times a very slim
one in that area. The United Nations cannot wage war in
Bosnia and hope to make peace at the same time, without
compromising the execution of one of these aims.
Furthermore, it is critical that the Security Council should
jealously guard against losing control altogether in
transferring the authority of the United Nations to regional
arrangements. In such situations, the United Nations should
never assume the position of a bystander in an operation
that is supposed to be under the command and control of
the Security Council.

