Mr. Barkin (United States of America): It is an honour to have Prime Minister Rama with us today in the Chamber, and we thank him for his briefing. Human rights, democracy, peace and the maintenance of regional stability are vitally important to all of us, but they cannot be preserved without deliberate effort. That makes the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) a crucial partner in promoting those values, as it also complements the Security Council's efforts to address global security concerns. We face a range of challenges today that threaten democratic institutions. Cyberwarfare and disinformation campaigns, including meddling in the elections of other States, tear at the fabric of free and open societies. Authoritarian States and leaders who disregard the human rights and dignity of their own people, including the freedoms of expression, association, religion and belief and peaceful assembly, also. disregard the sovereignty and _ territorial integrity of neighbouring States. We appreciate the OSCE commitment to combat those attacks on freedom and related challenges during the Prime Minister's chairmanship. As a member and the largest provider of financial support and personnel to the OSCE, the United States is advancing all dimensions of the OSCE's work. We encourage progress towards a comprehensive update of the Vienna Document to enhance military transparency and rebuild confidence among the 57 OSCE participating States. We also welcome greater OSCE focus on corruption and accountable governance. Some OSCE States have not kept their commitments, or have selectively implemented arms control arrangements. To address those failures, creative and courageous leadership is needed for structured dialogue and security issues. Nowhere is the OSCE's presence more important than in Ukraine. Russia's ongoing aggression has led to the deaths of more than 13,000 people, displaced 1.4 million people and left 3.4 million in need of humanitarian assistance. That poses the greatest threat to European security since the Cold War. We are encouraged by recent progress, including the recent detainee exchanges between Ukraine and Russia and work to improve humanitarian conditions. That progress has been achieved thanks to President Zelenskyy's extraordinary commitment to achieving a peaceful resolution. However, we need to see much more from Russia, which still ignores calls for a comprehensive ceasefire. Russia instigated that conflict and continues to arm, train, lead, fund and fight alongside its proxies in eastern Ukraine. It must immediately follow through on its Minsk commitments, withdraw its forces, support further disengagement, expand crossing points and respect Ukraine's sovereignty, both in eastern Ukraine and Crimea. Under such difficult circumstances, we are proud of the work that the OSCE has done in Ukraine, including the Special Monitoring Mission's essential assessments of the situation on the ground. We call on Russia and its proxies to stop interfering with the work of the Mission's monitors and assets and give them full access and freedom to fulfil the OSCE's mandate. The United States fully supports Ukraine's sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity within its internationally recognized borders, including its territorial waters. We do not, or will we ever, recognize Russia's purported annexation of Crimea. We join our European and other partners in affirming that our Ukraine-related sanctions against Russia will remain in place until Russia fully implements its Minsk commitments. Our Crimea-focused sanctions will also remain in place until Russia returns full control of the peninsula to Ukraine. The United States also opposes Russia's continued occupation of Abkhazia and South Ossetia, which are part of Georgia. Russia's actions contravene its international commitments and violate Georgia's sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity within its internationally recognized borders. Although Russia participates in the OSCE's 5+2 Transnistrian settlement negotiations, it has failed to honour its 1999 Istanbul OSCE summit commitments to withdraw its forces from Moldova. Instead, Russia has used protracted conflicts to obstruct the development of a rules-based order and slow the region's gravitation towards European and transatlantic institutions.We look forward to working with the OSCE to resolve those conflicts, including the Geneva international discussions and the 5+2 talks. We thank the OSCE Chairperson and participating States for their support of the Minsk Group process, in which the United States, Russia and France are working productively as co-Chairs to help the sides find a peaceful negotiated settlement to the Nagorno Karabakh conflict. As I noted at the beginning of my remarks, the preservation of human rights, democracy, the rule of law, peace and stability requires deliberate effort. The United States is committed to that effort, and we will continue to work closely with both the United Nations and the OSCE to strengthen the principles that undergird free nations, both within the OSCE region and around the globe.
