Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): It is a great pleasure
to see you here today, Mr. President. I should like, if I
may, to join the tributes the have already been paid both
to you and to Ambassador Chowdhury and the
Bangladesh Mission for the really sterling work that they
are doing during the current presidency of the Security
Council.

We are very grateful to you, Sir, and to the
presidency for taking this important initiative today. The
link between humanitarian crisis and conflict is
indubitable. That link has been highlighted recently in
many aspects of the Council's work, beginning with the
debate on human security during the Canadian presidency
last year. It is right that the Council should carefully
consider the humanitarian aspects of its work. Only then
will it be able effectively to factor in this key element to
its efforts to stop conflicts and try to prevent them.

It is a truism that humanitarian crises can frequently
become the genesis of conflicts. But it is an invariable
fact that humanitarian crisis arises from conflict. If the
Council is to take full account of all the causes and
consequences of conflict, in all its work, including
conflict prevention, peacekeeping and post-conflict
peace-building, then it must take full account of the
humanitarian aspects. Here I should like to underline the
importance of the points just made by the representative
of the Netherlands, which should give us all pause for
thought and study.

The presidential statement which you, Mr. President,
will deliver at the end of this debate sets out a number of
practical humanitarian issues that the Council should and
must consider. We welcome the work that you are taking
forward on all of them. From the safe provision of
humanitarian assistance to those affected by conflict to
the incorporation of humanitarian issues in peace
agreements: all need to be emphasized. These issues are
essential components of a comprehensive strategy in the
Council to deal with the causes and consequences of
conflict. We hope that today's presidential statement will
lead to concrete progress on all of them.

 

The statement to be made by the representative of the
European Union presidency later in the debate will contain
some detailed reflections on the issues we are discussing.
In the interest of brevity I will not repeat them here. But I
want to assure you that the United Kingdom fully shares
and supports the views that will be expressed in that
statement.

Finally, the United Kingdom would like to express our
particular sympathy for the people of Mozambique and to
encourage Member States and the humanitarian agencies to
continue their efforts to deliver assistance and support to
that troubled country.

