Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
congratulates C6te d'Ivoire on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council for this month. We will offer
you all our support, Sir. We appreciate the support of
all relevant parties during China's presidency of the
Council.

China extends its condolences on the passing of
former United States President George H.W. Bush and
presents its sympathy to his family members.

Iraq is currently at a critical stage of national peace,
stability and reconstruction. An inclusive political
solution is the only way to achieve lasting peace and
security in Iraq. China hopes that the new Government
of Iraq will make further progress in promoting
economic development, improving standards of living
and accelerating the reconstruction process.

The activities carried out by terrorists in Iraq
claimed massive civilian casualties and posed a severe
threat to peace and security in Iraq and to regional and
international peace and security. China commends the
Government and the people of Iraq for their tireless
efforts to counter terrorism, and supports Iraq's efforts
to bring terrorists tojustice, in accordance with relevant
domestic laws.

China takes note of the first report of the United
Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes Committed by Da'esh/Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (see S/2018/1031), and commends
the Team's work. China supports the Investigative
Team in its efforts to protect the victims of terrorism
and cooperate with the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq and other mechanisms so as to
avoid the duplication of functions. It is our hope that
the Investigative Team will act consistent with the
principles and purposes of the Charter of the United
Nations and in strict compliance with resolution 2379
(2017) and the terms of reference in fulfilling its
mandate. We also hope that the Investigative Team,
in consultation with the Government of Iraq and all
relevant parties, will develop a detailed implementation
strategy and complete its initial deployment at an
early date, prioritizing the collection and analysis of
existing evidence and conducting targeted, field-based
investigations.

As noted in the report, the ability of the Investigative
Team to address challenges effectively will depend
on its ability to maintain the trust and support of the
people of Iraq. The Investigative Team should fully
respect Iraq's sovereignty and jurisdiction over crimes
committed in its territory, thereby playing a positive
role in enhancing the capacities of the Iraqi Government
to hold terrorist groups accountable for their crimes.

The situation of international counter-terrorism
efforts remains serious as terrorist forces use diverse
means to conduct terrorist activities and spread
extremist ideas. The international community should
enhance its cooperation, unify its standards and adopt
concrete measures to resolutely fight all terrorist groups
designated by the Security Council. China stands ready
to continue to work with the international community
to make further progress in international counter-
terrorism cooperation.

