The President: Thank you very much,
Mr. Secretary-General for the practical suggestions that
you made, which are very welcome indeed to achieve the
action that we need in Africa, rather than simply the
words and resolutions that we have all become
accustomed to.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs
of the United Kingdom.

How do we build a real partnership between the
United Nations and Africa? First of all, we need a better
partnership between the United Nations and the
Organization of African Unity (OAU). The United
Nations and the OAU should not be competing, but
should instead be looking for cooperation and for synergy.
We need regular consultation between the Security
Council, the Secretary-General of the United Nations and
the OAU's Secretary-General and Chairman. We need
more joint United Nations/OAU envoys, an idea that, of
course, was floated by the Secretary-General in his Africa
report. We need better coordination in New York between
the Council, on the one hand, and the OAU office and the
African Group, on the other; and better coordination at
Addis Ababa between the OAU and representatives of the
Council on the ground. I propose today that the Security
Council should establish a mechanism to work with the
OAU to consider how to take forward these and other
practical ideas, including those suggested by the
Secretary-General for improved consultation.

Secondly, we need better prevention so that African
problems do not turn into conflicts, as so
often, sadly, they have done. Britain would welcome
periodic reporting from the Secretary-General providing
early warning for the Council on situations of growing
concern and recommendations for action. We want to
enhance the Security Council's capacity to monitor and
assess potential trouble spots. We should consider

 

Security Council missions to the region. We should be
more ready to consider preventive deployments, and we
should consider what more we can all do to help boost the
OAU's own conflict-prevention capacity. Britain is already,
of course, providing support to the OAU's Conflict
Prevention Centre in Addis Ababa.

Thirdly, we need much better peacekeeping, and your
remarks, Mr. Secretary-General, about the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Sierra Leone were especially
welcome. We need better peacekeeping when prevention
fails. Why did it take six months to get a United Nations
force moving into Sierra Leone after the Peace Agreement?
Why were advance preparations for a possible peacekeeping
operation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo so
difficult?

This is not a criticism of the Secretary-General or the
Secretariat. It is a criticism of all of us. The Secretary-
General and his team must have our full political support
for new peacekeeping operations, when necessary, with the
right resources, money and people, to make this happen
much more successfully than we have been able to do.

The Secretariat needs larger stocks of key equipment,
ready for rapid deployment, and structures and processes
for delivering quick, effective action.

Fourthly, we must have much better enforcement of
Council decisions, including smarter sanctions. For instance,
the United Nations - and by that I mean United Nations
Member States - has failed to enforce agreed sanctions
resolutions in Angola to stop supplies of fuel, arms and
munitions to Savimbi's murderous UNITA forces. We
applaud Ambassador Fowler' s groundbreaking work, but he
needs practical help, including intelligence and information
from many Governments represented here today, including
Britain's.

I have discussed with the United States, French,
Belgian and Ukrainian Governments, and many African
nations, the need to act now. After the recent military
defeat Savimbi has suffered, now is the time to make
sanctions bite. Far too many corrupt Government officials
in the region are collaborating with supplies to, and
diamond sales from, UNITA. Arms are coming in from
Eastern Europe. It is time that those responsible were
named and shamed. Let us work together to do so.

I also urge all diamond companies and trading centres
to follow DeBeers' lead and refuse to take diamonds from
Angola.

With decisive action now, the United Nations can
end the war in Angola and promote a lasting peace. This
will be a real test of the United Nations willingness to put
Africa much higher on the international community's
agenda, as we in Britain want it to be. That is why I shall
listen keenly to today's discussions, and at the end we
will draw out key points from it for the Security Council
to consider as a basis for new action.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

