Mr. Vilovic' (Croatia): I too would like to join
others in thanking the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ould Abdallah, for presenting
the most recent report of the Secretary-General on
Somalia (S/2009/373), which we welcome. I would
also like to welcome African Union Commissioner
Lamamra and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Somalia, Mr. Omaar, and to thank them for their
presentations today. My delegation would also like to
express its full appreciation to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia
for his tireless efforts and his valuable contribution in
promoting dialogue and reconciliation in Somalia.

Since we had an opportunity on 9 July to discuss
the situation in Somalia (see S/PV.6158), my
delegation would like to make a couple of brief points.

First, we note and express our concern about the
ongoing dire security situation on the ground. In that
context, we reiterate our full support for the
Transitional Federal Government and President Sheikh
Sharif Sheikh Ahmed. We commend their determination
and their action towards a more inclusive political
process and genuine national reconciliation, and we
welcome recent positive political developments in that
respect, which have already been mentioned today.

We add our voice to the calls for all Somali
stakeholders to opt for dialogue and to join the
Djibouti peace process, which continues to be the best
option for lasting peace in Somalia.

Secondly, we strongly condemn all attempts to
halt the current political momentum, destabilize the
Transitional Federal Institutions and undermine the
Djibouti peace process. We call for an immediate
cessation of hostilities and deplore the toll that
insurgent attacks have taken on both the civilian
population and the already dire humanitarian situation
in the country. Of particular concern to us was the
extensive recruitment and training of children, as noted
in the report of the Secretary-General. We echo the
Secretary-General's call for the immediate cessation of
such practices. Also, we urge all parties involved in the
conflict to adhere to international humanitarian law and
to respect human rights.

We also continue to be extremely concerned
about reports of foreign interference with regard to
insurgent attacks taking place in Somalia, as well as
with the destabilizing potential of such actions for the
whole region. We are therefore heartened by today's
statement by Foreign Minister Omaar that, without
foreign interference, the Transitional Federal
Government would be able to ensure peace and
security on the entire territory of Somalia.

As we have previously stated, we are ready to act
in the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 751 (1992) on the basis of the reports
presented by the Monitoring Group, whose work and
findings we very much value and strongly support.

Thirdly, while appreciating the untiring efforts of
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and
its troop-contributing countries, we call for the
strengthening of its capacities through fulfilment of
troop-contributing pledges and bilateral aid, as well as
through the Trust Fund for AMISOM. We also
appreciate all efforts and initiatives aimed at improving
the capacity of Somalia's security sector, in particular
as an accountable and capable security and police
force; this represents the backbone of achieving
stability in the country.

Finally, we strongly support the work done thus
far by all actors to tackle the issue of piracy off the
coast of Somalia. Croatia is pleased to be able to make
its contribution to the anti-piracy efforts and to
participate actively in the European Union naval
operation, Operation Atalanta.

