Mr. O'Brien: I would like to begin my briefing by
expressing my deepest condolences to those affected by
the recent attacks of the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) perpetrated in France and Lebanon.

The Syria crisis is a chronicle of missed
opportunities on the part of the Security Council,
Member States with influence on the parties and the
broader international community to bring the conflict
to an end. More than five years since the unrest in Syria
began, the parties to the conflict continue to commit
unthinkable atrocities on a daily basis, plunging Syria
and its citizens deeper into darkness. I very much
welcome the recent international talks in Vienna. That
momentum must be seized to leave no stone unturned
to put an end to the horrendous war that has cost the
lives of an estimated 250,000 people, given rise to
extremist and terrorist groups and reduced much of
the country - a middle-income country - to rubble.
The fighting has also propelled the world's largest
humanitarian crisis of the twenty-first century, with
some 13.5 million people in Syria in need of some
form of humanitarian assistance, including 6 million
children, and it has driven over 4 million people to seek
safe refuge outside their home country.

The neighbouring countries are shouldering most
of the burden with remarkable generosity and sacrifice.
Yet, many Syrians, who have lost hope and are fleeing
unspeakable violence and whose resources are all but
depleted, are willing to risk their lives in perilous
journeys across the Mediterranean. Some 400,000
people - over 50 per cent of the arrivals by sea in
2015 - are Syrian. And still they flee - yesterday,
today, and without a political settlement, tomorrow and
the day after, and the day after that - each day, even
as winter approaches and, I sadly predict, all the way
through it.

Security Council members and the international
community must also redouble their efforts to oblige
the parties to finally comply with the demands made by
the Council in resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165(2014) and
2191 (2014). As we have sat in the Council Chamber
month after month, we have borne witness to the failure
of all the parties to the conflict to protect civilians.
Each month, I speak of what seems like never-ending
Violence killing innocent civilians, including children.

The indiscriminate use of weapons continues
unabated in the Syria conflict. In October, hundreds of
civilians were killed orinjuredin direct orindiscriminate
attacks by all parties, owing to the continued use of
explosive weapons in populated areas, including through
barrel bombs and other aerial weapons, shelling and car
bombs. On 30 October, several air strikes hit the Al-Hal
market in Douma, rural Damascus, killing at least 60
civilians and injuring 200 more. The day before, air
strikes reportedly hit the main field hospital in Douma
killing at least 15 civilians and injuring 50 others.
Following these attacks, Jaish Al-Islam reportedly used
dozens of prisoners as human shields, placed in cages
around heavily populated areas, to seek to deter further
air strikes in civilian areas. Elsewhere, just a few days
ago, on 10 November, more than 23 people were killed
and 40 injured when non-State armed opposition groups
caused two explosions in Lattakia city.

Meanwhile, ISIL and other terrorist and extremist
groups continue to cause carnage across the country.
For example, in Aleppo governorate, ISIL detonated a
vehicle-borne improvised explosive device in Haritan,
killing more than 20 people in early October. Not only
are such indiscriminate attacks a tragedy that kills and
injures innocent people; they may also amount to war
crimes. The perpetrators must be aware that they will
one day be held accountable for their actions.

The pace of displacement in Syria remains
relentless. In Aleppo, at least 50,000 people are
confirmed to have been displaced since early October
following an escalation of fighting between non-State
armed opposition groups and the Government of Syria.
The number could be as high as 100,000. ISIL attacks
on Mahin and Hawarin in eastern rural Homs in late
October has led to the displacement of an estimated
25,000 people. Further displacement is expected to
continue at a similar rate unless there is a reduction in
the violence.

Attacks on civilian infrastructure also continue
unabated, including relentless attacks against health-
care facilities and personnel across the country.
According to Physicians for Human Rights, in October
there were 16 attacks on medical facilities - the highest
in a single month since the conflict began - and seven
medical staff were killed. Parties to the conflict must
ensure respect for, and protection of, health facilities
and personnel and patients under international
humanitarian law.

Meanwhile, medicines and medical supplies
continue to be prevented from reaching those who
desperately need them. The overall impact on the health
situation has been devastating, with many civilians,
particularly in areas not controlled by the Government,
unable to access even the most basic medical care. The
routine immunization coverage in Syria has dropped
from 95 per cent in 2010 to 64 per cent in 2015, and
in some places, is as low as 20 per cent. This poses an
acute risk for deadly epidemic disease in many areas.
Surely, meeting the health needs of children, who
represent our future, should be considered the lowest
common denominator of our humanity. We need a firm
commitment from the parties to the conflict to take all
necessary measures to protect civilians and stop the
targeting of civilian infrastructure, including medical
facilities, schools and key infrastructure networks.

In spite of repeated calls by the Council,
humanitarian actors continue to be prevented from
gaining sustained, unhindered access to millions of
people in need. While active conflict and insecurity
are limiting factors, the parties continue to delay or
obstruct assistance to people in need. We have only
been able to reach a small proportion of the 4.5 million
people in need in hard-to-reach areas in 2015. Nearly
half of those in need in hard-to-reach areas - some
2.2 million - are living under terror and subjugation in
ISIL-controlled areas, to which the United Nations and
its partners continue to have virtually no access. We
must spare no effort to ensure that these people receive
the assistance they desperately need.

The parties to the conflict, largely ISIL and the
Government of Syria, continue to use siege as a war
tactic, with an estimated 393,700 people living under
siege. This includes some 200,000 people under siege by
ISIL in Deir-ez-Zor city; some 181,200 people beseeged
by the Syrian Government in various locations in
eastern Ghutah, as well as Darayya and Zabadani in
rural Damascus; and some 12,500 people under siege
by non- State armed opposition groups and the Al-Nusra
Front in Foah and Kefraya in Idlib. These people have
next to no access to the basic essentials of life and our
ability to reach them is extremely limited. So far in
2015, the United Nations has been able to reach only
3.5 per cent of people with health assistance and only
0.7 per cent of people with food per month in besieged
areas. Such an inhumane tactic of war is unlawful and
must end immediately.

As I have said to the Council before, we need to
make urgent progress to reach people in hard-to-reach
and besieged areas as living conditions in these areas
continue to deteriorate and the onset of winter is not
far away. So far this year, only 30 per cent of the
convoy requests made by the United Nations have been
approved in principle by the Syrian Ministry of Foreign
Affairs, and less than half of those approved have been
able to actually proceed due to a combination of lack
of final security clearances from Syrian authorities,
lack of safe passage from non-State armed opposition
groups, and insecurity.

I call upon the Syrian authorities to urgently approve
the 46 currently pending inter-agency convoy requests
and allow convoys previously agreed in principle,
which are awaiting their clearance, to proceed. I also
call on non-State armed opposition groups, as well as
listed terrorist groups, to allow the deliveries they are
preventing. Over 1.4 million people in hard-to-reach and
besieged locations would be assisted if these convoys
were able to proceed. The planned humanitarian airlift
to Deir ez-Zor, although approved, has been unable
to proceed due to the deteriorating security situation
around the airport.

Despite all the challenges, the United Nations and
partners continue to reach millions of people in need
through all modalities. In the past month alone, the
United Nations and its partners delivered food aid to
over 4 million people; water, sanitation and hygiene
support to over 3.5 million; and medicines and supplies
for 717,000 treatments. The commitment and bravery
of the thousands of aid workers who deliver much-
needed aid at great personal risk - particularly Syrian
organizations, the Syrian Arab Red Crescent and
volunteers, who are often the first responders on the
front lines - are deeply humbling.

I once again stress the need for the United Nations
to be able to use all modalities, across conflict lines
and across borders, in order to reach people in need
in Syria wherever they may be found. Resolutions
2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014) have made a difference by
enabling the United Nations and partners to reach some
people in need who were largely inaccessible before.
Through cross-border deliveries, the United Nations
and partners have been able to regularly reach millions
of people. This complements the crucial work of
international non-governmental actors, who continue
to provide large-scale assistance across the country. We
remain committed to reaching all those in need, and we
need any and every route possible to do this.

The status quo in Syria simply cannot continue. We
have seen the devastating consequences of failing to act.
This failure has eroded confidence in the international
community. The people of Syria deserve more than the
discussions we are having or the aid we are providing.
They deserve an end to this senseless violence.

The recent international talks in Vienna provide
a glimmer of light that international diplomacy can
provide a solution to the conflict. We must take
advantage of this rare moment of diplomatic opportunity
to push for a negotiated political solution and create
the conditions for a nationwide ceasefire. At the same
time, this new diplomatic momentum should be used
to generate early dividends for the Syrian people. Most
immediately, I urge the Council and relevant Member
States to use their influence to press for an end to the
use of indiscriminate weapons and to take steps to
ensure unhindered humanitarian access to all people in
need throughout Syria.

I sincerely hope that progress will be made and
that the incoming year will finally see an end to the
conflict in Syria. We cannot squander this moment or
momentum; all of us must stand up and play our part to
bring an end to this conflict for once and for all.

