Mr. Kerim (The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia): At the outset, I should like to express our
deep regret that the Security Council was not able to
achieve a consensus on Iraq. The Republic of
Macedonia consistently supported Council members in
their search for an agreed way forward towards
achieving the objective of the immediate, full and
unconditional disarmament of Iraq, in accordance with
Security Council resolution 1441 (2002).

Unfortunately, the Iraqi regime did not
comprehend the seriousness of the situation and failed
yet again to fulfil its obligations to disarm,
disregarding the demands of the international
community. If Iraq had made a real effort to cooperate
in substance during the past 12 years - especially in
the light of Security Council resolution 1441 (2002),
which provided a final opportunity for peaceful
disarmament - it would have been possible to avoid
the current situation. The action that is being led by the
"coalition of the willing" represents the last resort, and
it is in accordance with the relevant United Nations
resolutions.

The energy of the Security Council must now be
focused on the humanitarian aspect of the Iraqi crisis.
The current divisions and disagreements among
Council members must be immediately resolved in
order to meet the humanitarian needs of the Iraqi
population. We support the plan aimed at continuing
and adapting, in a manner consistent with the proposals
put forward by the Secretary-General, the oil for food
programme, which must be provided with adequate
authorization to ensure the rapid delivery of
humanitarian assistance in Iraq. Failure to take action
under these circumstances will only further exacerbate
the situation on the ground.

The Secretary-General stressed the necessity of
respecting the territorial integrity of Iraq and "the right
of the Iraqi people to determine their own political
future and control their own natural resources". We
fully share his view on this issue. Iraq's territorial
integrity must be fully preserved, and sovereignty
should be restored as soon as possible to the people of
Iraq, who alone are entitled to decide their future. The
international community's help and support will be
essential for Iraq in the days to come. The United
Nations sanctions must be lifted as soon as possible
and followed immediately by an international
reconstruction programme.

In conclusion, as we have stated in the Security
Council's previous open debates on this issue, we urge
Council members to seek the broadest possible
consensus on achieving objectives with regard to Iraq.
The possibility of a huge humanitarian crisis in that
country makes it even more imperative that the
Council's effectiveness and unity be restored.

