Mr. Skoknic Tapia (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation thanks the Permanent Mission of Peru for
having convened today's open debate on the linkages
between terrorism and organized crime, thereby
addressing an important issue that presents serious
emerging challenges to international peace and security.

We thank the briefers for their presentations
and welcome the fact that the Council is once again
focusing its attention on the issue and continuing to
provide a space to analyse the phenomenon. It has held
several meetings on the subject in recent years, which
have led to concrete results, including resolutions
2195 (2014), 2331 (2016) and 2370 (2017) and various
presidential statements.

One of the main features of the rapid evolution
of terrorism in recent years has been its progressive
and strong link with activities related to transnational
organized crime, which is essentially reflected in the
way in which its operatives acquire resources to fund
their illicit activities. Similarly, the line between the
criminal and political motives underlying terrorism-
related crimes is becoming increasingly blurred.
The issue is of particular relevance to our region
because of the serious consequences of organized
crime in our countries. In Latin America, in particular
in South America, the terrorist threat stems, to a large
extent, from organized crime groups. Drug-trafficking
groups have resorted to terrorist tactics to protect their
economic interests and show strength through violence.
Factors such as high levels of corruption, the lack of
resources in the security sector and permeable borders,
among others, facilitate the financing of terrorism
and organized crime, which are mutually reinforcing,
in particular in vulnerable areas. Organized crime
undermines the rule of law, erodes international
security and, ultimately, violates human rights, all of
which are unacceptable. The United Nations system,
especially the Security Council, must take preventive
action, which is why today's debate is so important.

Major transnational terrorist groups engage in a
range of criminal activities to fund their operational
needs, propaganda, recruitment and training. For
example, the self-proclaimed Islamic State uses various
formats for organized crime, such as trade in natural
resources and trafficking in persons and cultural goods.
The nexus between crime and terrorism is clear; the
response must therefore be forceful and multisectoral.

Cooperation in border areas and information-sharing
among the various Government agencies, such as
intelligence services and the police, as well as with
international organizations, are indispensable in the
fight against terrorism and organized crime. In that
context, we laud the close cooperation between the
Security Council and INTERPOL and call for that
body to continue cooperating with the Council and
other relevant entities. The role of international and
regional bodies in promoting cooperation and providing
technical assistance is crucial.

Chile attaches great importance to the full and
effective implementation of the 40 recommendations of
the Financial Action Task Force on money-laundering
and terrorist financing, which are recognized as the
global standard in that area. We understand that money-
laundering continues to facilitate the commission
of organized crime activities because of the need for
criminal groups to conceal the illicit origin of funds.

Lastly, our country is committed to implementing
Security Council resolutions and sanctions against
transnational terrorist groups. Their effective
implementation helps to combat organized crime
by providing a holistic preventive framework that
includes curbing the export of arms and the diversion
of financing for illicit purposes, as well as ensuring
adequate control of migration flows.

