Mr. Wibisono (Indonesia): My delegation wishes to
extend its congratulations to you and the delegation of
Canada on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of April. We remain
confident that under your able guidance, the issue before us
will be brought to a successful conclusion. May I also
extend our felicitations to your predecessor, Ambassador
Anwarul Karim Chowdhury of Bangladesh, for his skilful
stewardship of the Council's activities last month. We
would also like to join other delegations in expressing our
appreciation to the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, and
to the President of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, Mr. Jakob Kellenberger, for their statements earlier
this morning.

It is one of the tragic ironies of the contemporary
world that despite the adoption of numerous conventions on
international humanitarian and human rights law during the
past five decades, which uphold the rights of civilians and
the obligations of combatants during conflict situations,
civilians have become the targets of brutality, terror and
indiscriminate killing. It is particularly unconscionable that
women and children are also victims of atrocities. Such dire
situations call for a multifaceted approach that would
provide legal and physical protection to civilians during
hostilities.

The report of the Secretary-General contained in
document S/1999/957 enumerates a number of measures to
strengthen both these aspects of protection. Their adoption
and implementation would compel the parties to a conflict
to respect the rights guaranteed to civilians under
international law and conventions. Despite the coming into
force of a comprehensive framework of international
humanitarian and human rights law, the rights of civilians
have often been violated. Hence, their implementation is of
utmost importance in ensuring the safety and security of the
civilians, which are their inherent rights.

In those endeavours, it is equally important to
acknowledge that international law does not take
precedence over national law and legislation, while a
balance must be sought to harmonize the sacrosanct
principle of national sovereignty with the provisions of the
United Nations Charter. It follows that any action or
intervention must necessarily be based on the consent of the
States concerned, rather than unilateral imposition.
Indonesia is gratified to note that in some of the conflict
areas dealt with by the Council, respect for sovereignty and
territorial integrity was reaffirmed. At the same time,
Indonesia is also saddened to learn that an absence of
respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity remains
obvious in a country which now continues to experience
internal conflicts.

Our attention is also drawn to the need for
monitoring, addressing and understanding the root causes
and implications of conflicts in order to facilitate the
consideration of options and to prevent the outbreak of
violence. As peace and stability and socio-economic
development are interlinked, close cooperation and
coordination between the General Assembly, the Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council would
facilitate a comprehensive approach to these multifaceted
issues. In this context, it is pertinent to note the
communication from the President of the Security Council
addressed to the President of the General Assembly,
contained in document S/2000/ 119 of 14 February 2000,
which sought the Assembly's views on the strengthening
of the Organization's capacity to plan and deploy rapidly
and the modalities to mobilize international support for
security forces from Member States.

Finally, Indonesia, while regretting the lack of
consultations with the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations, welcomes the Secretary-
General's Bulletin on the guidelines on compliance with
international humanitarian law by United Nations
peacekeepers. We believe that such guidelines can help
promote not only the safety and security of the United
Nations peace troopers but also the safety and security of
the civilians.

In sum, we agree that the plight of civilians in
armed conflicts can no longer be neglected and can be
dealt with only within a comprehensive framework of
action. Let me express Indonesia's unequivocal support
for the role of the United Nations in humanitarian
activities and for the Organization's consistent
commitment in upholding international humanitarian and
human rights law.

