Mr. Schulz (Germany): Germany aligns itself
with the statement delivered by the observer of the
European Union.

In my own statement, I would like to focus on three
issues in particular.

First, I would like to speak on the elections, as
so many previous speakers have done. Preparations
are taking place amid enormous challenges in terms
of logistics, security and the political climate. For
the first time, Afghan institutions are taking on those
challenges on their own, and thanks to their efforts,
preparations are largely on track today - at least in a
technical sense, as we learned in the briefing - despite
all obstacles. It is crucial that those parliamentary
elections, which have been postponed several times,
do take place. Equally important is that they must be
held in a timely, free, fair and transparent manner. The
Afghan people deserve no less, just as they deserve
more progress in fighting corruption, establishing the
rule of law and respecting human rights.

Secondly, with respect to the peace process, with
its offer of unconditional talks and the unprecedented
June ceasefire, the Afghan Government has shown
great courage for the sake of peace, even while the
Afghan National Defence and Security Forces are
putting their lives at risk to defend Afghan citizens
against attacks every day. Those acts of statesmanship
on the part of President Ghani and Chief Executive
Abdullah command our respect. Efforts should now be
focused on initiating direct talks between the Afghan
Government and the Taliban. Confidence-building
measures, such as ceasefires, are useful, but the Taliban
must not be allowed to garner international credit while
running away from the negotiating table.

The countries of the region, many of which have
already spoken today, can contribute greatly. In
particular, the policy statements issued by the new
Pakistani Government have raised hopes. We have seen
some encouraging signs. There is now an opportunity
to end the conflict in Afghanistan if Afghans and the
international community lend their united support.

Thirdly and lastly, with regard to the importance of
Afghanistan's young generation, we watched with great
satisfaction as Mr. Bakthiar - the first-ever Afghan
youth representative to the United Nations - so aptly
briefed the Council today. I thank him very much
for that. The average age in Afghanistan, as we have
already heard today, is just a little more than 18. More
than 40 per cent of its population is under the age of
14. Against that background, it is a truism that children
and young people play a tremendously important
role in Afghan society. It is also true that we need to
increase efforts in basic education, child protection
and including younger people in the political process,
especially younger women. We see encouraging signs
in that regard, but more has to be done.

Germany actively contributes to academic
infrastructure and formation in Afghanistan. In
the field of information technology (IT), Germany
supported the creation of several university IT centres,
an IT department at the Ministry of Higher Education,
and the IT Competence Centre ofAfghanistan in Kabul,
as well as the establishment of a computer science
master's programme for Afghan lecturers, to offer a
few examples.

In conclusion, Germany continues to support the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and commends the Head of UNAMA for
his great work, as well as the United Nations agencies
working in Afghanistan. Germany remains deeply
committed to the Afghan people, in close cooperation
with the Afghan Government and our international
partners. We will certainly make this issue a focus of
our upcoming term as a non-permanent member of the
Security Council.

