Mr. Valero Bricefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela welcomes the briefing by
Mr. Robert Serry, United Nations Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process and Personal
Representative of the Secretary-General to the
Palestine Liberation Organization and the Palestinian
Authority.

We endorse the statement made by Ambassador
Maged Abdelaziz, Permanent Representative of the
Arab Republic of Egypt, on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.

Mr. Maxwell Gaylard, United Nations
Coordinator for Humanitarian and Development
Activities in the Occupied Palestinian Territory,
warned recently that thousands of Bedouins would be
affected by the demolitions that are being carried out
by the Government of Israel in Jerusalem with a view
to expanding illegal settlements of Israeli citizens.
According to Mr. Gaylard, this year more homes have
been demolished than in all of 2009 or 2010, leaving
homeless refugees who have been living in that area
since 1948.

This serious situation threatens to displace 80 per
cent of the Bedouins who inhabit the region. In
addition, thousands of Palestinian families have been
forcibly displaced from their residential areas. The
increased illegal Israeli settlements, home demolitions
and the prohibition on new Palestinian construction
must all be condemned. All of those illegal and
inhuman acts are obvious examples of the apartheid
system imposed by the Israeli Government and are
carried out with total impunity by the occupying
Power, highlighting the Council's inaction.

Pursuant to the right to self-determination, the
immediate recognition of the State of Palestine and its
incorporation as a full member of the General
Assembly have been proposed. My delegation
reaffirms the sovereign right of peoples to choose their
own destiny. Venezuela reiterates its call on the
Government of Israel to fully respect the provisions of
the Fourth Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Times of War within
the Palestinian territories, including Eastern Jerusalem
and the other occupied Arab territories.

Bradley Burston, senior editor at the Israeli
newspaper Haaretz, has pointed out that

"[t]here is nearly nothing which more effectively
delegitimizes Israel - and makes Israel look
more like an uncaring blockhead state - than
does the siege of Gaza".

There is no doubt that the fragile humanitarian
situation of Palestinians in the Gaza Strip is deplorable.
The blockade imposed in that region is inhuman and
illegal, as is the wall built by Israel in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem and its
surroundings.

The unacceptable and relentless actions of the
occupying Power against suffering Palestinian citizens
have resulted in the most shameless violations of their
human rights. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
firmly demands once again an unrestricted and
immediate end to those inhuman, illegal and unilateral
measures.

Venezuela expresses its concern over the serious
events that took place in the occupied Syrian Golan on
15 May and 5 June, when Israeli soldiers massacred
numerous Palestinian citizens who were peacefully
protesting against the occupation. Venezuela once
again calls on Israel to withdraw from that territory, in
compliance with the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council. We also again request the State of
Israel to respect the sovereignty of the State of
Lebanon in order to avoid a conflict such as that which
took place in July 2006.

My country proclaims the values of freedom,
independence and sovereignty, which must continue to
be strengthened in order to achieve peace between
peoples. Again, without justice there can be no peace.

