Mr. Gambari: On 17 October, I briefed the
Council on the activities of the United Nations Office
in Angola (UNOA) since April 2001, as contained in
the Secretary-General's report in document S/200l/956
of 10 October 2001. Today, I will simply highlight
some of those developments and update the Council on
the others.

It is unfortunate that fighting in Angola has
continued and, in some cases, intensified. The guerrilla
activities of UNITA have spread to several parts of the
country and, indeed, UNITA has claimed responsibility
for attacking the locality of Caxito in Bengo province
in May, for shooting at a World Food Programme plane
near Kuito in June and for attacking a passenger train
in Kwanza Norte in August. These attacks have caused
over 400 civilian deaths and many more injuries.

The Government of Angola has launched a
number of military offensives in the past weeks,
particularly in the eastern province of Moxico, where it
was reported that the Government took 600 UNITA
combatants prisoner, 100 have surrendered and over
1,000 armament pieces were captured. UNITA's
strategic operational command centres were also
reported to have been destroyed by Government forces.

The continuation of the fighting continues to have
a devastating effect on the country's social fabric and
has further impoverished its people. In general, the
humanitarian situation has deteriorated. Today, a tenth
of all Angolans depend upon food assistance to
survive. Humanitarian agencies report that the
condition of children in Angola is very serious.
Furthermore, war has also led to massive population
displacements in Angola. A total of 4.1 million people
are estimated to be displaced. Since the beginning of
this year alone, humanitarian agencies estimate that as
many as 323,000 persons are likely to have been
displaced by war-related violence and warn that the
number of newly displaced persons could reach
350,000 for the year. War, conflict and displacement
have led to significant urbanization. Around 60 per
cent of the Angolan population lives in urban areas
today and the continuation of the fighting is likely to
aggravate the situation further.

Concerning the peace process, the Government of
Angola has continued to reaffirm its commitment to
peace within the framework of the Lusaka Protocol. In
this regard, the Government of Angola also established
the Fund For Peace and National Reconciliation and
approved a four-point peace plan early this year. On 11
November, in an independence anniversary speech,
President dos Santos, inter alia, reaffirmed the validity
of the Lusaka Protocol and declared that his
Government is ready to discuss ways, mechanisms and
guarantees to integrate all citizens who are part of the
military wing of UNITA led by Mr. Savimbi.

In May, Mr. Savimbi requested the Church,
through a letter, to continue its search for peace and
national reconciliation in Angola. The leadership of
UNITA further issued a document entitled "Proposals
for the Solution of the Angolan Conflict". And in a
letter addressed to the Secretary-General, UNITA
reiterated its interpretation of the Lusaka Protocol.
Although UNITA appeared to accept the continuing
validity of the Lusaka Protocol, many of the specific
proposals emanating from these communications
appear to lie outside the framework of that Protocol.

On its part, the Church responded by reiterating
its appeal for an urgent ceasefire and by forming a
peace network comprising several prominent church
and civil society leaders. Furthermore, the Angolan
National Assembly decided to create a Commission for
Peace and National Reconciliation, which is to examine
the prospects for establishing mechanisms that may
facilitate contacts with the main parties and other
relevant actors.

In a speech to the Central Committee of the
ruling MPLA on 23 August 2001, President dos Santos
announced his intention not to stand as a candidate in
the next general elections. However, he also indicated
that there were several preconditions before the
elections could take place, such as the need to revise
the electoral law, adopt a new constitution, carry out a
census, resettle displaced populations and have security
guarantees in place.

After my last visit to Angola in May 2001, I
reported to the Council that there were issues on which
the Angolan Government would like the United
Nations to begin immediate engagement with its
representatives. These are, first, the management of the
Peace and Reconciliation Fund; secondly, the pilot
project for the resettlement of demobilized soldiers and
internally displaced people; and, thirdly, national
elections projected for the second part of 2002. In a
letter to the Secretary-General, President dos Santos
formally sought the assistance of the United Nations in
these areas. Consequently, a multi-agency United
Nations team was sent to Angola in late September to
discuss the details of the request with the authorities.
The mission has since returned to Headquarters and the
results of its findings and recommendations were
considered at high-level meetings in the Secretariat.
The report submitted by the mission will be shared
with the Government of Angola and a follow-up
programme of action is being prepared by the
Secretariat.

Meanwhile, in our view, careful attention needs to
be paid to the situation in the Angola-Zambia border
area. According to UNOA's assessment, the situation
there is neither secure nor stable. Refugees continue to
arrive from Angola into the western province of
Zambia, reportedly in deplorable conditions. Quite
apart from the humanitarian concerns, it is important
that the recent efforts of the Governments of Angola
and Zambia to improve security coordination and
cooperation along their common border not be
jeopardized.

Finally, in his report of 10 October, the Secretary-
General urged the international community to continue
to exert its influence and to assist the parties in finding
lasting peace in Angola within the framework of the
Lusaka Protocol, including through the identification
of practical steps that can help the parties to return to
the resolution of their outstanding issues under the
Lusaka Protocol and also encouraging the positive role
of civil society in promoting lasting peace in Angola.

Just as I was coming here, our Office in Angola
informed me that, today, President dos Santos met with
the President of COIEPA, one of the leaders of civil
society in Angola. We consider this to be a positive
development. In any case, the Secretary-General has
directed me to visit Angola later this year, upon
invitation of the Government, for consultations with
the Government and other stakeholders in the country
on how best the United Nations could help in the
search for a negotiated peace, so that we can bring the
fighting to an end in Angola. The people of Angola
deserve peace so that they can enjoy the benefits of the
resources which God has given them.

