Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): As this is the
first open meeting of the Council in February, Ijoin
others in extending to you, Sir, and the Japanese
delegation our congratulations on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for this month.

I would also like to extend to Ambassador Ripert
and the French delegation our sincere appreciation for
their effective leadership of the work of the Council
last month.

I thank the Secretary-General for his first report on
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL). I also thank Michael von der
Schulenburg, head of the Office, for his detailed
presentation of the report. I further thank Ambassador
Frank Majoor of the Netherlands for his statement in his
capacity as the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission's
country-specific configuration on Sierra Leone.

I welcome Ambassador Shekou Touray of Sierra
Leone and thank him for his statement.

My delegation notes with pleasure that Sierra
Leone continues to achieve progress in implementing
its agenda for peace consolidation and socio-economic
reconstruction, partially reflected in its overall stable
political and security situation, its enhanced dialogue
with countries of the Mano River Union aimed at
resolving issues of mutual interest, its successful
conduct of the local council polls in July 2008, and the
determination of its Government to tackle the country's
challenges in a peaceful manner. We also note with
satisfaction the continued cooperation between Sierra
Leone and the United Nations country team, the
Peacebuilding Commission and other development
partners to strengthen areas of focus and principles of
national ownership, mutual accountability and
sustained engagement, as contained in the
Peacebuilding Cooperation Framework and the Joint
Vision of the United Nations Family for Sierra Leone.

On another note, while we realize that the
situation remains of concern, we commend the
Government for its determination and initial success in
the fight against corruption. At the same time, we share
the Secretary-General's concerns about the unresolved
political tension along ethnic and regional lines; the
emerging threat of piracy, illicit drug trafficking and
illegal trade in natural resources; the marginalization
and disempowerment of rural and certain urban
communities; the high numbers of unemployed youth;
as well as poor economic and social conditions
exacerbated by the rising price of food and fuel, which,
in our assessment, if not carefully managed have the
potential of derailing the peace consolidation process.

We commend the efforts of UNIPSIL in taking
over the responsibilities of the United Nations
Integrated Office in Sierra Leone as planned, and in
proceeding with its new mandate stipulated in Security
Council resolution 1829 (2008). At this critical
juncture of peacebuilding in Sierra Leone, we believe
that coordination among United Nations agencies,
regional organizations and international donors
remains essential so as to ensure maximal use of
resources, avoid duplication of work and help serve the
best interests of Sierra Leone in each particular phase
of development.

Finally, let me reaffirm that Viet Nam will
continue to support the efforts of Sierra Leone to
assume leadership and achieve more concrete progress
in sustaining peace and stability, addressing the root
causes of the conflict, promoting national
reconciliation and unity, accelerating progress towards
achieving the Millennium Development Goals, and
strengthening its international integration process. We
call upon the United Nations, the Peacebuilding
Commission, the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States and the
international community at large to continue to assist
the Government of Sierra Leone in these efforts.

