Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): Iwould like
to begin by warmly thanking the Senegalese presidency
for convening this meeting on a very important topic
for the Security Council and for the United Nations
in general. I also to thank today's briefers: Mr. Jan
Eliasson, Deputy Secretary-General of the United
Nations; Ms. Michaelle Jean, Secretary-General of
the International Organization of La Francophonie;
Mr. Yuri Fedotov, Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime; Mr.Jean-Paul
Laborde, Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate; and Mr. Arthur
Boutellis, Director of the Brian Urquhart Centre for
Peace Operations.

As we have just heard, the United Nations must
face up to increasingly complex and non-permissive
environments as they engage in actions in the field.
That has been true for some time now for many special
political missions, which operate in particularly
difficult circumstances in terms of security. That has
been the case for over 14 years in Afghanistan, where
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
has supported the restoration of governance and has
done so faced with the threat of the Taliban and other
terrorist groups. And the same can be said for the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya, the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq and the African
Union Mission to Somalia.

In the framework of peacekeeping operations, the
prevailing need of protecting civilians is increasingly
confronted by asymmetrical threats. That is
particularly the case in Mali, where the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA) must face such threats while
it focuses on the protection of civilians and supports
the peace process. The adoption of a robust posture is
clearly notjust desirable, but indispensable. In Security
Council resolution 2295 (2016), the Council conferred
the necessary mandate upon MINUSMA in order to
be able to respond to the threats it faces and to protect
Blue Helmets.

In that regard, I wish to pay tribute once again to
the soldiers of MINUSMA and to all the soldiers of
peacekeeping operations, who perform their duties
in particularly difficult conditions. In particular
today, I am thinking about the Togolese contingent of
MINUSMA, saddened by the death of one Blue Helmet,
the wounding of several of his comrades and the death
of several Malian civilians who died in those attacks. I
extend the condolences of France to the families of the
victims and to the authorities of Togo and Mali.

MINUSMA is not alone in operating in a very
complex theatre, and it can count on the full support
of France. Every day, the Barkhane Force carries out
counter-terrorism operations in Mali, and more widely
in the Sahel to support States in the region. It does so
while simultaneously providing support to MINUSMA
and by working to improve security of the Blue Helmets.

The need to face such asymmetrical threats should
shape our deployment of peacekeeping operations and
also the way in which they function. There is a need to
make efforts along those lines on several fronts.

First, with regard to planning, an in-depth analysis
upstream of deployment would allow us to properly
identify threats and challenges that peacekeeping
operations must respond to. The establishment of the
Strategic Force Generation and Capabilities Planning
Cell, as proposed by the Secretary-General and to which
France provides financial support, should provide us
with a body that is in place to respond to the need for
improved planning.

Secondly, building on that, we need to properly
define the mandates and the stance to be adopted by
peacekeeping operations. The Security Council must
give a clear mandate to peacekeeping operations in
terms of the use of force as and when that may be
necessary. The goal is to foster a robust posture that
will allow for a response to threats and also allow the
mandate to be properly implemented while such threats
are grappled with. That has been the step taken by the
Council in terms of MINUSMA, but also in the case of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo where we
mandated an Intervention Brigade.

Thirdly, peacekeeping operations must be equipped
with appropriate resources, whether those be human
resources or the necessary equipment in order to fulfil
their mandate. Intelligence-gathering and analysis
capacity are vital to anticipate and understand the
threats on the ground. The development of autonomous
intelligence-gathering capacities must contribute along
those lines. We must also strengthening the security
of United Nations staff on the ground, including by
demining. In that regard, I wish to commend action
undertaken by the United Nations Mine Action Service
in many theatres.

Finally, given the urgency of certain situations, it
is important to think about the introduction of reactive
procedures that would equip the contingents with
appropriate materiel.

Having troops who speak the local languages
is also an essential factor, as underscored at the
ministerial conference on peacekeeping in Francophone
environments in Paris. That conference brought
together several French-speaking and non-French
speaking troop-contributing countries to identify
necessary strategies in order to better respond to the
specific threats posed in theatres operation in the
French-speaking world. That was not just an issue of
the language, but also force generation, the provision
of equipment and crisis emergence. I would like to pay
particular tribute to the efforts made by the International
Organization of La Francophonie and the personal
engagement of its Secretary-General to uphold the role
of the Francophone community as a key actor in the
international community, including in international
peace and security.

Responding to all the challenges that lie before
us requires deepening the triangular dialogue on
cooperation between the Security Council, the
Secretariat and troop- and police-contributing
countries. The establishment of a Strategic Force
Generation and Capabilities Planning Cell, a step that
we support, will contribute to that cooperation.

Responding to asymmetrical threats, but also
permanently reducing them, means that we have
to identify the root causes and the mechanisms to
identify early warning signs and to act in response in
advance. That involves thinking about the way in which
the United Nations system, at all levels, takes into
account the threat of violent extremism. In that regard,
the Secretary-General's Plan of Action to Prevent
Violent Extremism proposes useful and very relevant
recommendations.

The theatres where peacekeeping operations are
deployed are particularly vulnerable to the threat of
violent extremism, given the political, security and,
indeed, economic and social challenges that loom
over them. That point that has been made repeatedly.
Given the reality with which we are confronted,
we need to better understand that phenomenon and
craft appropriate responses in those theatres, always
upholding human rights. To that end, we would like
to encourage the strengthening of contacts among
peacekeeping operations, United Nations agencies
and th relevant United Nations bodies on combating
violent extremism, especially the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate. That dimension must
be taken into account in a more systematic fashion in the
support given to host countries - for example, in the
framework of national programmes on disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, or support to security
sector reform. The exchange of good practices should
be encouraged in order to help host countries to better
face that scourge.

Peacekeeping operations have to deal with
increasingly complex contexts and challenges. They
are all the more necessary for protecting civilian
populations and in maintaining international peace
and security. France will continue to participate and
to very actively support United Nations peacekeeping
operations, and we will play our full part in the quest
for greater effectiveness and greater relevance of such
operations. That is in fact one of the core goals of the
Organization.

