Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank the
Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, Mr. Wane, and President Mogae for their
briefings. Let me take this opportunity to reiterate
the full support of the United Kingdom for their work
and for the work of the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan.

I would not normally take the floor before
consultations, but the horrifying and entrenched
situation in South Sudan compels me to speak out.

Two weeks ago, the people of South Sudan
should have been celebrating that young country's
Independence Day. They should have been celebrating
six years of progress, six years of a country learning to
stand on its own two feet. But six years on, South Sudan
is not standing. It is barely even crawling, stifled by its
leaders, who would rather serve their own ends than
help their country. Six years of their rule has left over
half the population without enough food - 6 million
people dependent on humanitarian assistance just
to survive.

Make no mistake: this is a crisis of human creation,
a crisis that the leaders of South Sudan have had six
years to prevent. But, instead of helping, they have
poured fuel on the fire. We need only look at the
ongoing fighting across the country between the
Government and the opposition forces. In Pagak, for
example, the Government offensive has displaced
thousands of civilians into Ethiopia. Aid workers have
been evacuated. The already desperate humanitarian
situation has been made even worse. Yet when the
Government is asked about Pagak, we hear different
stories from different people. Some say there has been
no violence there. Others argue that the offensive
was for self-defence. Let us be clear: the violence is
happening there, and it is not self-defence. It is a blatant
infringement of the ceasefire that President Salva Kiir
declared only a few months ago.

Not content with misleading their people and the
international community, the Government of South
Sudan has systematically clamped down on the media
and on access to information. Last Friday, Internet
service providers in South Sudan were ordered to block
media outlets with which the Government disagrees.
The head of State television was reported to have
been arrested for failing to broadcast President Kiir's
Independence Day speech.

The Government says it is committed to media
freedom, but its actions speak otherwise. What the
Government of South Sudan says bears no relation to
what it does. In June we saw humanitarian access being
blocked 100 times, the highest number in a month in
2017 so far. In addition, ceasefire monitors have been
blocked on multiple occasions by Government troops
from investigating incidents of reported violence. That
is all in clear violation of the peace Agreement, and all
at the cost of the South Sudanese people.

Until we see the Government's actions match its
words, the Council has no choice but to take measures
to protect peace and security. For the United Kingdom,
that means returning to the issue of an arms embargo
on South Sudan once again. We must do all we can to
stop the uncontrolled flow of weapons that is driving
this violence.

In parallel, we should continue to work with the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development to
support their high-level revitalization forum initiative.
The first priority for that must be to bring an end to
the fighting. That will require a negotiated ceasefire
or a cessation of hostilities agreement among a broad
and meaningful range of armed actors. It will require
national and local initiatives, and we must be clear that
any actors blocking peace will face consequences.

But, in truth, we have said all of this before. In
this Chamber back in May (see S/PV.7950), I said that
we were not yet fulfilling our responsibilities as the
Council to the people of South Sudan. Two months on,
that is, I am afraid, still the case. The parties continue
to put violence before peace. That cannot continue. We
have a unique window of opportunity before the end of
the rainy season to make meaningful progress in South
Sudan. Should we fail in our efforts, South Sudan will
enter into a fifth year of conflict. For a country that is
only six years old, that is simply heart-breaking.

