I thank Mr. Mladenov for his briefing. As always, we appreciate his and his team's impartiality as they work to address this conflict. It is not often that I have the opportunity to discuss genuinely good news during these meetings, and I have the pleasure to do that today. As many Council members know, on 13 August President Trump announced the Abraham accords, the most significant step towards peace in the Middle East in over 25 years. This historic agreement to normalize relations between Israel and the United Arab Emirates advances peace in the Middle East. It is a testament to bold diplomacy and the courage of the United Arab Emirates and Israel to chart a new path that will unlock the great potential of the region. The leadership and foresight of President Trump, as well as Prime Minister Netanyahu and Crown Prince Mohammed Bin Zayed made this momentous achievement possible. Opening direct ties between two of the Middle East's most dynamic societies and advanced economies will transform the region by spurring economic growth, enhancing technological innovation and forging closer people-to- people relations. Direct military cooperation will benefit the entire region by countering the threat posed by Iran's destabilizing activities in the Middle East and beyond. For years and up to today, Iran has defied international law by breaking the United Nations own weapons ban, providing militias and terror groups with the firepower to kill and maim men, women and children across the Middle East. While members of the Council are so far unwilling to confront this daily threat to peace and security, the United States stands by the Arab world and Israel as we work to maintain an arms embargo on the murderous Iranian regime. We believe that more Arab and Muslim countries will follow the United Arab Emirates' lead and normalize relations with Israel. And as we convene here today, Secretary Pompeo is in the region to promote further efforts towards peace, including discussions with Israeli and the Emirati leadership about building on this historic breakthrough. I know the Palestinian leadership has been vocally opposed to this agreement, arguing that it neglects Palestinian rights." But let me be clear that by no means is the intention of this agreement to ignore the Palestinian people; in fact, it is just the opposite. We hope that this courageous step by the Emiratis will give the Palestinian leadership positive momentum to re-engage in negotiations with Israel to end their conflict. So much progress on defining the parameters of a settlement has been achieved in years past, as Israeli and Palestinian negotiators compromised with one another in pursuit of peace. The sides must continue in a spirit of good will, which has already yielded peace for millions of people in the Middle East. Arab nations making peace with Israel does not diminish the need for peace with the Palestinians. America wants to see peace between the Israeli and the Palestinian people. The Trump Administration's blueprint for peace is a testament of earnest concern. For too long, the approach towards Israeli-Palestinian peace has been to repeat tired talking points promoting unrealistic and outdated ideas about a solution to the crisis. And there is, of course, tangible outside interference, such as Iran, which supplies weapons and financial support to the terrorist organization Hamas that rules the Gaza Strip. Other nations also play a role in perpetuating the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. These activities sap the ability of the Palestinian leadership in the West Bank to properly care for the Palestinian people and damage the prospect of peace and future prosperity. The international community must use the recent positive events to break out of this cycle and demand actionable change in the region. The lives and futures of Israelis and Palestinians alike depend on it. I believe that the Palestinian leadership owes it to its people to look forward instead of looking back. Change is often difficult; however, things are only going to continue moving forward. And we hope that other Arabs States can build on this agreement between the United Arab Emirates and Israel, and support the Palestinians to do the same. In conclusion, I understand that many of our colleagues in the Council plan to raise the issue of the arms embargo on the Islamic Republic of Iran in their remarks today. If they do, I would strongly encourage all of them to explain to the Iranian people why they are empowering a regime that brutalizes them, the Iranian people, and crushes their freedoms and their aspirations. They should explain to their friends in the region why they are turning their backs on them and ignoring their well-founded concerns; explain to the Israelis and Palestinians, the Yemenis, the Lebanese, the Iraqis, the Syrians and all the citizens of the Middle East why they think it is a good idea to allow the world's largest State sponsor of terrorism to gain access to modern weapons systems; explain why they want to empower Iran to strengthen Hizbullah, strengthen the Houthis, strengthen the Al-Assad regime; explain to their own citizens why they opposed Council action in the form of a straight-forward resolution to stop Iran from buying and selling weapons - an action that makes us all less safe; explain to the world why they are lending support to Tehran to continue to sow violence and chaos across continents when Iran is clearly in violation of its commitments. I would be interested to know, and I am sure that those listening today would be interested as well. Second statement by the Permanent Representative of the United States of America to the United Nations, Kelly Craft On 20 August, the United States took the only reasonable and responsible action left to us, after the majority of this body surrendered to unthinkable inaction, abandoned the people of Iran and the Middle East, and invited an arms race that regional nations have begged to avoid. For months and months, we told the Council that President Trump would never allow the world's largest State sponsor of terrorism to freely buy and sell planes, tanks, missiles, and other kinds of conventional weapons. The countries of the Middle East most familiar with Iran's terror pressed us to stay true to our commitment. We reminded members of our right under resolution 2231 (2015) to trigger snapback and our firm intent to do so in the absence of courage and moral clarity by the Council. It can be no surprise that we have arrived here today. As Secretary Pompeo stated from United Nations grounds last week with absolute clarity: "America will not join in this failure of leadership. America will not appease. America will lead. The leadership begins with recognizing the Islamic Republic of Iran for what it truly is: a theocratic, revolutionary, brutish regime that will not voluntarily seek peace or make life better for the Iranian people." Iran has defied the Council's arms embargo, fomenting conflict and murder throughout the world as it supplies weapons to proxy militias and terrorist groups. History is replete with tragedies of appeasing regimes such as this one, which for decades has kept its own people under its thumb. However, there can be no mistaking where we are today. Put simply, it is Russia and China that revel in the Council's dysfunction and failure. It is Iran that celebrates its newfound leverage over the free nations of the world. It is Hizbullah that welcomes the possibility of new, more powerful weapons to fuel its campaign of terror. It is the Maduro regime that has already expressed glee at the prospect of additional Iranian support. It is the Houthi rebels who see new life in their already brutal assaults on the Yemeni people. It is our European colleagues on the Council that have expressed privately their concerns about lifting sanctions on Iran but have taken no actions to address that concern. Let me just make it really, really clear. The Trump Administration has no fear of standing in limited company on this matter, in light of the unmistakable truth guiding our actions. I only regret that other members of the Council have lost their way and now find themselves standing in the company of terrorists.
