Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Japanese presidency for having convened this
important meeting, and I also thank the Secretary-
General for his very informative briefing.

France is deeply concerned at the worsening
situation on the Korean peninsula and by the significant
risks therefrom to our collective security. This year the
North Korean regime fired 20 ballistic missiles, three
of them intercontinental, and carried out a nuclear test
on an unprecedented scale. We have met 17 times, 12 on
an emergency basis. North Korea today is an existential
threat for our partners in the region; I would like to
assure them of our full solidarity in the face of this
unacceptable situation.

This unprecedented series of illicit and increasingly
destabilizing actions has all the hallmarks ofa dangerous
escalation. The threats are real and proven, have already
reached an unacceptable level and increase daily. That
is why inaction and weakness are not options.

France believes that our action should be guided by
three priorities.

The first to be clear-sighted in the face of the
extreme seriousness of the situation. The multifaceted
progress of North Korea in terms of its nuclear and
ballistic capacity and probably in the chemical area as
well represents a deep-seated change. The threat has
gone from regional to global and from potential to
immediate. Let us not be under any illusion: the threat
is unprecedented and has no equivalent.

The North Korean regime, however, has to date
shown no intention of reversing course. Instead, forging
ahead with its illicit nuclear and ballistic programmes,
it continues to flout its international obligations and to
defy the Council, to the detriment of its own people.
I would stress here that the tragic situation of human
rights in North Korea is only getting worse, and we
heard earlier this week. With regard to the humanitarian
situation, it is indeed the North Korean regime that
bears the primarily responsibility.

Secondly, given this very dangerous and volatile
situation, the main focus of our action must be to stand
firm, primarily because the dangerous spiral in which
North Korea is engaged threatens the very foundations
of our collective security system, which together we
have the responsibility to preserve.

It is Vital that we react to this testing of the
non-proliferation regime and avoid any possibility of
impunity, which would necessarily lead to other aspects
being called into question. What is at stake here is our
ability to not only ensure our own security but also to
prevent any disruption of the strategic balance in Asia
and, beyond that, the strategic stability that underlies
peace and security.

In that framework, our action should take place
on two tracks. It is indispensable, first, to implement
existing sanctions strictly and comprehensively, in
the face of the formidable inventiveness of North
Korean networks in circumventing our decisions and
escape their effects. Everyone knows that the uneven
implementation of sanctions seriously affects the
effectiveness of our collective action. Their correct
implementation is the responsibility of all Member
States, beginning with the ones seated on the Council.

We must also react methodically and with
determination to all North Korean provocations in
order to prevent further escalation and to preserve the
non-proliferation regime. If North Korea continues
to defy our injunctions and to ignore our appeals to
reason, North Korea will leave us with no other choice
than to strengthen the sanctions, on the understanding
that sanctions are not a goal in themselves and that
target the regime for what it does and not for what it is.

The third and final priority must be the potential
for diplomacy to find a political solution. We do not
close, and have never closed, the door to dialogue. All
our efforts, on the contrary, are aimed at convincing
Pyongyang to return to the negotiating table and to agree
to negotiations on its nuclear and ballistic programme.
But it is clear that given North Korea's obstinacy, today
only maximum pressure can enable us to return to the
path of negotiation.

France is, of course, in favour of the resumption of
negotiations, but it is up to the North Korean regime to
give us clear indications that it is prepared to talk, and
the sooner the better.

France is convinced that maximum pressure on
the North Korean regime is our best lever to enable
dialogue, which itself is the condition for a political
solution. Failing that, anything that could be seen by
the North Korean regime as a sign of weakness or of
disunity among us would encourage it to continue its
provocations and objectively aggravate the threat of an
extreme scenario.

So, quite simply, the firmness that France is calling
on the Council to show is our best antidote in the light
of the threat of war and our best chance to chart a course
towards dialogue and therefore towards the political
solution that we all seek.

