Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): I would like
to begin by thanking the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for her detailed statement, as well
as for her outstanding work at the head of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).

On behalf of the Senagalese people and its
Government, I should also like to express our sincere
condolences and solidarity with the brotherly people of
Haiti, who suffered atragic blow in the wake of Hurricane
Matthew early this month. Hurricane Matthee, quite
frankly, has further complicated the lives of the people
of Haiti, which were difficult enough before that. We
are all aware of the statistics arising from this disaster,
so I shall not dwell upon them. Nevertheless, suffice it
to say that much human life and property has been lost,
while cases of cholera have increased, exacerbated by
floods and damage to numerous health centres. That is
why my country would once again urge the international
community to mobilize the delivery of humanitarian
assistance commensurate with the damage suffered by
the Haitian people.

In addition to the emergency situation caused
by this catastrophe, we have seen yet another
postponement of the electoral process in spite of the
efforts of the Haitian authorities, who, as we know, were
forced to postpone the elections. In spite of this new
ordeal, my country calls on the Haitian Government
to spare no effort to organize free, transparent and
credible elections as soon as possible. We welcome the
outstanding work accomplished by the good offices
of Special Representative Honore and congratulate
her efforts and those of her team to ensure a return to
constitutional order, peace, stability and prosperity in
Haiti. Ms. Honore may rest assured that she has the
renewed support of the Senegalese Government.

I should like also to pay tribute to MINUSTAH not
only for the role it is playing during this difficult time
but also for everything that it is doing in Haiti. The most
striking example, perhaps, is its cooperation with the
Haitian National Police in order to ensure the security
of the elections. Senegal, which has a presence in the
Mission through its police units, urges the Security
Council to provide all necessary support to the Mission
by supporting the recommendations emanating from
the recent visit made to the country by the Department
for Peacekeeping Operations from 30 June to 3 July.

