Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I would first like to offer my heartfelt
condolences to the families of the victims of the terrorist
attacks in my country and in Lebanon, Baghdad, France
and all over the world. We firmly condemn such attacks
and those who perpetrate, support or finance them. We
would also like to express our deep condolences to the
people and Government of the Russian Federation in
the wake of the downing ofa Russian plane over Egypt.

Syria associates itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the representative of Iran on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

We rely on the essential role of the Security Council,
as stipulated in the Charter of the United Nations,
in maintaining international peace and security and
preventing conflict, based on how important we believe
it is to ensure the creation of an environment conducive
to development, stability, peace and inclusion, as well
as to support the United Nations bodies that deal with
development issues. In that regard, I would like to
recall the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(General Assembly resolution 70/1), and in particular its
paragraph 47, which cites the central role to be played
by the high-level political forum on development, under
the auspices of the General Assembly and the Economic
and Social Council, in systematically reviewing the
Agenda.
My delegation is therefore concerned by the
holding of today's meeting and the attempt to push the
Council to consider development issues that are not part
of its mandate under the Charter. Furthermore, we do
not support the selection of Sustainable Development
Goal 16 and its link with conflict prevention as part of
the Council's agenda. If we insist on the fact that the
Security Council should not deal with issues outside its
purview, such as development, we do so for the practical
reason that we should neither dilute nor politicize
international efforts when we are trying to achieve our
common goals. Moreover, the exclusive mandate of
the Security Council to address issues of international
peace and security and conflict prevention needs to
be operationalized in the light of the disappointing
outcome of the Council's work in this area. We need to
concentrate on what is within the Council's domain and
not branch out into other areas.

With respect to international peace and security
and conflict prevention, we can make the Council
more operational by doing the following. We must
immediately and completely implement all Security
Council resolutions that have not been implemented for
years, in particular those on the occupied Syrian Golan,
Palestine and Israeli nuclear disarmament of Palestine.
Secondly, we call for the immediate, unpoliticized and
impartial implementation of resolutions on fighting
terrorism. Thirdly, we must uphold respect for the
sovereignty of States and non-interference in the
domestic affairs of States on the part of countries that
have a great deal of influence in the Council and that
arrogate to themselves the legitimacy that they deny to
others without taking into account the choices made
by peoples. We need to require accountability from
those Governments that have taken unilateral decisions
or poorly interpreted Council decisions in order to
justify interference in other countries' affairs, thereby
spurring violence, extremism and terrorism in those
countries and others in the region, as occurred in Libya
after the military invasion. We also need to underscore
the interference of some countries since 2011 in the
internal affairs of my country, Syria, as they have
sought to undermine the Syrian State by force, using
what one speaker today called revolutionary terrorists
or coercive unilateral economic measures that have
made us lose decades of development and stability.

Many questions remain before the Council for action,
in particular certain resolutions, including resolutions
2170 (2014), 2178 (2014) and 2199 (2015), which prohibit

the financing of terrorists and their travel to Syria and
to stop the trade in oil and antiquities with them. The
Council also needs to look into the catastrophic effect
of unilateral economic sanctions implemented against
Syria by European countries and the United States,
with the resulting conflict, unemployment, disease and
poverty, which are not the effects that the Charter or
Council resolutions were designed to achieve, but are
the result of the lack of political will and the failure of
wealthy countries, including some on the Council, to
live up to their historical obligations.

