Mr. Heusgen (Germany) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank the French presidency for
including this issue on the agenda.

(spoke in English)

We warmly thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Virginia Gamba, for her crucial work on this
essential mandate and for her valuable contribution to
the advancement of the children and armed conflict
agenda. We commend her for her powerful briefing
this morning. We will continue to build upon our long-
standing cooperation with the Special Representative
and to support a strong mandate based on a credible and
effective monitoring and reporting mechanism.

Germany aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union and would
like to make some additional remarks.

First, this year marks the tenth anniversary of the
adoption of the Paris Commitments to protect children
from unlawful recruitment or use by armed forces or
armed groups and the Paris Principles and Guidelines
on Children Associated with Armed Forces or Armed
Groups. Over the past decade, significant progress has
been achieved in establishing and improving the legal
and normative framework for the protection of children
in armed conflicts. At the same time, the alarming scale
and seriousness of violations against children in recent
years reminds us that today's agenda is still relevant.
As documented in the Secretary-General's annual
report (S/2017/82l), boys and girls living in countries

affected by armed conflict continue to be Victims of
widespread and unacceptable violations - and today
we heard a number of concrete examples, not least
from Mr. Mubin Shaikh, on how children are still
impacted today. When countering violent extremism,
it is important that all measures be carried out in full
compliance with international law and that they protect
children effectively. Violations of children's rights
remain a serious concern of the whole international
community. The signing and effective implementation
of action plans with the armed forces and groups listed
in the annexes of the Secretary-General's annual report
are an essential tool to achieve concrete progress.

Secondly, Germany is committed to keeping
the protection of children in armed conflict on
the international agenda, including that of the
Security Council. Over the past two decades,
important mechanisms and tools have been developed
to deal with the issue. One of those tools, resolution
1998 (2011), which was adopted under our Security
Council presidency in July 2011, set standards for
the protection of schools and hospitals to ensure that
schools become safe spaces for children, allowing them
to develop where they feel protected and sheltered.
Setting standards is important, but implementation
is paramount: real progress needs to be measured on
the ground. We therefore urge all parties to armed
conflict to stop attacks on schools and hospitals and
halt the military use of schools, in accordance with
international law. We intend to promote the children
and armed conflict agenda if Germany is elected as a
non-permanent member of the Security Council for the
period 2019-2020.

Thirdly, efforts to strengthen regional networks
and relationships with civil society are vital for better
protecting and promoting the rights of children in
conflict. For example, the Group of Friends of Children
and Armed Conflict in Afghanistan promotes such
efforts, and Germany is proud to have assumed the
chairmanship of that Group last year. Cooperation with
regional actors was also a focus at the Berlin workshop
on children and armed conflict and women, peace
and security in April. By bringing together various
actors, the workshop provided a useful platform for
exchanging lessons learned and good practices. We are
delighted to announce that we are planning for the next
workshop on that topic to take place in Berlin on 12 and
13 February 2018.

Despite the advances that have been made over the
past few decades, much work remains to be done. The
changing nature of conflicts, which now include Violent
extremism, terrorist threats and non-State armed
groups, presents new challenges for the protection of
children. Germany will therefore further encourage the
United Nations family, as well as Member States, to
continue to uphold the protection of children in armed
conflict as a high priority. Germany will continue to
do so as well and will remain a valuable partner in
that endeavour.

