Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French):
Today's Security Council debate on post-conflict
peacebuilding is of crucial importance; the subject
merits follow-up and further comprehensive work. It is
significant, Sir, that this debate is taking place under
the presidency of a noble son of our continent, Africa,
which continues to be a stakeholder in international
peacebuilding efforts.

The recent report of the Secretary-General on this
theme (S/2009/304) contains reflection, analysis and
forward thinking about how to fill the gaps and make
United Nations efforts more effective and better
adapted to the needs of countries affected by conflict.
Let me draw four fundamental elements from this rich
report which in my delegation's view are of particular
importance.

First, peacebuilding efforts should be launched as
soon as a peace agreement is signed and should be
integrated into the implementation of peacekeeping
operations. Such an approach would enable the
international community to respond in good time to the
priorities of countries emerging from conflict, help
those countries to implement the peace agreements
they have signed, create peace dividends that can calm
populations and help restore trust.

Secondly, national ownership - encompassing
both Government and civil society - of the
peacebuilding process is fundamental. When the
Government or authorities of a country emerging from
conflict takes ownership of the process of defining and
implementing peacebuilding strategies, it becomes
engaged and takes responsibility for the success or
failure of the process. But national ownership, however
necessary, is not enough. The contribution of the
international community is also needed, including that
of the international financial institutions, through
financial and technical assistance and capacity-
building.

Thirdly, there is a need for predictable, rapid and
flexible financing for the implementation of
peacebuilding strategies. Here, we hope that the recent
review of the terms of reference of the Peacebuilding
Fund will make it possible to ensure flexibility and
speed in the timely disbursement of funds, as well as
their optimal utilization.

Fourthly, the international community's activities
in the field require coherence and coordination, with a
view to producing the desired outcome. In that regard,
the competencies and experience that the United
Nations has gained in this sphere enable the
Organization to assume a leadership role in channelling
international action that responds to the needs of the
society in question.

I said that I would mention four elements, but a
fifth is extremely important as well: the role of
regional actors in the creation of conditions conducive
to peacebuilding in countries emerging from conflict.
You, Mr. President, are well placed to see the very
valuable contributions made by neighbouring countries
and regional groupings. Experience continues to show
that the contributions of neighbouring countries and
regional or subregional groupings can make or break a
peacebuilding endeavour. The special contribution of
such regional actors is extremely important: they
should be involved in a constructive way, to bring
about peace, stability and regional cooperation.

The report of the Secretary-General rightly
emphasizes the importance of economic recovery,
which should be integrated into other peacebuilding
tasks such as security sector reform; rule of law,
including the protection of human rights; bolstering
State authority; and transitional justice.

In conclusion, I stress the important role of the
Peacebuilding Commission. I have been participating
in its work for some eight months, and I have seen the
tremendous work the Commission is doing; it is
pragmatic and invaluable for the countries concerned.
Since it became operational, the Commission has
played an extremely important role by designing
integrated peacebuilding strategies, adopting a country-
specific approach to the States on its agenda,
promoting integrated strategies and mobilizing
resources. The role of the Peacebuilding Commission
should be enhanced and better integrated into the
architecture of the United Nations system and its
partners, including through the promotion of regular
interaction and productive cooperation between the
Commission and the Security Council.

