Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I thank you, Madam
President, for convening this important open debate on
the working methods of the Security Council and for the
concept note (S/2014/725, annex) your delegation has
prepared to guide our discussion. I also thank Madam
Kimberly Prost, Ombudsperson of the Committee
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989
(2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals
and entities, and Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), for their respective
briefings.

Rwanda aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Saint Lucia on behalf
of the group of support of draft resolution A/6l/L.69.
I will now make additional comments in my national
capacity.

Let me start by congratulating you, Madam
President, and your delegation on your able leadership
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions. Indeed, Argentina's
chairmanship of the Working Group led to laudable
progress, notably through the adoption of important
notes by the President on intra-Council dialogue, on
consultations between the Council, the Secretariat and
troop- and police-contributing countries, on dialogue
with non-Council members and on penholders, among
others. Rwanda believes that those notes will greatly
contribute to a more transparent, democratic and
effective Security Council, provided that they are
implemented in good faith.

Rwanda also appreciates that Argentina will
organize at the end of its presidency a wrap-up session
under the format of a public briefing. We note with
satisfaction that this public format, introduced by
Rwanda in its presidency in July this year, was since
adopted by all countries that have decided to organize
wrap-up sessions, namely, the United Kingdom
in August, Argentina in October and Australia in
November. We hope that all Council members will
continue on that path so that we can all contribute to
the transparency and effectiveness of our work.

Nevertheless, despite the current positive trends
in the working methods of the Security Council, we
have yet to live up to the expectations of the 2005
World Summit, mainly with respect to representativity
and legitimacy, to efficiency and effectiveness,
to transparency and accountability, and to the
implementation of Council decisions. In that regard,
we hope that in the months to come, the Council will
make tangible progress on the issue of penholders on
the basis of the note by the President S/2014/268, of
14 April 2014, which recognized the right ofany Council
member to be a penholder. That reform would allow
Council members representing the regions affected by
conflicts on the Council's agenda to at least share the
pen with the current penholders. But, most importantly,
Rwanda believes that there is a need to reform the use
ofthe right to veto, on the basis of the French proposal.
Indeed, given the recent history of the Council and its
failure in the past, permanent members should discuss
and agree on how to refrain from using the veto in cases
of mass atrocities.

Rwanda recognizes the tremendous job done by
Madame Kimberly Prost as Ombudsperson of the
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989
(2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated individuals
and entities. The appointment of the Ombudsperson
to that Committee was a positive step towards the
implementation of paragraph 109 of the 2005 World
Summit Outcome (General Assembly resolution 60/1).
In that respect, we would like to express our support
to the extension of the Ombudsperson's mandate to all
sanctions lists without exception. That is just common
sense. And I urge Council members that are still
reluctant on that issue to reconsider their positions and
put the interests of the countries for which the sanctions'
regimes were established above their national and
strategic interests. Indeed, we are of the view that such
enhancement of due process in a sanctions regimes will
result in more fairness, effectiveness and credibility of
sanctions regimes.

As recalled in the concept note, the Rome Statute
of the ICC grants the Council the power to refer to the
ICC situations in which crimes within its jurisdiction
were committed, article 13 (b), as well as the power
to defer an investigation or prosecution for a period of
12 months for reasons relating to the maintenance of
international peace and security, article 16. We agree
that the Security Council should ensure that both
provisions on the referral and deferral are implemented,
when the conditions set out by the Rome Statute are
met. We join the Council President in regretting that no
response was provided to any of the seven letters from
the President of the ICC in relation to the cooperation
of States with the Court. We believe that the Council
should take time to thoroughly discuss the issue and
provide an appropriate response to those letters.

In the same vein, as much as we respect the
function of the President and the Prosecutor of the ICC,
we believe that African Members of the United Nations
also deserve respect and consideration. While the
concept note deplores the Council's failure to respond
to the seven letters of the President of the ICC, I will
take the opportunity to remind this body that decisions
of African Heads of State and Government adopted
during at least seven different summits of the African
Union (AU) since February 2009 requesting the
deferral of the case against the President of the Sudan,
in accordance with article 16 of the Rome Statute,
remained unanswered. Indeed, as the AU Heads of State
and Government put it, "The search for justice should
pursued in a way that does not impede or jeopardize
efforts aimed at promoting lasting peace".

In addition, I would also wish to recall the AU
summit, held on 12 October 2013, in Addis Ababa,
which had requested the deferral of cases against
the President and Deputy President of Kenya, in
accordance with the same article 16 of the Rome
Statute. Despite the interactive dialogue between an
African ministerial contact group and members of the
Council, and despite a draft resolution introduced by
the three African members of the Council, the call of
representatives of our whole continent was not heeded.
Therefore, Rwanda, while regretting that letters of the
ICC President were unanswered, would advise Council
members to avoid double standards, particularly when
African leaders are involved.

What can we do? First, Rwanda recalls that the
Informal Working Group was created for the two
international criminal tribunals created by the Council.
Therefore, its work cannot be extended to the ICC,
which is a treaty-based jurisdiction. In that regard, I
wish to recall that Rwanda, as well as other United
Nations Member States, is not a party to the Rome
Statute.

Secondly, for the situations in the Sudan and Libya
and any other situation that could be referred by the
Council, we are of the opinion that the regular Council
meetings, where the ICC Prosecutor presents her
report, are the appropriate avenues to consider those
situations in all their aspects, including the cooperation
of Member States with the Court.

Thirdly, Rwanda believes that relationships
between the Council and the ICC should be enhanced,
including through regular interactive dialogues with
the Prosecutor to discuss all pending issues in relation
to Council referrals and requested deferrals or through
area formula meetings with various organizations,
including civil society, which would highlight particular
cases that require the attention of the Council. And the
Permanent Representative of Australia mentioned that
his country has co-organized some of those meetings.
Rwanda, although not a patry to the Rome Statute, is
open to that permanent dialogue with the ICC or on the
work of the ICC, as our shared goal is to fight impunity
and ensure accountability for the most serious crimes.

I will conclude by reiterating Rwanda's commitment
to working for continued improvement of the working
methods of the Security Council by supporting
fairness and due process in sanctions regimes and by
enhancing interaction between the Council and the ICC
with a view to making sure that justice and peace are
equally achieved, while upholding the Charter's equal
sovereignty of States.

