Mr. Lowcock: Security Council members will all
have heard what the Secretary-General said earlier
today, which Rosemary DiCarlo also just referred to.
Like Ms. DiCarlo, I briefed the Council one month
ago on the worsening humanitarian situation in Idlib
(see S/PV.8527). Ten days later, my deputy alerted
the Council to further violence and destruction (see S/PV.8535). Violence, involving Syrian Government
forces and their allies, armed opposition forces and
the Security Council-listed terrorist organization
Hayat Tahrir al-Sham, continued throughout the holy
Eid al-Fitr period. It has still not stopped, despite the
announcement of a truce on 12 June. The conduct
of hostilities has resulted in more than 230 civilian
deaths over the past six weeks, including 69 women
and 81 children. Hundreds more have been injured. An
estimated 330,000 people have been forced to flee their
homes since 1 May and have moved northward towards
the border with Turkey. That is almost double the
number of newly displaced people since my previous
briefing to the Council (see S/PV.8527). A recently
conducted rapid assessment found that many of them
have moved multiple times since the start ofthe conflict,
some as many as 10 times. That is a particular feature
of the Idlib area. People fled there initially from other
parts of Syria, then moved again and again, constantly
searching for safety.

Camps for the displaced are overcrowded, with
many people forced to stay in the open. Those who
remain in towns and villages close to the fighting live
in constant fear of the next attack. Many are crowding
into basements, seeking refuge from air strikes, volleys
of shells and mortar rounds, and fighting that continues
to threaten what is left of their homes. Hospitals,
schools and markets have been hit. Power stations have
been affected. Crops have been burned. Children have
been forced out of their schools. We had reports this
morning of another 19 people killed yesterday by air
strikes and artillery shelling. And this past weekend
civilians were killed by mortar and rocket attacks in
the Al-Wadihi area, south of Aleppo. In short, we are
facing a humanitarian disaster unfolding before our
eyes. There is no denying the facts.

The United Nations and its partners have been
responding with emergency food assistance through
ready-to-eat rations, reaching more than 190,000 people
in May. In addition, the United Nations and its partners
have reached nearly 800,000 people with general food
assistance. Water, health and sanitation supplies have
been distributed to some 180,000 displaced people, and
water trucking has been made available to people in
some 342 camps and informal settlements. Incidentally,
none of that would have been possible if the Council
had not renewed resolution 2165 (2014). Cross-border
assistance remains the only means of reaching people
in and around Idlib. The United Nations and the brave
humanitarian workers on the ground are doing all they
can. They are risking their lives to help others. But the
response is stretched, and a further increase in need
brought on by additional fighting would risk seeing
it overwhelmed.

To this day, we continue to receive reports of attacks
impacting civilian infrastructure, including schools and
hospitals. Since April, according to reports, 37 schools
have been affected. More than 250,000 children are out
of school, some 400,000 students have had their exams
cancelled, and 94 schools are currently being used as
shelters. As a UNICEF representative said last week, no
parent should fear sending their child to a school that
may be bombed later that day.

I need to remind the Council again of the incidents
affecting health facilities. Twenty-six incidents
affecting health-care facilities in north-western Syria
have been confirmed by the World Health Organization
since late April - eight more than when I last briefed
the Council. Two of those facilities were located in
an area controlled by the Government of Syria. Many
other hospitals have closed out of fear ofbeing attacked.
Those attacks do notjust claim innocent lives. They also
deprive thousands of civilians of basic health services,
even as fighting intensifies around them.

As the Council is aware, some of those hospitals
had been deconflicted through the Organization's
deconfliction mechanism. All parties have specific
obligations under international humanitarian law
to refrain from attacking protected sites, regardless
of whether they have been deconflicted or not. It is
appalling that those sites were hit in the first place,
but hitting a facility whose coordinates were shared
as part of the Organization's deconfliction system is
simply intolerable.

A number of partners now feel that supplying
geographical coordinates to be given to the warring
parties effectively paints a target on their backs. Some
have drawn the conclusion that hospital bombings are a
deliberate tactic aimed at terrorizing people. This whole
episode raises deep questions about the deconfliction
system. We are discussing this internally, and I will
tell the Council what our conclusions are at the regular
monthly humanitarian briefing next week.

Security Council-listed terrorist group Hayat
Tahrir al-Sham has a significant presence in Idlib, and
it is responsible for its own share of the suffering there.
Countering Hayat Tahrir al-Sham is plainly a major
challenge. But counter-terrorism efforts cannot, in
any way, absolve States of their obligations to uphold
international humanitarian law. That is the bottom line.
Just as the Secretary-General said earlier, international
humanitarian law must be upheld and attacks on
civilians and civilian infrastructure need to stop - and
they need to stop immediately.

