Ms. Zerrougui (spoke in French): I should like to
thank the Council for affording me the opportunity to
brief it on the situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

Less than five months before the elections, to be held
on 23 December, preparations reached a key turning
point yesterday with the opening of registration centres
for presidential and legislative election candidacies.
The elections continue to give rise to high expectations,
both among the Congolese people and the international
community, as they are of key significance to shoring
up stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and throughout the region.

Although significant progress has been achieved in
meeting the critical benchmarks set out in the timetable,
the electoral process remains a source of suspicion and
mistrust between the majority and the opposition and
between the opposition and the Independent National
Electoral Commission. The opposition's grievances
relate, inter alia, to voting machines, the electoral
registry and the unresolved issue of the replacement
of the representative of the Union pour la de'mocratie
et le progres Social (UDPS) within the Independent
National Electoral Commission.

These grievances were recently reiterated by a
group of five political opposition parties and platforms,
including UDPS, Ensemble pour le changement, Union
pour la nation congolaise, Mouvement de liberation du
Congo (MLC) and Dynamique de l'opposition, through
a joint statement published on July 23 in Kinshasa.
The statement also demands the return of high-profile
personalities and the release of political prisoners
within the framework of implementing the de-escalation
measures set out in the 31 December 2016 agreement.

On July 24, Jean-Pierre Bemba, President of the
MLC and the party's nominee for the presidential
elections, held his first press conference in Brussels
to confirm his return to Kinshasa on 1 August to
declare his candidacy. The same day, Moise Katumbi
also announced his upcoming return without however
specifying a date. In the meantime, the newly
established political platform - Front commun
pour le Congo - for which President Kabila was
designated the moral authority, has yet to nominate a
presidential candidate.

(Spoke in English)

I am, however, encouraged to note that while
encountering the disagreements that I just mentioned
against the backdrop of immense logistical and
financial challenges, all major political parties were
able to successfully register candidates for provincial
legislative elections. In my travels last week to Kolwezi,
Lubumbashi and Kalemie, I heard first-hand the lengths
to which political parties have gone to ensure their
participation in upcoming elections. In some remote
areas, candidates travelled nearly 1,500 kilometres
by motorcycle to declare their candidature. I was also
glad to see the engagement between the Independent
National Electoral Commission and political parties,
which ultimately resulted in several deadline extensions
for provincial legislative candidate registration,
thereby contributing to ensuring that the process is
more inclusive and legitimate. Following a slow start,
more than 18,000 candidacies were ultimately enrolled
to compete for 715 seats. Although the final tally is
yet to be published, initial indications suggest that
women made up less than 12 per cent of all registered
candidates. I continue to use my good offices to urge
political parties to ensure greater female representation
and participation in the upcoming elections.

AlthoughI am pleased to note such a level of political
engagement on the part ofall parties, I remain concerned
by the poor implementation of confidence-building
measures. While the Minister of Justice announced the
release of 4,109 prisoners, only a few of them were part
of the confidence-building measures, and the release of
high-profile personalities was completely ruled out. As
violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms
continue to impact negatively on democratic space,
peaceful demonstrations are being suppressed. Civil
society actors and political opponents continue to be
arbitrarily arrested, and media workers threatened.
Conditions leading to a level playing field are therefore

not yet in place, and without progress on those fronts,
the credibility and inclusivity of upcoming elections
could be at risk.

On the logistical side, Council members will recall
the Government's stated intent - including in the
President's state of the nation address - to manage
and finance elections without external support. The
logistical support of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) for elections, mandated by the
Security Council, was initially planned to begin today.
However, thus far, no request has been received from the
Independent National Electoral Commission. Although
we remain ready to provide support as requested, I
must note that, in the interest of responsibly managing
United Nations resources, we will soon require more
clarity from the Council in that regard, as the first
aircraft for MONUSCO's logistical support was denied
landing clearance upon an attempted arrival yesterday.

On a positive note, we were pleased to hear the
Minister of Health announce the official end of the
Ebola virus disease outbreak in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo this past Tuesday. In the face of
that challenge, MONUSCO, together with other United
Nations agencies, contributed to the Government's
response by offering all available means to help contain
the disease and prevent its spread to major urban
centres. I commend the leadership demonstrated by
the Government in confronting that challenge. Such a
laudable achievement demonstrated what is possible
through effective cooperation among the authorities,
the United Nations and external partners.

While the country is focused on the important
upcoming elections, the security environment
continues to be volatile and is deteriorating in some
parts of the country. We are seeing an intensification of
inter-community violence and activities of local armed
group coalitions that sometimes espouse a politically
driven narrative. I remain particularly concerned about
the Kasais, where the activities of several dissident
militia factions continue; North Kivu where the
Allied Democratic Forces is increasingly active; and
South Kivu, Maniema and Tanganyika provinces. In
all those areas, the civilian population - especially
women and children - continue to pay the highest
price for conflict. They are enduring grave human
rights violations, displacement, challenges to their
livelihoods and the disruptions to their education. I
myself just returned from Tanganyika province a few
days ago, and I witnessed the unbearable conditions
in which internally displaced persons are living and
heard about the suffering and continuing tensions
among communities.

In Ituri province, I am glad to report, tensions in
Djugu have recently abated. We undertook immense
efforts in support of local authorities, including
intensive dialogue at the local level to reconcile
communities, good-offices engagement with local and
national authorities to ease tensions, strong support
for judicial authorities to fight impunity, and the
deployment of three standing combat deployments
to the highest-risk areas. Those deployments are
a realization of our protection-through-projection
approach, thereby showing that results are possible
where logistical capability and the right troop mindset
exists. In Ituri, as elsewhere in the country, although
MONUSCO's efforts can help protect civilians and
mitigate the risk of further deterioration, root causes
need to be addressed by Congolese authorities.

In that security context, I note with concern that
MONUSCO personnel are increasingly targeted. Our
troops in the Beni area have been attacked several
times, as the Council is aware. We have also recently
experienced a number of staff abductions, the most
recent of which was only this past week in Uvira. In
my visits to the eastern part of the country last week, I
listened to members of our staff voice their increasing
concerns about the security situation and their safety
resulting from their work with the United Nations.
While I am working to enhance our staff's safety and
security, such events are a constant reminder of the
risks that staff and troops face every day in support
of MONUSCO's mandate. In this volatile context, the
stakes for the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and
the region's future stability, are high. In the coming
months, MONUSCO will operate in an increasingly
tense environment, while faced with high expectations.
However, as Council members are aware, we will
navigate through that period with fewer resources.

The General Assembly recently approved a budget
reduced by $38.8 million compared to the Secretary-
General's proposal - a significant reduction that
further compounds the impact on our operational ability
following last year's budget cuts. I do not mention that
to make a plea for more resources; we all know the new
financial reality facing all peacekeeping missions. I
highlight it because it is important that we collectively
understand that while MONUSCO's resources continue
to shrink, its mandate remains the same and expectations
only continue to grow. We will therefore be limited
in our ability to respond to all emerging protection
risks, particularly in densely populated urban areas or
in areas where we have no presence. As such, I must
emphasize the importance of our collective work, as
the United Nations and the international community, in
preventing electoral violence and ensuring the process
remains on track.
(spoke in French)

The Democratic Republic of the Congo is at a
crossroads. That is why I call on all stakeholders to
seize this historic opportunity to enable the holding
of inclusive, transparent and credible elections on
23 December in order to offer a more stable future to
the country and its people.

