Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): We, too,
thank Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi of Spain for
his briefing in his capacity as Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004), and we congratulate him on his energetic
leadership of that very important Committee.

This briefing comes at an important time for
resolution 1540 (2004) - 10 years after the Security
Council's unanimous adoption - and we believe that
we can say that good progress has been made, bearing
in mind that it is a crucial backstop to the various
treaty-based instruments that address the issue of the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. Over
the past 10 years, Governments have recognized the
importance of both national action and international
cooperation to secure and prevent the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction. We welcome the fact
that more than 90 per cent of United Nations States
Members have voluntarily submitted national reports
on the implementation of the resolution. For its part,
New Zealand has been proud to support the efforts to
extend the implementation of the resolution throughout
the Pacific, where we have funded expert assistance to
Pacific States to help them meet their commitments.
We have also provided assistance with the drafting of
counter-terrorism legislation.

We support the Committee's comprehensive
review of the resolution. It is time to take stock of
our efforts over the past decade and determine how
the implementation of the resolution can be improved
to best support our collective security. The Group of
Experts has collected an impressive amount of data that
underscore how successful implementation has been.
We can use the data to reveal trends in the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction and to better identify
risks. We commend the experts for their hard work and
encourage them to continue their direct dialogue and
outreach with States. At the same time, we are aware of
the burden placed on small States, especially small island
developing States, in implementing such a complex legal
framework. We are keen to explore practical solutions,
especially for States that do not produce or store the
relevant materials, while respecting the legally binding
nature of resolution 1540 (2004) and acknowledging
the importance of leaving no gaps. In brief, the
implementation of the resolution is a significant burden
for small countries with small administrations. We also
emphasize the importance of working through regional
and subregional organizations, and we welcome the
cooperation of the Group of Experts with the Pacific
Islands Forum in that regard.

New Zealand looks forward to working
constructively with other Council members so that
the comprehensive review can be used to update and

strengthen the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004). The horrific chemical attacks in Syria over the
past two years have demonstrated all too clearly that
the threat posed by weapons of mass destruction is as
relevant now as it was a decade ago, if not more so.
Ultimately, only through the total elimination of such
weapons, together with ongoing, stringent verification
measures implemented by all Member States, can we
protect our collective security.

