Mr. Doutriaux (France) (spoke in French): I
wish at the outset to thank you, Mr. President, for your
excellent initiative of holding this very comprehensive
briefing on the situation in West Africa - a briefing
which has brought together the head of Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno;
Ms. McAskie, of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs; and Mr. Ibrahima Fall of the
Department of Political Affairs.

As all of those who spoke before me have noted,
the crisis in the subregion has many different
aspects - political, peacekeeping and humanitarian -
all of which are closely interrelated. As has been
mentioned several times, the resumed fighting in Sierra
Leone has spilled over to the Guinean border over the
last few months, which has given rise to humanitarian
problems with respect to the situation of Sierra
Leonean refugees, in particular those living in Guinea.

Ms. McAskie also noted the recent case of
Liberian citizens who want to settle across the border
in Sierra Leone as refugees. Thus the interrelationship
between humanitarian, military and political problems
continues to aggravate the situation. That is why the
suggestions made by Mr. Fall in the wake of his Inter-
Agency Mission to the region clearly make sense.
Anything that will help us move towards an integrated
approach to the problems must be considered.

For example, Mr. Fall's proposal to open a
subregional office with a special representative in the
region is sound one, as is the idea of creating an inter-
agency working group in New York. In the same vein,
we must clearly strengthen cooperation between the
United Nations and the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS). We are grateful for the
initiatives taken by ECOWAS in this regard that have
made it possible to relaunch the peace process in Sierra
Leone; I will come back to that point later. We also
welcome the efforts of ECOWAS to bring together the
three heads of State of the Mano River Union
countries.

In this regard, I would like to draw the attention
of the members of the Council to the fact that the
European Union will itself be sending a mission to the
region, headed by the former Ambassador of Sweden to
the United Nations, Ambassador Dahlgren, who is now
Sweden's Secretary of State. He will lead the mission
on behalf of the presidency of the European Union. The
mission will meet with all the heads of State in the
region, as well as with President Konare' in his capacity
as the current Chairman of ECOWAS. The European
Union thus supports the peace initiatives in the region.

I should also like to mention two other countries
referred to by Mr. Fall: Guinea-Bissau and C6te
d'Ivoire. We fully support Mr. Fall's proposals in this
regard. In Cote d'Ivoire, for example, we should
promote dialogue for reconciliation. The European
Union has entered into a dialogue with the Ivorian
authorities in that regard.

We were very interested in what Mr. Jean-Marie
Guehenno said with regard to the most recent positive
developments in Sierra Leone. Again, thanks to
ECOWAS initiatives, the Abuja meeting and the
activities of the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL), there are some positive signals
relating to the strengthening of dialogue between
UNAMSIL, the Government of Sierra Leone and the
Revolutionary United Front (RUF). This is very
positive, but, as Ambassador Greenstock said, we must
now move on to the implementation of the
commitments that have been renewed, and we will
follow developments very closely.

One of the commitments undertaken by the RUF
and mentioned by Mr. Guehenno is of great interest in
the matter of the return of Sierra Leonean refugees in
Guinea. During the Abuja meeting and the Makeni
follow-up meeting, the possibility of the deployment of
UNAMSIL and the Sierra Leone army in the Kambia
district was raised. Mr. Guehenno referred to the date
of, I believe, 18 May, which is in a few day's time. I
should therefore like to ask Mr. Guehenno how
UNAMSIL plans to respond to the RUF withdrawal
from Kambia. Is UNAMSIL going to be deployed in
that district to facilitate the voluntary return of Sierra
Leonean refugees in Guinea who want to use the
Conakry-Freetown route that passes through the district
of Kambia?

My last point relates to what Ms. McAskie said
about the situation of refugees and displaced persons,
in particular the serious situation that is continuing in
Guinea, where, as Ms. McAskie said, Ms. Short and
Mr. Josselin recently made a joint visit. It is clear that
international assistance must be provided to Guinea, as
Mr. Fall recommended in the report issued following
his Inter-Agency Mission. However, in addition to
humanitarian relief, there is the question of the return
of refugees. That return must, of course, be voluntary.
The return must take place, and the refugees must be
taken in, under the best possible conditions.

In this regard, we have received fairly worrying
information relating to what has happened in
Gueckedou. Ms. McAskie spoke about the different
possibilities, in particular the relocation of some
refugee camps in that area further to the north. We have
received rather disturbing information about the
conditions attached to that relocation. Is it true that the
refugees have been asked to go by foot, more than 150
kilometres under difficult conditions? Is it also true
that to encourage the refugees to move north, they have
been given to understand that those who stay will no
longer receive humanitarian assistance?

My first question thus relates to refugees in
Gueckedou. I have another question, about the refugees
who want to return but from the west of Guinea to
Sierra Leone. I have been told that, until very recently,
there were two boats chartered by the International
Organization for Migration that enabled Sierra Leonean
refugees who wanted to go back home to do so through
the maritime route from Conakry to Freetown. I
understand that there is now only one boat. I would
like to know why the means of transportation have
been reduced for refugees who want to return to Sierra
Leone voluntarily.

I have one last question. Resolution 1346 (2001),
which we adopted several weeks ago, contains one
paragraph - I believe it is paragraph 9 - that requests
the Secretary-General to submit to the Council a report
dealing in particular with the question of the support
that UNAMSIL can provide for the voluntary return of
Sierra Leonean refugees currently in Guinea. We would
like to know when the Council will be receiving that
report.

