Mrs. Millicay (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to begin by thanking Deputy Secretary-
General Jan Eliasson for presenting the Secretary-
General's report (S/2013/326) on the situation in
Somalia, the implementation of the mandate of the
United Nations Political Office for Somalia and the
planning for the deployment of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia. I would like to
recognize the presence among us of the Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Somalia,
Her Excellency Ms. Fowsiyo Yusuf Haji Adan.

Argentina welcomes the consolidation of the
efforts by the Government of Somalia to establish State
institutions that are credible and democratic. However,
we must be aware of the complexity of the tasks facing
the Federal Government in terms of drafting the
Constitution and establishing regional administrations
that will form the basis for the federal structure of
Somalia. In order for these tasks to be successfully
completed, there must be an inclusive dialogue leading
to the creation of broad consensus.

We welcome the recovery of certain areas near
Marka and Buurhakaba by Government forces, their
allies and the African Union Mission in Somalia,
and we lament the loss of the city of Xuddur, which
shows how difficult it is to retain control over areas
that are recovered. We continue to be concerned by the
unpredictability and fragility of the security situation,
in particular as a result of the attacks perpetrated by
Al-Shabaab, which continues to launch asymmetric
attacks using terrorist tactics that cause civilians
deaths.

We welcome the holding of the second London
Conference on Somalia, as well as the drafting of the
national security plan framework.

The difficult human rights situation is of deep
concern to us. Extrajudicial executions and the selective
killing ofjournalists can be added to serious violations
of human rights, including children's rights, through
deaths, mutilations, the recruitment of child soldiers,
sexual abuse, kidnappings and sexual violence, in
particular in the internally displaced persons camps in
Mogadishu. Such abuses must come to an end. Those
responsible are not just Al-Shabaab, but also members
of the Somali forces and allied militias.

Argentina believes that those abuses must be
investigated properly and those responsible brought to
justice. In that respect, the Government must commit
decisively to fighting impunity. We welcome the
holding by the Government of the national conference
to examine the current justice system and to recommend
legislative and institutional reforms. That is an essential
contribution to cementing the establishment of the rule
of law.

Argentina would like to acknowledge the work
that the Government has done together with the United
Nations to apply a plan of action to put an end to the
recruitment, exploitation, murder and mutilation of
children. We commend the Somali National Security
Forces' delivery to UNICEF of 41 former child soldiers
for reintegration. We welcome the signing on 7 May
of a communique between the Government of Somalia
and the United Nations on the prevention of sexual
violence.

We welcome the improved humanitarian situation;
however, we are still concerned about the fact that
2.7 million Somalis continue to rely on the provision
of aid. It is vital to ensure that such humanitarian
assistance reaches its destination in order to prevent
any deterioration of the situation. It is also essential that
the physical persons ofhumanitarian staffbe respected.

Argentina would like to highlight the work being
done by the United Nations Office in Somalia and to
express its thanks to Mr. Augustine Mahiga, who has
facilitated the end of the transition period, and the
political process. We would also like to congratulate
Mr. Nicholas Kay on his appointment as the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia. His
work will have my country's full support as he provides
coordination assistance to the Somali authorities,
enabling them to consolidate successes in the areas of
security and support for the civilian population as well
as providing comprehensive support for peacebuilding
and the reconstruction of the State. We firmly believe
in the importance of maintaining an approach that fully
respects the Somalis' responsibility for peacebuilding
and implements a long-term strategy for developing
their capacities, as well as supporting an accelerated
transition from humanitarian aid to economic recovery
and development.

Lastly, Argentina would like to pay tribute to
the work of the African Union in Somalia through
the African Union Mission in Somalia. Its strategic
partnership with the United Nations remains crucial,
and we are sure that it will continue to play an important
role. We would also like to stress the importance of
ensuring that the Mission is provided with sustainable
and predictable financing mechanisms and the
operational capacity necessary for the fulfilment of its
mandate. In order to deal with all those challenges, the
international community must remain committed to
Somalia.

