Ms. Pillay: Let me follow the words of the
Secretary-General by beginning with with Syria. At
my latest briefing to the Security Council, 60,000
people had already been killed. That figure is probably
now approaching 70,000. The Security Council is at
its best when it acts with a unified voice. The lack of
consensus on Syria, and the resulting inaction, has been
disastrous. Civilians on all sides have paid the price.
We will be judged against the tragedy that has unfolded
before our eyes. The Council, as well as those of us in
key positions within the United Nations, will be rightly
asked what we did.

One immediate action that the Council could
take is clear, namely, refer Syria to the International
Criminal Court. That would send a clear message to
both the Government and the opposition that there will
be consequences for their actions. It could also have a
very significant preventive effect.

In contrast, the Council has achieved political
consensus regarding the situation in Mali. I welcome
the Council's provision for United Nations human rights
monitoring there. The protection of human rights is
key to stabilizing the situation. My Office is deploying
human rights officers in the country, with the first
having arrived in Bamako at the end of last week.

As the situation evolves, attacks and reprisals risk
driving Mali into a catastrophic spiral of violence. I call
on all parties to the conflict to abide by international
human rights and humanitarian law and to prevent
retaliation.

The Council is increasingly making use of human
rights components in peacekeeping and special
political missions, often in response to concerns for
the protection of civilians from human rights abuses.
Human rights components provide fundamental support
to the overall mandate ofpeace missions through strong,
impartial and independent human rights monitoring and
reporting. Through that, they bring critical information
to the Council and support local authorities in directly
addressing human rights concerns.

In Afghanistan, the Council's decision to provide
a strong human rights mandate to the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) allows
the international community to have an authoritative
account of the protection-of-civilians challenges
and the responsibility of all parties for protecting
them. Currently, according to UNAMA, insurgents'
indiscriminate use of improvised explosive devices
(IEDs) account for 53 per cent of all civilians killed or
wounded. I call again on all anti-Government groups
in Afghanistan to cease targeting civilians and stop the
use of IEDs and other illegal tactics.

In the eastern part of the Democratic Repulic of
the Congo, the human rights component of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has reported to the
Council on recent large-scale and serious violations.
To end that cycle of Violence, I encourage the Council
to include an accountability element in its interaction
with all parties in that country and in neighbouring
countries.

Given the ongoing conflict in Somalia and recent
events in the Central African Republic, independent
and stronger human rights monitoring is essential also
in those countries. Human rights information will allow
the Council to measure progress against its mandated
objectives in those countries.

I also urge the Council to provide for a stronger
human rights monitoring capacity in the peacekeeping
mission in Abyei. That would help the mission and the
international community to respond proactively to the
fragile situation in the border area.

The recent expulsion of a human rights officer by
the South Sudanese Government, without any valid
justification, sets a dangerous precedent that does
not facilitate the mission's efforts to protect civilians.
I join Special Representative Johnson in asking the
Government to reconsider its decision.

I wish to thank the Secretary-General and
Deputy Secretary-General for their leadership in
launching a follow-up process to the Petrie report,
which reviewed United Nations action in Sri Lanka.
The report highlights systemic failings that extend
across responses to many situations and indicates
that important recommendations of the 1999 United
Nations independent inquiry on Rwanda have not been
implemented. It is time for us to find a way to do better.
In that context, my Office looks forward to working
towards addressing this issue. Let me highlight four
areas where there is need for improvement.

First, early and credible information on human
rights and international humanitarian law violations
can make it easier for the Council and the wider United
Nations system to reach consensus and make informed
decisions. While information technology facilitates
early warning, it cannot replace impartial, reliable
and timely expert monitoring and reporting on respect
for international law. Far too often, before monitoring
and reporting on human rights violations, the United
Nations waits many months until we deploy staff on
the ground. Sometimes access is denied expressly to
prevent reporting. United Nations protection of civilians
cannot be held hostage to delayed deployments or a lack
of access. We must have the capacity and structures
to monitor from Headquarters, when needed, and to
provide Member States and policy makers with the best
available information.

Secondly, the United Nations can strengthen its
sense of common purpose and management. The Petrie
report points to the problematic tendency of United
Nations entities to compartmentalize our approach to
a situation rather than providing Member States with a
holistic analysis. Compartmentalization not only leads
to duplication, but can also side-line human rights
concerns.

Thirdly, the United Nations should offer a wider
range of tools for intervention on the ground. Small and
discrete models of field operations with short lifespans
can be deployed quickly at limited cost and in close
consultation with the regional States and national
authorities. Such deployments provide a non-intrusive
means of United Nations action that may be attractive
where States wish to support an early United Nations
response to serious concerns with regard to the
protection of civilians, so long as it is light and limited.
The use of large peacekeeping operations can be
deployed later where needed.

Fourthly, both the Rwanda and the Petrie reports
are clear in stating that the single most important
element for United Nations protection of civilians is
early political consensus among Member States acting
through the United Nations. I hope that we in the
Secretariat can better support Member States in their
efforts to reach early consensus.

Effectiveness, integrity, courage and accountability
are what the people we are trying to protect expect from
us. That is what should guide our interactions when
dealing with the killing of many people. There will
always be some disagreement within the international
community as to how to respond to a given situation, but
when tens of thousands of civilian lives are threatened,
as is currently the case in the Syrian Arab Republic,
the world expects the Security Council to unite and act.

