Mr. Foradori (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, I would like to congratulate the Republic
of Uruguay on its accession to the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of January. I am
grateful for the invitation to participate in today's
open debate on an issue of such importance for the
international community - the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question.

We are pleased that Uruguay has once again been
elected as non-permanent member of the Council, after
a long-standing absence of 50 years. As we are familiar
with the quality of Uruguayan diplomacy and the
contributions it has made to the United Nations through
eminent persons who played a part in developing
international policy, and international public law in
particular, we are convinced that, during its two-year
mandate, your country, Sir, will make a considerable
contribution to the work of the Council.

The year 2016 marks the twenty-fifth anniversary
of the holding of the Madrid Peace Conference, and
next year will mark a half-century since the adoption of
landmark resolution 242 (1967).

Argentina is deeply concerned about the
proliferation of conflicts in the Middle East. Those
conflicts, tensions and violence have triggered a
humanitarian crisis of unprecedented scale, with
hundreds of thousands dead and wounded, internally
displaced persons and refugees. We strongly support all
efforts aimed, not without difficulty, at consolidating
peace in Syria, Iraq, Libya and Yemen, and we support
the active role played by the United Nations in all these
processes as guarantor of the each country's efforts to
find its own path to peace and security.
As a country that actively participates in
international humanitarian assistance through the
White Helmets initiative, Argentina is committed
to support peace and development in the region not
only politically and diplomatically, but also through
humanitarian supplies and the caring work of our
volunteers. Indeed, with respect to the crisis in the
Syrian Arab Republic and the situation of its refugees,
Argentina has not only expressed solidarity with them
but has sent a team of White Helmet volunteer experts
to camps under the direction of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and has also
sent humanitarian supplies to the Lebanese Republic,
with the same aim of supporting assistance that is being
provided there to Syrian refugees.

Furthermore, our country is formalizing its
provision to the Secretary-General of expert teams of
White Helmet volunteers for managing refugee camps,
distributing food, medicines and other donations,
providing psychological and social support and
general logistics, and training for local staff on these
issues. The volunteers are to be deployed to assist
Syrian refugees in Jordan, Iraq, Lebanon, Turkey and
wherever the United Nations deems it most appropriate,
thus underscoring our solidarity and commitment to
improving humanitarian situations affecting fraternal
peoples in the region.

As in any conflict, the primary responsibility for
finding a solution lies first and foremost with the leaders
of the parties directly involved, in this case the States
of Israel and Palestine, which must show that they are
willing to work to build sustainable peace and security
for the benefit of their peoples. But it should also be
clear that the international community represented
here, in particular the Security Council, has a collective
responsibility and cannot stand at the sidelines of a
conflict that perpetually goes on without any prospects
for a solution. Throughout the years we have noted that
there can be no military solution to this conflict, so we
as the international community must devote ourselves
as a priority to creating anew a genuine political plan
and redouble our efforts so that the Palestinians and
Israelis can regain the hope that peace is still possible.

The parameters of a negotiated solution have been
set forth on numerous occasions in the Security Council
and at the General Assembly, as well as in agreements
signed by the parties, the Quartet road map, the Arab
Peace Initiative and other international instruments.
Israel must end its occupation of the territories
occupied in 1967, find a mutually acceptable solution
to the status of Jerusalem and resolve the refugee issue
in a fair manner. Israel must end its policy of building
settlements in the occupied territories, including
East Jerusalem, which are illegal under international
law and an obstacle to peace. The negative impact of
settlements on the ground is enormous and works to
undermine the two-State solution.

At the same time, Palestinian leaders should
honestly address Israeli security concerns. Hamas
and other Palestinian groups must stop incitement
and attacks against Israeli civilians. The launching
of rockets from the Gaza Strip into Israel must cease
immediately. Accordingly, my country vigorously
condemns such terrorist acts against Israel and is
convinced that just as there is no military solution to
this conflict, so there is no solution that can be imposed
by terrorist methods.

Regional instability is being fuelled by a terrorist
threat that is far more complex than in the past. It is a
threat that includes violent extremism and the flow of
foreign terrorist fighters to the Middle East, particularly
to Syria and Iraq. This serious threat shakes the very
foundations of humankind. As such, terrorism must be
firmly and unambiguously condemned in all its forms
and manifestations and must be met in an effective
manner through joint action by the international
community.

Moreover, Argentina believes that the establishment
ofa zone free of nuclear weapons and other weapons of
mass destruction in the Middle East would represent a
major step forward in the peace process in the region.
In that regard, my country regrets that the failure to
reach agreement on the subject at the ninth Conference
of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons, held in May 2015 here in New
York, prevented the adoption of a consensus outcome
document.

We believe that the revival of the peace process in
the Middle East could decisively contribute to greater
stability in the region. It is essential that a substantive
and committed dialogue for peace resume immediately,
with the clear objective of ending the occupation and
bringing about the full independence and sovereignty
of the State of Palestine, so it can become strong,
living in peace side by side with the State of Israel,
on the basis of terms accepted by the international
community, that is, the two-State solution, with pre-

1967 borders, guaranteeing Israel's right to live in peace
with its neighbours, within secure and internationally
recognized borders.

The quest for peace must be a cherished goal for
all parties. Examples such as the expansion of the self-
styled Islamic State/Daesh are possible only as a result of
States' failure to resolve internal and external conflicts
and of the power vacuum that ensues. To the extent that
States make progress in resolving their conflicts, gaps
that serve to fuel the growth of fundamentalism and
extreme violence will disappear.

I would now like to express Argentina's concern
about the humanitarian situation in Syria, which has
undoubtedly contributed to the deterioration of the
situation in the region and added extraordinary pressure
to countries hosting refugees. Next March marks the
fifth anniversary of a tragedy that horrifies us daily,
having led to the worst humanitarian crisis of our time.
The figures are well known but still dramatic: more than
250,000 people dead, half of them civilians, 6.6 million
internally displaced and 4.3 million refugees. Half the
Syrian population, approximately 13.5 million people,
require urgent humanitarian assistance. These numbers
make us realize the size and impact of the conflict,
which has left in its wake a country destroyed, a people
experiencing untold suffering and a region at the
boiling point.

But just when we thought we had seen it all in Syria,
our conscience was struck once again by the images
from Madaya from a few days ago. We agree with the
Secretary-General that the use of food as an instrument
of war constitutes a war crime under international
humanitarian law. There will likely be other situations
in Syria like that of Madaya, which makes it necessary
for urgent and unconditional access be given to
humanitarian assistance throughout the territory of the
country. The serious violations of international law and
international humanitarian law go far beyond what has
happened in Madaya and require that those responsible
for them be held accountable. The International
Criminal Court may have a very active role to play in
that regard.

A solution for the conflict in Syria will have to be
political, not military, much less terrorist, which was
recognized in resolution 2254 (2015), unanimously
adopted by the Council on 18 December. Argentina
is pleased that, after years of misunderstandings and
disunity with regard to Syria, the members of the
Security Council were able to speak with one voice in
support of this political solution, which should lead to
preserving the sovereignty, independence and unity of
Syria and respecting the principle that only the Syrian
people have the right to determine their own future.

Two years after the Geneva II Conference on Syria,
we are pleased that negotiations between the Syrian
parties will resume in a few days, under the mediation
of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General. The
negotiations should lead to a political transition process
led by the Syrians themselves and set the terms for a
total ceasefire throughout the country. Hopefully, both
results will be achieved quickly, with all countries with
influence over the parties acting in concert to achieve
an early agreement. In that regard, we support the
efforts of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Staffan de Mistura. At the same time, we must
prevent the further militarization of the situation, and
therefore we appeal that an end be put to the supply
and flow of weapons to all parties. At this stage efforts
must be focused on eradicating the terrorist threat
posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and
the Al-Nusra Front, in order to protect the civilian
population, in strict observance of international law
and international humanitarian law.

This year, the Republic of Argentina will celebrate
the bicentennial of its independence. Argentina's identity
has always been based on diversity and the peaceful and
harmonious coexistance of its communities of different
origin, ethnic groups and religions. This characteristic
has forged a unique society, of which we are proud. It is
also why Argentina particularly feels the tragedu of the
Middle East. We urge for a just, peaceful, negotiated
and lasting solution that makes it possible for the
peoples to live in harmony, accepting the differences,
growing as a result of diversity, learning that dialogue
is more valuable than confrontation and that it is more
important to broaden horizons than turn ourselves
inward. I hope, although it may be naive, that wisdom
will prevail over irrationality and that where today
there is death and the ashes of destruction, tomorrow a
solid peace will be built with the strong determination
of a people prepared to lead their destiny with order
and justice.

