Mr. Dumitru (Romania) (spoke in French):
Since the most recent public meeting of the Council on
Cote d'Ivoire less than a month ago (see S/PV.5152),
there has been significant progress in the situation in
the country. We welcome this opportunity to meet
again today to take note of those achievements.

In that context, we extend a warm welcome to
Mr. Aziz Pahad, Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Republic of South Africa. We thank him for his
briefing on the successful mediation of President
Mbeki on behalf of the African Union. We would also
like to thank the Permanent Representative of Nigeria
for the message that he delivered on behalf of President
Obasanjo.

The Pretoria Agreement has charted a course
towards the restoration of peace in Cote d'Ivoire. After
many months of political deadlock, there is now a
glimmer of hope in that regard. We take this
opportunity to pay tribute, with admiration and
gratitude, to the outstanding efforts and perseverance
of President Mbeki and his team in working to
extricate Cote d'Ivoire from a calamitous situation that
threatened to continue indefinitely.

The future priorities in C6te d'Ivoire are clear:
the immediate launch of the disarmament process,
including the disarmament of the militias, and its
successful completion, and proper preparations for the
elections in October. Given the new political dynamic
since the Pretoria Agreement, all outstanding problems
should be resolved in a speedy and responsible manner,
including those related to the dispute with regard to
amending article 35 of the Constitution.

Much ground has been covered between the
signing of the Linas-Marcoussis and the Pretoria
Agreements. We welcome the fact that the Pretoria
Agreement constitutes a needed supplement to the
Linas-Marcoussis Agreement. But it is clear that, after
two years of repeated failure by the parties to fulfil
their commitments, the gulf of mistrust between the
parties cannot be bridged all at once. The
reconciliation process will be difficult and protracted.
The propaganda of hatred must be silenced and a new
climate of tolerance built up gradually, so as to
facilitate the reunification of the country.

The international community must remain
vigilant so as to ensure that the military option is
wholly renounced. Compliance with the arms embargo
will continue to be strictly monitored by the Security
Council. In that regard, we welcome the recent
establishment of a group of experts, pursuant to
resolution 1584 (2005).

The most recent developments in Cote d'Ivoire
will have a direct and immediate effect on the situation
of the United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire
(UNOCI). Given the election timetable and the
forthcoming launch of the disarmament process, the
responsibilities of the mission will increase. We
therefore agree with those who believe that the
mission's resources need to be increased and its
mandate revised. In this regard, we look forward to
relevant proposals from the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations. Romania is ready to take a
constructive part in future negotiations on that subject.

The holding of free, open and transparent
elections in Cote d'Ivoire is an essential precondition
for the country's return to normality. This is a
particularly difficult task given the requirements of the
electoral timetable. Any approach must also take into
account the risks of outbreaks of violence and social
unrest associated with elections that have a significant
political impact. We have already seen this in the
subregion. Thus, proper preparations for the elections
is crucial. International assistance is also vital, and in
this context we support an increased role for the United
Nations in this area. Cooperation among the African
Union, UNOCI and the Security Council continues to
be of particular importance.

In conclusion, a great deal is at stake for Cote
d'Ivoire and for the region as a whole. Support has
been offered by the international community and by the
region. We hope that the Ivorian actors will continue to
demonstrate a sense of responsibility by taking
advantage of that support, for the benefit of the
country.

