Mr. Sergeev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to the Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Sy, and to the representatives of
the United Nations Development Programme and the
World Bank for the statements that they made in the
Security Council.

We have always supported efforts to build peace,
achieve national reconciliation and strengthen
democratic institutions in the Central African Republic.
We greatly appreciate the work done by the United
Nations Peace-building Support Office in the Central
African Republic, which is assisting the authorities in
their efforts to strengthen the peace process and to
involve the international community in helping the
process of recovery in the country.

Like other members of the Council, we are
disturbed by what the Secretary-General said in his
report about tension in relations between the central
Government and the opposition in the Central African
Republic. As can be seen from the report, the
opposition is still feeding on hopes that it can seize
power again, even after being defeated at the ballot
box, and it is relying on a confrontational approach.
Given the background of social tension and the
difficult economic situation, the absence of a
constructive dialogue between the interested parties
could have dangerous consequences for the future of
post-conflict recovery of the country. Additional
concern arises from the fact that the fragile peace and
stability in the Central African Republic are being
negatively affected by the conflict in the Democratic
Republic ofthe Congo.

We support the appeal by the Secretary-General
to the Government of the Central African Republic to
take steps to reduce the tension between the
Government and the opposition. Like other members of
the Council, we believe that the people of the Central
African Republic themselves bear the main
responsibility for strengthening the peace process, and
they must themselves demonstrate political will in the
interests of national reconciliation. The international
community, including the organs of the United Nations
and the specialized agencies, must do all they can to
help.

