Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I,
too, wish to thank Mr. Voronkov for his informative
briefing on the seventh report of the Secretary-
General on the threat posed by Da'esh (S/2018/770). I
thank also Ms. Coninsx and Ms. Cook for their very
enlightening briefings. I wish specifically to commend
the outstanding work done by the International Centre
for the Study of Radicalisation through its report on the
return of women and minors affiliated with Da'esh.

The report of the Secretary-General underscores
the fact that despite the loss of its territorial foothold,
Da'esh continues to pose a grave threat, both locally and
globally. Its transformation into a global underground
network, the widespread network of foreign terrorist
fighters and the appeal of terrorist propaganda only
make the threat more resilient. In the face of an
enemy that is endlessly adapting, our responses, too,
must evolve.

I wish therefore to stress four areas where France
believes that our efforts can and must be scaled up.

I turn first to the operations of the international
coalition against Da'esh. These must continue so as to see
through to completion the struggle against the terrorist
organization in Iraq and Syria following the decisive
victories over that group, which has lost virtually all
of its territory. In order to prevent its resurgence, our
military actions are complemented by efforts on the
civilian front aimed at a lasting stabilization of the
areas liberated from Da'esh and at reconstruction where
possible, such as in Iraq, in keeping with the pledges
made at the Kuwait International Conference for the
Reconstruction of Iraq, held in February. It is important
that all stakeholders and the United Nations system
remain mobilized and that their efforts be translated
into tangible progress for the peoples concerned.

We must also eradicate the root causes of terrorism
through the implementation of pluralist and inclusive
political solutions in Syria and Iraq that meet the deep-
seated and legitimate concerns of the people. Putting an
end to impunity for the crimes perpetrated by Da'esh in
the Levant is vital to rebuilding inclusive and peaceful
societies. I am specifically thinking here of the grave
violations perpetrated by Da'esh against children and
of the sexual violence against and the enslavement of
more than 6,000 Yazidis. In that vein, France reiterates
its full support for the independent international
investigative mechanisms established by the United
Nations to shed light on the serious crimes committed
in Syria and Iraq and call on all States Members of the
United Nations and the system as a whole to work hand
in hand to that end.

The second area where we need to redouble our
efforts is the struggle against the financing ofterrorism,
which is a top priority for France. Although the loss of
territory has significantly reduced Da'esh's revenues, the
group has devised increasingly sophisticated adaptation
strategies. Our legal and operational frameworks must
therefore also be consistently adapted and strengthened
so as to enhance the transparency of financial flows,
the sharing of information and cooperation with the
private sector.

To that end, last April France organized an
international conference on combating financing for
Da'esh and Al-Qaida that brought together 70 States
and some 20 international organizations. It culminated
in the adoption of the Paris Agenda, which represents
an effective road map for stepping up our commitment,
and we call for the implementation of the commitments
undertaken within that framework.

Thirdly, we must continue our efforts to counter
Internet use by terrorist groups. A significant amount
of progress has been achieved and Internet companies
have mobilized, but a great deal remains to be done, as
demonstrated by the broadcasting of a nearly one-hour
statement by Omar Al-Baghdadi on Telegram on
22 August. We will continue our efforts, including at
the European level, to more effectively obstruct the
dissemination of terrorist propaganda, which fuels
radicalization, and the use of the Internet for the
financing of terrorism.

Finally, the relocation and return of foreign
terrorist fighters remains a more pervasive threat
that our countries must address. In the face of this
challenge, whose complexity was eloquently described
by Ms. Coninsx, we must step up our efforts to track,
monitor and follow up individuals who pose a risk
through the consistent sharing of information. In the
light of the diversity of the profiles concerned, close
cooperation between military, civilian and financial
intelligence services and agencies and with the judicial
authorities is vital to strengthen the nexus between
intelligence and the actions of criminal justice.

Education, social services and justice are vital
to assist families. Through our national mechanism,
France emphasizes specifically caring for children at
the social, psychological and educational levels, in order
to facilitate their integration. We will therefore host in
Paris next September a regional meeting organized by
the Office of Counter-Terrorism on dealing, with full
respect for human rights, with children who accompany
foreign terrorist fighters.

I wish to stress the unifying role that the United
Nations must continue to play in the fight against
terrorism, specifically in areas where Da'esh has
established a presence or that it has infiltrated.
France will continue to provide support to United
Nations bodies in their efforts to identify needs and
the responses required as well as in the promotion of
coordination among all concerned stakeholders in the
wake of the United Nations High-level Conference
of Heads of Counter-Terrorism Agencies of Member
States, held here in late June.

