Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome you to New York, Mr. President, and we are pleased to see you presiding over the Security Council. We also extend our gratitude to the Secretary- General and Mrs. Robinson for their briefings. This year we will mark the closely connected seventy-fifth anniversaries of the end of the Second World War and the establishment of the United Nations. Seventy-five years ago, the conditions were created for the establishment of a post-war global order, and the load-bearing structure of that was the United Nations as the cornerstone of the system of international relations and multilateralism. Enshrined within the Charter of the United Nations are all the principles of multilateralism. Its purposes and principles enjoy the status of imperative norms of international law. The Charter's provisions include the inadmissibility of the use or threat of use of force and the imperative of the peaceful settlement of disputes. There can be no justification for non-compliance with the Charter, under any circumstances. The foundation of that structure is the system of collective security, steered by the Security Council. I would like to emphasize the word "collective". The entire Charter highlights the notion of collectivism and the fostering of friendly relations and cooperation. In addition, the Charter outlines the essential principle of the sovereign equality of all States, large and small. The process of creating a polycentric, multipolar world has become irreversible and not everyone is in favour of it. Attempts at revisionism with regard to the principles of international law embodied in the United Nations Charter are often disguised in pretty packaging. Today's fashionable concept of the rules- based order is the most striking example. Such rules are selected and employed as needed. The purpose of that concept is to replace universally agreed international legal instruments and mechanisms with narrow formats in which alternative, non-consensus-based solutions are developed in circumvention of legitimate multilateral frameworks. In essence, we are dealing with attempts by a small group of States to usurp the process of making consensus decisions on key issues on the international agenda while using this concept as a cover. What is very dangerous is the fact that the proponents of the concept of the rules-based order have set their sights on the exclusive prerogatives of the Security Council without hesitation. I will give a few examples. Following the failed attempt to force politicized solutions through the Security Council - accusing the Syrian authorities, without proof, of using banned toxic substances - the Technical Secretariat of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons was granted the authority to determine who had been responsible for using chemical weapons. That was nothing less than an encroachment on the authority of the Security Council. Another example of disregard for the authority of the Security Council was the establishment of the so-called International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Those Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes in Syria, in contravention of the United Nations Charter. Regrettably, there is an ever-increasing number of such examples of the revision of international law. Recently, we have seen the steady weakening of the disarmament machinery - torpedoing of the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty, withdrawal from the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty and threats to the New Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty and the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty. Today, we face the risk of the entire treaty architecture that covers nuclear missile arms control being dismantled. We believe that any action that seeks to interfere in the domestic affairs of States for the purpose of overthrowing their legitimate Governments is unacceptable. We oppose the use of unilateral coercive measures in the absence of the corresponding Security Council resolutions or in addition to measures taken by the Council, which undermines the role of the Council in the maintenance of international peace and security and is incompatible with the Charter and universally recognized principles of international law, including the peaceful settlement of international disputes, the sovereign equality of States and non-interference in their domestic affairs. For many years now, the distortion of the norms of international law and mindless intervention have caused more suffering in the Middle East and North Africa than in other regions. The lack of a settlement in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, the illegal intervention in Iraq, endless violence in Afghanistan, the murder of the leader of Libya and destruction of the country, attempts to overthrow the legitimate authorities of Syria and the extrajudicial killing of an official of a sovereign State in a third country are but a few examples of actions that have left wounds on the body of international law and order. The quintessence of those regrettable developments was the withdrawal of the United States from the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action on the Iranian nuclear programme, which was approved by the Security Council and is of key importance to nuclear non-proliferation. As a result of increasing confrontation, the region and, indeed, the entire world are on the brink of a conflict whose consequences are unpredictable. We call for an immediate de-escalation. The risk of conflict is too great and the price too high. We must also note one more violation of and non-compliance with international law and _ its unconditional obligations by the host country of the Headquarters of the United Nations. We have been talking about this issue for a long time. The most recent example of this artificial crisis was the denial of a visa to Iran's Foreign Minister, Mohammed Javad Zarif, who was supposed to speak at today's meeting. The Russian Federation believes that strict compliance with the United Nations Charter is the only way to preserve peace. In that regard, we there is no alternative to maintaining and strengthening a system of international relations, based on the United Nations Charter and the universally recognized principles and norms of international law derived from it. Despite all the complexities and contradictions in the modern world, for us and for the majority of countries the United Nations remains the backbone of international relations and the legitimate universal tool that lets us collectively search for responses to crises and challenges. It has a unique mandate for addressing key international issues and maintaining international peace and security and we will continue to uphold it.
