Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the convening of today's meeting and welcome
the presence among us this morning of the Secretary-
General. We would also like to express our gratitude
for Mr. Nickolay Mladenov's very detailed briefing.
We particularly welcome the presence of Mr. Mahmoud
Abbas, President of the State of Palestine, and other
sennior officials.

Peru follows the situation in Palestine with deep
concern. The inflexibility of positions, the absence of
dialogue between the parties and the unbroken stream
of violent episodes have led to a stalemate in the peace
process in the form of an unstable and unsustainable
status quo. Against that backdrop, we stress the
importance and urgency of a forging a basic framework
of understanding that would help to reverse negative
trends on the ground and favour the resumption of
direct negotiations between the parties, with a view to
achieving the only viable solution: two States living side
by side with secure and mutually recognized borders.
In that connection, we should remember the relevance
and validity of the Oslo Accords, which provided the
parameters necessary for such a solution, as well as the
important role of the Quartet.

We consider it necessary, in the political, religious
and social spheres, to act with respect, while also
seeking to build mutual trust as a precursor to the
resumption of constructive dialogue. Leaders on both
sides are responsible for showing tangible restraint, a
commitment to peace and respect for international law
and the Charter of the United Nations.

This leads me to recall the obligation to implement
the resolutions of the Security Council. In particular,
we deem it urgent to put an end to some practices
that have been on the rise in the past year, that is,
settlements, the demolition of homes and eviction, in
the Palestinian territories occupied since 1967. All
of this must stop, in line with resolution 2334 (2016).
Moreover, we urge those parties directly involved to
desist from, investigate and punish all violations of and
international humanitarian law, all terrorists act and all
attacks on civilians.

Tangible steps to this end must be taken. For
example, information must be forthcoming on the
plight of fallen or detained Israeli soldiers. We believe
that the return of the remains of the fallen to their
relatives would be an important gesture of humanity.
By the same token, we believe that it is essential that
the right to legitimate defence be invoked by the Israeli
authorities legally and proportionally and in a careful
manner. The human rights of Palestinian citizens,
including minors, cannot be trampled upon.

In a similar vein, we also believe that it is crucial
to reject hate speech, anti-Semitism and discrimination
in all its forms. In any society, ethnic, cultural and
religious diversity should be viewed as something
precious, never as a threat.

We note with concern the ongoing deterioration of
the humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip, described
a few months ago by Secretary-General Antenio
Guterres himself as

"one of the most dramatic humanitarian situations
I have seen in many years working at the
United Nations".

We deem it urgent to meet the basic needs of the
people in Gaza. Poverty and marginalization are
fertile breeding grounds for radicalization and violent
extremism. It is important to promote sustainable peace,
twinning humanitarian assistance with development
plans that offer hope and opportunities to the youth.

We take this opportunity to reiterate our
appreciation for the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East. It is
important to support the Agency and to endow it with
stable and predictable financing. This leads me to hail
the extraordinary meeting of the donors conference that
took place in Brussels on 31 January, and I also hail the
willingness stated by many countries to use their good
offices and to contribute to alleviating the situation on
the ground.

