Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement (NAM).

I would like to thank the French presidency for
holding this open debate and preparing the concept
note (S/2016/503, annex). I also thank briefers for their
inputs to this debate, which provides an opportunity for
all Member States to evaluate the contribution of United
Nations peacekeeping operations to the protection
of civilians.

The international community is deeply concerned,
because civilians are under attack as never before.
Despite all of the efforts made at the international level
and by the relevant humanitarian institutions, it is most
unfortunate that civilians still account for the vast
majority of casualties in armed conflicts. According to
last year's report ofthe Secretary-General (S/2015/453),

approximately 42 per cent of the world's poor now live
in conflict-affected States, and that figure is expected
to rise to 62 per cent by 2030. Direct attacks on schools
and hospitals have become common features of many
armed conflicts. Humanitarian and health-care workers
are being deliberately targeted. Humanitarian action is
at the core of the United Nations Charter, and civilians
caught up in armed conflict have a right to be protected
by their respective States.

In this regard, NAM. believes that due priority
should continue to be given to the promotion of States'
knowledge of, respect for and observance of the
obligations they assumed under the Charter ofthe United
Nations and international law, including international
human rights law and international humanitarian law,
in particular the four Geneva Conventions of 1949 and
their 1977 Protocols.

We call upon all parties to armed conflict to
redouble their efforts to comply with their legal
obligations by, inter alia, prohibiting the targeting of
civilian populations and civilian property and stressing
their responsibility to ensure general protection against
the dangers arising from military operations to civilian
installations, hospitals and relief materials and the
means to transport and distribute such relief materials.

The Movement reiterates its condemnation of
the increasing number of attacks on the safety and
security of humanitarian personnel and urges the
Governments of States Members of the United Nations
to ensure respect for the protection of the personnel
of humanitarian organizations, in conformity with the
relevant provisions of international law.

Furthermore, the Non-Aligned Movement emphasizes
that the principles of the sovereign equality, political
independence and territorial integrity of all States
and of non-intervention must be upheld. The consent
of the country is also imperative in granting access
to humanitarian assistance to its territory and for its
continued operation at all times.

United Nations peacekeeping missions constitute
one ofthe means at the disposal ofthe United Nations to
protect civilians in situations of armed conflict. Since
1999, the Security Council has tasked United Nations
peacekeeping missions with protection mandates. Such
protection mandates include establishing effective
early-warning mechanisms; ensuring the provision of
adequate resources to monitor, prevent, and respond to
incidents; and supporting the efforts of host-country

authorities to implement their responsibilities in
protecting civilians.

NAM. acknowledges that the protection of civilians
is currently mandated in a number of United Nations
peacekeeping missions, and within this context
stresses that United Nations peacekeeping operations,
in particular with protection of civilian mandates,
should be guided by the principles of the Charter and
not be used as a means for Government change and
military intervention. The Movement underlines that
the protection of civilians is the primary responsibility
of the host country, and accordingly emphasizes that
relevant United Nations peacekeeping missions with
such mandates should conduct their tasks without
prejudice to the primary responsibility of the host
Government to protect civilians. Efforts of the United
Nations must be in support of and not in substitution for
those of national authorities.

We stress that the successful conduct of tasks
related to the protection of civilians requires the
integration of efforts at all levels and a holistic approach
that encompasses the timely provision of adequate
resources, logistical support and required training, as
well as clearly defined and achievable mandates. In
this regard, we acknowledge again the importance for
United Nations peacekeeping operations to support
and build synergies, and to coordinate with host
Governments, including at the local level, in protecting
the civilian population.

The Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms the
importance of protecting civilians in conflict
situations, establishing accountability for violations
of international humanitarian law, and putting an end
to impunity. In this context, NAM. supports the call
made by Palestine regarding the protection of the
Palestinian people.

Let me conclude by expressing the hope that this
open debate will provide an opportunity to assess
the ways and means of providing better protection to
civilians in armed conflict. We need to identify not
only the positive developments achieved so far, but the
challenges ahead.

