Mr. Mufioz (Chile)(spoke in Spanish): I would
like first to thank you, Mr. President, for having
convened this meeting to discuss the situation in
Kosovo. This debate is of great importance, given the
recent events that have taken place on the ground.

We welcome the presence among us of the
Secretary-General, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Germany, Ioschka Fisher, and the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia and Montenegro, Goran Svilanovic.
Their participation is powerful testimony to the gravity
of the events that we are considering today.

My Government condemns with the utmost
vigour the atrocious acts of violence - the worst since
1999 - that have taken place between Kosovo
Albanians and Kosovo Serbs in Mitrovica, Pec and
elsewhere, resulting in a tragic loss of life, injury to
hundreds, including personnel of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and KFOR, and substantial material damage. Those
responsible must be brought to justice. Impunity must
not be allowed to take hold in Kosovo.

We would like in particular to offer our
condolences to and express our solidarity with the
families of those who have died.

The acts of violence, which now seem to be out
of control, cannot and should not pressure us to attempt
interpretations regarding the ultimate motivation of
such violence or cause us to falter in our efforts to
achieve a multi-ethnic, democratic Kosovo capable of
integrating all its inhabitants, without exclusion of any
form, pursuant to resolution 1244 (1999).

We are concerned about the political damage that
may be done to the process by those reprehensible acts.
We therefore call on all the parties involved to abandon
their combative posture and use available peaceful and
democratic means to resolve their differences.

The guns must be silenced and dialogue resumed.
Without constructive dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina, or between UNMIK and the Kosovo
Assembly, a concrete response to the enormous
challenges that exist will remain a remote expectation.
Worse still, the most important of all the objectives -
ensuring that all the inhabitants of Kosovo can live in
their homeland in dignity, freedom and security -
would be undermined.

Finally, we would like to reaffirm our full support
for the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, the personnel of UNMIK and the maintenance
of the policy of "standards before status".

