Mr. Heusgen (Germany) (Spoke in French): At
the outset, Germany welcomes the new Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region,
Mr. Huang Xia, to the Council and pledges its support
for his work. We share his conclusions and those of
the Secretary-General's report (S/2019/783), especially
with respect to the improvement of the cross-border
situation and the positive rapprochement he spoke
of. We also share the view that it is largely due to
President Tshisekedi that we were able to achieve that
cooperation. Germany also supports and encourages
the ongoing regional efforts and rapprochement, as well
as intensifying regional cooperation.

In his briefing, he underlined the remaining
challenges. I will touch upon them briefly. Everyone has
already highlighted the continuing crimes and attacks
perpetrated by armed groups, the forced displacement
of persons and the illegal trade in natural resources.
If those developments continue, they risk derailing the
positive dynamic.

Looking forward, we share Mr. Xia's priorities,
particularly on the need for a comprehensive approach
of which he spoke. In that connection, one point that has
been flagged by many around the table is key - good
governance. On that particular point, Germany echoes
what was said by our American and British colleagues
on the elections in Burundi, which we believe will be
crucial for the development of that country.

Respect for human rights, as Mr. Xia said, is
absolutely vital. People need to be at the heart of efforts
going forward. Action against corruption and impunity
is also essential, and we need to strengthenjustice in all
countries of the region. With regard to the participation
of young people and women, I can only endorse what
my Polish colleague said on those issues just a few
minutes ago.

As the written report of the Secretary-General
spells out, sexual violence continues to rage. As has been
noted, a large part of that sexual violence is committed
by the security forces. That needs to be acknowledged
and addressed. Mr. Xia was not here then, but in April
the Noble Peace Prize laureate Dr. Mukwege spoke
before the Council (see S/PV.8514) and described the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. He
also spelled out what needed to be done to address it.
Thereafter, the Security Council adopted resolution
2467 (2019) to address that issue, and the provisions of
that resolution need to be fully implemented.

On the economic front, again we support what
the Special Envoy said. Cross-border cooperation is
vital. The upcoming Kigali conference on trade and
investment will be key. In order to promote job creation
and more prosperity, there must be good governance. If
the rule oflaw does not improve, it will not be possible
to attract investors.

On the humanitarian front, we share the concerns
expressed by other colleagues with respect to financing.
This year, Germany will provide €66 million for
humanitarian efforts in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the broader region. The Ebola situation is
having a ripple effect on the humanitarian and security
situation. On that issue, we share the view that the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo ought to play a
key role.

To conclude, we support the Special Envoy.
Germany stands ready to contribute to his considerations
concerning potential adjustments to his mandate.

