The President (spoke in French): With the
Council's permission, I should like to make a few brief
comments as President of the French Republic.

My first comment is that what is happening in
Africa concerns us all. We cannot allow poverty to
progress in Africa. We cannot let war tear Africa apart.
We cannot let illness decimate Africans. This is a
problem for the stability of the world.

I say to the Chairperson of the African Union that
there is no contradiction between mobilizing the
international community to assist Africa and our desire
for Africans to take their destiny into their own hands.
We wish to assist Africa in taking its destiny into its
own hands. There are crises that are so serious, so
substantial, that Africa cannot extricate itself from
them by itself. Therefore, I believe in a strengthened
partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union.

And in a certain way, what is happening in Darfur
is extraordinary. We see there the African Union, the
United Nations and Europe, working for peace. And
who here can say that either of those organizations
would have succeeded alone? We are able to make
progress because we are all together, helping Africa,
which will believe once again in its future.

I would like to make a second comment. What
Africa needs are concrete actions, not so many
speeches, but rather concrete actions. Somalia needs
military assistance, including upstream assistance, to
stop piracy and to allow humanitarian assistance to get
through. In Darfur, it is because a hybrid force is going
to be deployed and because a European force will be
deployed in Chad and that a number of countries,
including France and others - the Prime Minister of
Belgium spoke on this subject - that we agree to send
people and wherewithal, that things can progress. For
us, it is not just intellectual solidarity. What we are
talking about operational solidarity.

The third and final comment that I would like to
make concerns respect for the human person. We must
be completely categorical about respect for human
rights, on the progression of the rule of law, on the
need for justice and on punishing criminals. It is not a
matter of giving lessons to anybody. It is simply a
matter of knowing that, in Africa, as elsewhere,
murderers will one day be caught and punished.

Our national public opinions will only support the
huge effort to help Africa - which is never sufficient,
but substantial nonetheless - if we can ensure that
criminals will not go unpunished, that we will not
simply turn the page and go on to the next chapter.
Criminals must be punished everywhere, and that is
perhaps the major responsibility of the international
community. Our collective responsibility is to tell those
who kill in Africa, in Lebanon or anywhere in the
world that we will come after them wherever they are
and hold them accountable in the only legitimate court,
the court of the entire international community, which
will uphold respect for human beings.

We want a coherent effort, working with Africans
for peace, development and stability in Africa. To do
this, we should accept no complacency when the rule
of law is not respected or human beings are not
respected. It is because we defend these ideas that we
all wish to assist Africa together.

To end this meeting, I give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Alpha Oumar Konare, Chairman of the
African Union Commission.

