Mr. Gombo (Chad) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, for presenting his fourteenth briefing
and the forty-eighth report of the Secretary-General
(S/2015/841, annex) covering the period from 21 April
to 21 October 2015.

It is especially alarming that the report, like
those before it, refers to the threat that the historic
General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, signed in 1995, may be called into
question. Indeed, on 15 July, the Republika Srpska
threatened to organize a unilateral referendum in
2018 on possible independence. That impulse towards
secession, even if theoretical, seriously undermines
the Dayton Peace Agreement, which ended the tragic
events which Bosnia and Herzegovina experienced.
The territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina
can in no way be questioned, in keeping with the
aforementioned Agreement.

Furthermore, we note with regret that insufficient
efforts have been made to achieve the "5+2" agenda-the
five objectives and two conditions set for the closure of
the Office of the High Representative on the ground.
There can be no question of considering a withdrawal by
the United Nations, NATO or the European Union-led
peacekeeping force (EUFOR), all of them synonymous
with restored peace and stability. The isolated attacks
that have claimed a number oflives in April at the police
station in Zvornik and the ethnically based incidents
during the ceremony commemorating the twentieth
anniversary of the Srebrenica genocide are signs that
the path to lasting peace and reconciliation between the
communities remains long and difficult. The assistance
of the international community is therefore needed.

We recall that the Srebrenica massacre of 1995,
which claimed over 8,000 lives, qualifies as genocide
under international law. We firmly condemn denial of
that genocide by the leader of the Republika Srpska.
Statements referring to the atrocities in Srebrenica as
something other than genocide offend the memory of
the victims of all genocides. The deliberate refusal of
Republika Srpska partisans to cooperate with the High
Representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina - including,
inter alia, by blocking his access to its archives - is
also part and parcel of genocide denial.

We urge all the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to cooperate fully with the Residual
Mechanism of the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia to accelerate the process
of bringing the accused to trial by national tribunals.
We also urge them to cooperate fully with the High
Representative, in keeping with article IX of the
General Framework Agreement, by granting him access
to the information and official documents he needs to
discharge his mandate.

The issue of refugees and displaced individuals is a
central element of the comprehensive implementation of
the General Framework Agreement for Peace. Despite
the obligation incumbent on the authorities to create
at all levels the economic, social and other conditions
conducive to the harmonious return and reintegration
of refugees without ethnic distinction, the latter are
experiencing great difficulties in returning to their
pre-war homes.

The decrease in the budget of the Office of the High
Representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina by 44 per
cent and of its staff by 51 per cent has had an impact
on its ability to discharge its mission successfully.
However, as we have already indicated, the conditions
necessary for the closure of the Office of the High
Representative do not seem to be present. We therefore
call on all people of good will to lend their support to
the activities of the High Representative.

In conclusion, Chad underscores the need for
respect for the historic Dayton Agreement and all of
its provisions, including the essential role played by
the Office of the High Representative, NATO, and
EUFOR Operation Althea in guaranteeing security and
preventing a return to the starting point.

