Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): Let me thank the
delegation of Panama for convening this open debate
on children and armed conflict. My delegation thanks
you, Mr. President, for coming to New York to preside
over this meeting as an indication of how your
delegation takes this matter in all its seriousness. Allow
me also to extend our appreciation to Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Children and Armed Conflict,
and the Executive Director of UNICEF for their
contribution to this meeting today.

In the past year important precedents have been
set to end impunity for crimes against children,
particularly the recruitment and use of children by
Government forces and armed groups. Several
individuals who have committed grave violations
against children in situations of armed conflict have
been brought to justice by national, international and
special courts and tribunals. A noteworthy achievement

has been the delisting of the parties to conflict in Cote
d'Ivoire from the annexes to the Secretary-General's
report on children and armed conflict (S/2007/757).
These parties earned their delisting by ceasing the
recruitment of children and taking concerted measures
to identify and release children for rehabilitation. The
Security Council should continue to call upon all
parties to armed conflict listed in the annexes to the
Secretary-General's report to prepare, in accordance
with Security Council resolution 1612 (2005), concrete
time-bound action plans to halt the recruitment and use
of children and other violations and abuses committed
against children in armed conflict.

Despite positive developments in the promotion
and protection of the rights of children affected by
armed conflict, the Secretary-General's report
illustrates that armed conflicts continue to have an
impact on children around the world. Children continue
to be recruited and exploited as child soldiers by
parties to armed conflict. Children continue to be killed
or maimed in war zones due to the use of
indiscriminate weapons such as landmines and cluster
munitions. Children continue to be targeted with
various forms of sexual and gender-based violence,
including rape during armed conflicts. Abductions, the
denial of humanitarian access to children and the
systematic and deliberate attacks on schools and
hospitals by parties to armed conflict have also
escalated in certain conflict situations.

The cross-cutting nature of the issue of children
and armed conflict warrants the attention of the
Security Council. The Council should consider giving
equal weight to all six categories of grave violations
committed against children in situations of armed
conflict. Furthermore, the Council should refer to the
International Criminal Court for investigation and
prosecution all six violations against children in armed
conflict that fall within its jurisdiction.

The task of monitoring and reporting and the
submission of timely and accurate information to the
Security Council by the monitoring and reporting
mechanism could be enhanced by mainstreaming child
protection in United Nations peacekeeping operations.
The inclusion of child protection advisers should
therefore be considered when reviewing or creating
mandates for United Nations peacekeeping operations
and political missions. The role of child protection
advisers would contribute to more-consistent advocacy

08-2361]
and response for the protection of children in situations
of armed conflict.

Furthermore, a zero-tolerance policy should be
implemented with regard to sexual exploitation and
abuse committed by United Nations peacekeeping and
related personnel. The implementation of a
comprehensive strategy for assistance and support to
the victims of sexual exploitation and abuse by United
Nations staff and related personnel is also important so
that all children who are victims of, or born as a result
of, such abuse receive support.

The reintegration and rehabilitation of all
children who have been associated with armed forces
or armed groups remains a priority. The international
community should therefore continue to provide
adequate resources to develop and support national
rehabilitation and reintegration programmes that are
relevant and effective so as to ensure long-term
sustainability and success of such interventions. Those
programmes should also take into account the special
concerns of girl combatants and girls associated with
armed groups.

