Mr. Antonio: On behalf of the African Union (AU)
Commission I wish to extend a special welcome to His
Royal Highness Crown Prince Al Hussein bin Abdullah
II and to thank him for his presence among us today,
which attests to his personal commitment and that of
his country regarding the critical global phenomenon
of Violent extremism. I also wish to extend a special
welcome to the honourable ministers and other high-
level officials who have been present at this meeting.
I also wish to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
and Mr. Peter Neumann and Mr. Scott Atran for their
comprehensive briefings.

In Africa, terrorism and Violent extremism
continue to represent the most serious threat to peace
and security. Terrorist groups, such as Al-Qaida in the
Islamic Maghreb, the Movement for Unity and Jihad
in West Africa, Boko Haram, Les defenseurs des
musulmans en Afrique noire "Ansaru" and Al-Shabaab,
have displayed an increased capacity for enlisting youth
into their ranks.

In the report presented to the meeting of the
African Union Peace and Security Council held on
2 September 2014 in Nairobi, the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission outlined factors that have
contributed to creating a breeding ground for alienation
and radicalization. They include, but are not limited
to, widespread conditions of conflict and poverty,
marginalization, human-rights violations, unresolved
conflicts, ethnic, national and religion-based
discrimination and the lack of employment and
opportunities for youth. Those factors, coupled with the
growing exploitation of technology such as the Internet,
have given the terrorists a wide-ranging reach.

Therefore, while we consider solutions and ways
to counter the threats posed by terrorists, it is equally
imperative to engage in addressing the conditions
that contribute to fuelling radicalization and Violent
extremism. Only then can we effectively and sustainably
protect our territories and, more important, our youth
against terrorism and related phenomenona.

ForAfrica, extracting its youth from indoctrinization
and radicalization remains a priority, given that young
people comprise over 60 per cent of Africa's combined
population and represent a huge potential demographic
dividend, as underlined by Secretary of State Manuel
Augusto of Angola.

Over the past two decades, the relevant AU policy
organs have adopted a number of instruments designed
to facilitate and promote coordinated and effective
action against terrorism and violent extremism.
The 1999 Algiers Convention on the Prevention and
Combating of Terrorism and its 2004 supplementary
Protocol, as well as the 2002 Plan of Action on the
Prevention and Combating of Terrorism and the
establishment of the African Centre for Study and
Research on Terrorism, have provided a sound legal
and institutional basis for enhanced cooperation among
member States. From an operational perspective, steps
have been taken to mobilize member States to fully
and effectively implement the AU's normative counter-
terrorism framework.

The African Union's commitment was further
demonstrated by its holding in Nairobi on 2 September
2014 of a special summit of the Peace and Security
Council dedicated to terrorism and violent extremism.
At the Summit, the Peace and Security Council
emphasized the need to address conditions conducive
to the spread of terrorism and violent extremism. It also
stressed the importance of adopting comprehensive
counter-terrorism strategies that empower civil society
organizations, including religious leaders, women and
vulnerable groups, and that cover not only security
and law enforcement but also poverty eradication, job
creation and development. Following the Summit, the
AU Commission convened a forum in Addis Ababa
that brought together the African regional groupings,
relevant United Nations institutions and other
international agencies with the goal of formulating a
coordinated implementation plan.

Efforts to combat terrorism without acknowledging
and addressing the drivers of violent extremism are
likely to be counterproductive. Mindful of that fact, the
AU is actively working with member States to develop
sound national policies and programmes aimed at
countering radicalization, delegitimizing the terrorist's
narratives vis-a-Vis young people, building young
people's resilience in the face of violent extremism
and renewing their confidence in their Governments'
ability to respond to their needs. In that regard, the
initiatives the AU Commission has taken include the
following measures.

First, it is developing and implementing programmes
designed to counter radicalization and violent
extremism in prisons and detention facilities, in order
to rehabilitate disengaged fighters and support their
reintegration into their communities. Initiatives in that
regard are under way in Somalia and will be expanded to
other countries in the future. Secondly, it is facilitating
open discussions between State authorities and civil
society, including religious authorities and women's
organizations, in order to enable communities to air
grievances and contribute actively to efforts to counter
extremist ideologies. Thirdly, it is engaging the media
in countering terrorist narratives and delegitimizing
violent ideologies. The Network of African Journalists
for Peace is now playing an important role in outreach
efforts in that regard. Fourthly, the AU Commission
is providing a platform for Victims of terrorist acts
to contribute to overall efforts to counter terrorism
and Violent extremism. In Algiers in October, the
Commission organized the first AU symposium on the
victims of terrorist acts, a very important part of our
strategy. Fifthly, it is encouraging member States to
ensure that their economic development and poverty
alleviation policies and programmes are successfully
implemented. As a follow-up to the Nairobi Summit,
the AU Commission will work with the African
Development Bank and the United Nations Economic
Commission for Africa to provide the necessary support
to member States.

In conclusion, I would like to thank you once again,
Mr. President, for giving us the opportunity to share our
perspectives on this very important matter with Council
members, and to reiterate the AU's determination to
shoulder its share of responsibility in the fight against
terrorism and Violent extremism in all their forms and
manifestations.

