Mr. Mudenge (Zimbabwe): I wish to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of October. We are
confident that the Council's business will profit from your
wisdom and experience. I also wish to extend our
warmest congratulations to your predecessor, Ambassador
Alfredo Lopes Cabral of Guinea-Bissau, on his excellent
stewardship of the work of the Council last month. Allow
me also to express my gratitude to the Secretary-General,
Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, for his most insightful report
on the situation in Angola, and to his Special
Representative, Maitre Alioune Blondin Beye, for his
tireless efforts in the search for peace in Angola.

On 2 October 1996 the Heads of State or
Government of the members of the Southern African
Development Community (SADC) Organ on Politics,
Defence and Security, deeply concerned about the
stalemate in the Angola peace process, met in Luanda

 

with the intention of giving a fresh impetus to the process.
Since it was UNITA that was failing to honour its
commitments under the Lusaka Protocol, they decided to
invite the UNITA leader, Mr. Jonas Savimbi, so that he
could apprise them fully on why he was not honouring his
commitments. Regrettably, this was not to be, as
Mr. Savimbi, after first agreeing to attend the meeting,
decided at the last moment not to turn up. The SADC
leaders were naturally disappointed by this but decided
nevertheless to proceed with their meeting. They were
extensively briefed by, inter alios, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Angola.

Following a profound analysis of the prevailing
situation in that country, the summit decided to dispatch to
New York the Foreign Ministers of Angola, Botswana,
Mozambique, South Africa and Zimbabwe in order to
convey the region's position on the Angolan situation.
Furthermore, they recommitted themselves to redoubling
their efforts to contribute towards the realization of peace
and stability in Angola. In this connection the summit
mandated its Chairman, President Robert Gabriel Mugabe
of the Republic of Zimbabwe, to hold extensive
consultations with all concerned with the view to
facilitating an early high-level meeting between the
Angolan Government and UNITA, as a way of building
confidence between the two parties.

When the Security Council met in July this year to
review the mandate of the United Nations Angola
Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III), most of us shared the
cautious optimism that prevailed then over the
implementation of the Angolan peace process. Although we
were all deeply conscious of the fact that the peace process
continued to run behind schedule, our hopes were excited
by some of the limited measures which both the
Government of Angola and UNITA were taking. Keen to
recognize that progress, the Security Council, in its last
resolution on the situation in Angola, resolution 1064
(1996), commended both the Government of Angola and
UNITA for registering real movement in the peace process.
Conscious of the need to keep the momentum of the peace
process going, the Council said it would, when next
reviewing the mandate of UNAVEM. III, take into
consideration progress made in the implementation of the
peace process.

It is therefore a matter of great disappointment to us
all that, as the Council meets today, Angola is no nearer to
peace than it was the last time the Council met; instead it
is now hovering between war and peace, as the
implementation process of the Lusaka Protocol is now

 

stalled. Delays in meeting the targets laid out in Security
Council resolution 864 (1993), as well as other political
machinations, are not only undermining the fragile peace
process, but even more depressing, are threatening to
unravel the gains made thus far. Signs abound that narrow
personal and factional interests are again in the ascendant.

Given a schedule of achievable goals and time-
frames voluntarily agreed upon by the Government of
Angola and UNITA, and encouraged by the content and
substance of those agreed steps and measures on the road
to peace, we in southern Africa, and I believe the
international community as a whole, were looking
forward, like the war-weary people of Angola, to the
early formation of a Government of National Unity and
Reconciliation. We were hoping to celebrate the
irreversibility of the peace process in that country during
the course of the UNAVEM. III mandate, which expires
tomorrow. We are therefore naturally disappointed to note
that the political will needed for that final push has been
sadly lacking. Apparently, scheming, selfishness, greed
and self-aggrandizement have stymied the peace process.

The stalemate in the process, as reflected in the
Secretary-General's report, has not only dimmed the
peace prospects, but more ominously has plunged Angola
into a crisis of no peace, no war. That situation has been
brought about by UNITA's non- compliance with
agreements it has already committed itself to.

In his report, the Secretary-General informs us that
over the past three months the Government of Angola
took a number of positive steps, such as continuing the
withdrawal movements of the Angolan Armed Forces
from forward positions, adopting the National Programme
for Demobilization and Reintegration of Ex-Combatants
and allocating up to $70 million of Government funds for
the exercise, and launching the programme for the
disarmament of the civilian population ahead of schedule.
However, while the Government of Angola was taking
these positive steps towards meeting agreed goals within
the specified time- frames, UNITA on the other hand has
dismally failed to honour its commitments, which it
voluntarily made in the context of the peace process.

The Secretary-General's report clearly reveals that
during the past three months UNITA in fact resorted to
obstructing the deployment of UNAVEM. III by hindering
the movement of the Mission's personnel and aircraft, and
by vitiating the extension of the State administration
throughout the country as provided for in the Lusaka
Protocol. Major pieces of UNITA's weaponry and arsenal

 

remain unaccounted for, and the formation of the unified
Angolan Armed Forces remains stymied owing to UNITA' s
procrastination on this issue, despite the deployment of
selection teams to almost all quartering areas.

I need not chronicle the sad plight of the Angolan
people whose fate remains uncertain as long as the no-war-
no-peace situation continues in that country. Suffice it to
say that the 1996-1997 agricultural season is already upon
us in southern Africa, and close to 1.5 million internally
displaced Angolans will, once again, depend on food aid for
the next 12 months simply because there are no adequate
security guarantees to allow them to resettle in their areas
of origin.

Faced with such a dangerous state of affairs only four
months before the expiry of the lifespan of the United
Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III) in
February 1997, the international community owes it to itself
and its credibility and, in particular, to the long-suffering
people of Angola, to do all it takes to bring peace to
Angola. The task ahead of us and the cost of prevarication
have never been so painfully clear. Countless opportunities
for making progress have been frittered away since the
1991 signing of the Bicesse Accords. The time has come to
say enough is enough. Recalcitrance and obstinacy should
not be tolerated or, worse still, rewarded.

The international community has invested too much in
this peace process to see its efforts go down the drain and
its authority challenged ad nauseam. The people of Angola
have waited for too long and sacrificed too much to be
denied peace for the umpteenth time. Their hopes and
aspirations have been raised too high to be sacrificed yet
again at the lowly altar of narrow self-interest and
partisanship.

While calling upon UNITA to redeem itself by acting
responsibly and honouring its commitments, we believe it
is time the Security Council exercised its authority in a
clear and decisive manner to salvage the Angolan peace
process and restore the credibility of the United Nations in
this whole affair. The Council must send a clear,
unambiguous message to UNITA which says: time is up;
the game is over.

If UNITA does not comply with the commitments it
has voluntarily undertaken, then the following additional
measures will be taken against it: all UNITA bank accounts
will be frozen; its offices will be closed and no new ones
will be allowed to be opened; the non-issuance of visas to
UNITA leaders and personnel will come into effect, and

 

there will be a limitation of trips to Bailundo or Andulo
to peace process-related missions. These measures should
come into force within 30 days of the adoption of a
resolution which, inter alia, contains the above provisions
unless the Secretary-General has reported UNITA's full
compliance with the provisions of the Lusaka Protocol.

The Council must leave UNITA in no doubt of its
willingness to take further and more drastic action, if
necessary, to bring peace to Angola.

The countries of SADC have decided to bring the
Angolan peace process to the front burner in their
regional and international engagements. The no-peace-no-
war state in Angola is having a negative impact on
regional cooperation in southern Africa. It is complicating
Angola's role as a coordinator of major SADC-wide
programmes. It is undermining the stability of the region
as a whole. Therefore, besides the initiative being taken
in this Council today, the leaders of southern Africa
intend, as a matter of the highest priority, to initiate
dialogue with all those countries they believe can make a
contribution towards promoting the peace process in
Angola. In this regard, they appealed to all those
countries to refrain from any acts that may negatively
affect the resolution of the Angolan conflict.

We should never forget that the suffering and
innocent people of Angola are mere victims of the now-
defunct colonial, racist and cold-war rivalries. They did
not and certainly do not deserve such a cruel fate. Like
their brothers and sisters in southern Africa, the people of
Angola have suffered enough from the imposed designs
of colonialism, racism - in particular its rabid variant
known as apartheid - and cold-war rivalry. All that the
people of southern Africa are asking for now is a chance
to live in peace so that they can address the myriad
problems and challenges left unattended for decades by
previous colonial and racist regimes in their region. This
is not too much to ask.

We bear no ill will towards any country or
individual for our present predicament. Instead, we are
looking for partners to create conditions for peace,
progress and prosperity for our people in southern Africa.
Our mission to New York is a mission to promote peace
in our region. We are therefore asking the Council to
oblige UNITA to respect fully and urgently the deadlines
established by the Security Council so as to bring peace
and stability to Angola and southern Africa without
further delay.

 

