Mr. van Walsum (Netherlands): We are grateful to
Assistant Secretary-General Annabi for his realistic and
hardly reassuring briefing.

The draft resolution we are about to adopt is a very
sobering one. It plainly lists the major shortcomings in the
implementation of the Lome Peace Agreement before
focusing on the immediate problem of the withdrawal of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) Monitoring Group (ECOMOG). This is the
correct order.

The Security Council is called upon to enable the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) to
take over essential tasks under Chapter VII of the Charter
that were previously carried out courageously and in the
spirit of sacrifice by ECOMOG troops from Nigeria,
Guinea and Ghana. By filling this gap, the Council will
enable the United Nations to continue to assist the parties
in implementing what they agreed upon in Lome on 7 July
1999, but the draft resolution rightly underlines that the
responsibility for the success of the peace process
ultimately lies with the parties themselves.

In the draft resolution, the Council reiterates its call
upon the parties to fulfil all their commitments under the
Lome Peace Agreement, but some important elements of
the peace process have encountered dangerous delays. The
momentum and promise of Lome must be upheld. In
particular, the following is now required. The parties,
especially the Revolutionary United Front Party (RUFP),
must make every effort to speed up the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) process and to
encourage more ex-combatants to lay down their arms.
The recent meeting of the Joint Monitoring Committee
characterized the success of the DDR as minimal.
Parties, especially the RUFP, must refrain from hostile
acts against the United Nations and humanitarian workers.
They must also put an end to defamatory public
statements directed against the United Nations and
UNAMSIL that endanger the peace process.

Those who continue to terrorize the civilian
population of Sierra Leone must realize that the amnesty
of the Peace Agreement does not extend to atrocities
committed after the signing of the Lorne Agreement. The
mechanism called for in that Agreement must be set up
and made fully operational. This applies in particular to
the Truth and Reconciliation Commission, but also to the
Commission of the Management of Strategic Resources,
National Reconstruction and Development (CMRRD).

The reorganization of the diamond mining sector
recently announced by the Chairman of CMRRD must be
in full compliance with article VII, paragraph 6, of the
Lome Agreement. The Commission must ensure that the
proceeds are used for the development of Sierra Leone,
particularly public education, public health, infrastructure
development and compensation for incapacitated war
victims, as well as post-war reconstruction and
development.

With regard to this last point, my delegation would
like to make the following observation: the impressive
activities of Ambassador Fowler as Chairman of the
Angola sanctions Committee have opened our eyes to the
alarming extent to which natural resources can fuel a
conflict. One is almost inclined to conclude that some
African countries are blessed with the absence of mineral
resources. That, of course, is not a very practical and
operational conclusion, but it points at the existence of a
real problem. My delegation would welcome an
exchange of views on this subject in general. It is clearly
also relevant in the West African context.

Given the request for international involvement
contained in the Lome Peace Agreement, we feel that the
Council has the responsibility to see to it that, on this
matter too, the letter and the spirit of the accord are
respected so that Sierra Leone's rich resources can at last
fuel peace and prosperity instead of civil war.

