I have briefed the Council 15 times on the FSO SAFER tanker in the last 15 months. Most of those 15 briefings have repeated the same information. With little concrete progress, there was little new to say until quite recently. But in May, a leak on the FSO SAFER brought us closer than ever to an environmental catastrophe. Last week, Ansar Allah authorities confirmed in writing that they would accept a long-planned United Nations mission to the tanker, which we hope will take place within the next few weeks. We understand that Member States are working to finalize funding to pay for the United Nations mission, which in the first phase will include a technical assessment and any initial repairs that prove possible. Member States have also been helpful in using their good offices to advocate in favour of this work. So this is a good moment to recap where we are with the FSO SAFER and where, we hope, we are going. There are four issues I should like to update the Council on today: first, the recent leak onboard; secondly, what a major spill would mean for local communities; thirdly, what we have been doing about it; and, fourthly, what will happen next. Let us start with the incident beginning on 27 May, when seawater began leaking into the FSO SAFER engine room. It is difficult to know precisely what caused that leak, as no maintenance has been carried out on the FSO SAFER and there have been no international visits to it since the conflict in Yemen escalated nearly six years ago. Water coming uncontrollably into the engine room could destabilize the FSO SAFER and potentially sink the entire structure. That would almost certainly lead to a severe oil spill. As the Council heard from Inger, the FSO SAFER is carrying 1.1 million barrels of oil. That is about four times as much oil as was discharged in the Exxon Valdez disaster - a spill that the world still talks about 30 years later. Fortunately, the engine room leak was relatively small, and divers from the SAFER Exploration and Production Operations Company were able to contain it. That dangerous work took five days, with divers spending a cumulative 28 hours underwater. The world owes them a debt of gratitude, and I want to commend them on their work. But the fix they applied is only temporary, and it is impossible to say how long it might hold. The world might have a bit more time to solve the larger problem, but not much. This brings me to my second point - the impact of a spill. The Council has just heard from Inger about the appalling environmental consequences for Yemen and its neighbours. A spill would also be bad news for the Yemeni people, millions of whom already depend on humanitarian aid after nearly six years of war and now an unprecedented pandemic. Independent experts have modelled what a major spill might look like depending on seasonal conditions and other factors. In every scenario, coastal communities would be severely affected in Taiz, Al-Hudaydah and Hajjah, mostly in areas controlled by Ansar Allah authorities. If a spill were to occur in the next two months, experts project that 1.6 million Yemenis would be directly affected. Essentially every fishing community along Yemen's west coast would see their livelihoods collapse and would suffer substantial economic losses. About 90 per cent of the people in those communities already need humanitarian assistance. Sea currents and seasonal conditions also mean that much of the oil would likely remain near Yemen's coast rather than dispersing widely. As a result, the port in Al-Hudaydah could be forced to close for a period of weeks or even months. Yemen imports nearly everything, and most imports come through Al-Hudaydah or the port at nearby Saleef. Losing either of those ports for an extended period would destabilize critical commercial and aid imports of food and other essential commodities. That would inflict terrible additional suffering on millions of Yemenis, including people who are already going hungry in Sana'a, Saada, Ibb and other places located away from coastal areas. It would also deliver another severe blow to Yemen's already embattled economy. The resulting disruption would substantially accelerate recent trends that are already - once again - pushing the country towards famine. International maritime routes and neighbouring States would also be affected. So I want to be clear that the risk from the FSO SAFER is by no means strictly environmental, dreadful though the environmental impact would be, as Inger has described. It is also a direct and severe threat to the well-being - and potentially the survival - of millions of Yemenis. We are deeply concerned about those people, and we want to do everything we can to avoid this new blow falling upon them. That brings me to my next point: the role of the United Nations. The Government of Yemen and the Ansar Allah authorities formally requested United Nations assistance with the FSO SAFER in March 2018, more than two years ago. The first step was to be a technical assessment, in order to provide impartial evidence to guide the next steps, which might potentially include the safe extraction of the oil and removal of the FSO SAFER structure, were the parties to agree to that. For much of 2018, a coalition-backed military offensive in Al-Hudaydah made it too dangerous to visit the site. But with the Stockholm Agreement in December of that year and the subsequent ceasefire in Al-Hudaydah, safe access again became possible. Since then, the United Nations has been working closely with the parties to secure the necessary clearances so that the United Nations technical team can deploy. The Government of Yemen has agreed to the assessment and has actively sought to facilitate access to the SAFER. The Ansar Allah authorities have also consistently agreed - in principle. In fact, authorities in Sana'a have sent several letters to the United Nations and to the Security Council confirming their agreement. They have also made public statements to that effect. But in the past, the Ansar Allah authorities have been unwilling to accept a mission in practice. Instead, they imposed preconditions and linked the SAFER with other issues. I have provided the Council, in my previous 15 briefings, with a running commentary on this protracted bureaucratic minuet of permissions to visit being sought, apparently being granted and then turning out in fact not to have been granted. The most frequent demand from the Ansar Allah authorities has been to deploy the United Nations Verification and Inspection Mechanism (UNVIM) to Al- Hudaydah prior to any assessment of the FSO SAFER. That is a completely unrelated issue to that of the tanker. I must emphasize here that from a humanitarian perspective, we do not take a position on where UNVIM is deployed. That is a political issue and is subject to agreement by the parties. My only objective - with the FSO SAFER, UNVIM and indeed all of our work - is to alleviate suffering and prevent a humanitarian catastrophe. The Ansar Allah authorities have also sought assurances that repair works will occur simultaneously with the assessment. We would like to do that and so have adjusted the mission plan to include both a technical assessment and whatever initial repairs might be feasible. Obviously, though, you have to find out what the problem is before you can fix it, and you cannot do either without visiting. Initial repairs, insofar as they might be possible, may buy us a little more time to find a sustainable solution, but they will not be enough to eliminate the risk of a disaster. The assessment results will provide an impartial analysis of what needs to happen next and of what kind of equipment and other resources will be required. Without prejudging the outcome of the assessment, industry experts have told us we should expect additional repairs to be necessary. But for the reason I have just given about initial repairs, they do not know exactly what those required additional repairs will be. Experts have also said that extracting the oil is probably the only way to remove the threat of a spill from the 44-year-old tanker for good. This brings me to my last point: where do we go from here? Last week, we received encouraging news. Ansar Allah officials confirmed to the United Nations in writing that they are ready to authorize the United Nations mission to the FSO SAFER. They have also communicated their intention to issue entry permits for mission personnel. I welcome that announcement. We have, of course, been here before. In August 2019, we received similar assurances and, on that basis, deployed the United Nations team and equipment to Djibouti at significant expense. The Ansar Allah authorities cancelled that mission the night before departure. But it is not too late, and we remain eager to assist. The United Nations team can deploy within three weeks of receiving all the necessary permits. We are in touch with the Government of Yemen for their approvals. Yesterday we also submitted an official request to the Ansar Allah authorities, which includes details on the mission plan, personnel and technical equipment. We hope that these requests and other logistical arrangements will be quickly approved, without preconditions. The Ansar Allah authorities have an important opportunity here to take steps that will spare millions of their fellow citizens from yet another tragedy. We are eager to work with them to do this.
