Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I would like to briefly address two issues.

First, I was intrigued by Minister Jeremie's very
interesting proposal that the Security Council visit
Kosovo. As I understand, Mr. Hoxhaj also believes that
such a visit to the province is important to obtaining an
objective and correct understanding of developments
there. The Security Council programme of work for
this year is still not fully determined, so I propose that
the Security Council discuss such a possibility to see if
it can be part of our work programme for 2012.

Now, I should like to return to the matter of
investigating the human organs issue and the Special
Investigative Task Force led by Mr. Williamson. I take
it as a positive sign that the Security Council has
spoken about the work of that group for the first time
today. Of course, it is important that cooperation and
contact be established between the Task Force and
interested parties because it is the only existing
investigation mechanism. Of course, we should support
it and cooperate with it.

Now, with regard to impartiality, we all know that
in politics perceptions are as important as facts, and
sometimes more important. We all know that, for
example, in the United States of America, where we
work, and in many other countries there is a jury
system for trials. The jury selection sometimes takes
longer than the trial itself. Some candidates are
removed not because they are bad people or because
they are not professionally trained, but simply because
their perceptions may not be impartial, which could
have an impact on the case.

I am convinced that the Task Force set up under
Mr. Williamson is a closed group of which little is
known, and its members have not gone through the
kind of vetting process that would normally take place
when a jury is established, simply because certain
28

countries, including the United States, have their
political agendas. I stress that we recognize
Mr. Williamson as a highly professional specialist, and
he has been put into a very difficult situation. To help
him, we must set up the kind of mechanism described
in the Serbian initiative. It would be under United
Nations and Security Council auspices because, unless
such a mechanism is set up, no outcome of the
investigation undertaken by the Task Force that is not
based on confirmed facts and the conclusions of the
Marty report will be accepted as convincing.

They may make every effort and do everything
necessary to fulfil their professional duty, but if they
claim to be unable to confirm this or that assertion, or
the involvement of particular individuals in the crime,
then the international community will not accept them
as convincing. We must understand that we are putting
Mr. Williamson in a bind. In order to avoid such a
dilemma, we again offer our support for the Serbian
initiative to establish a special mechanism to involve
the United Nations in this investigation.

