Mr. Atlassi (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): Let me
start by congratulating you, Mr. President, on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for this month
and on your initiative to discuss the situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question. I would
also like to extend our thanks to Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for her
valuable briefing, as well as Mrs. Nada Majdalani and
Mr. Gidon Bromberg for their briefings.

The policies adopted by the Israeli occupying
authorities against the Palestinian people, including
Judaization, settlement-building and oppression, are
adding insult to injury in occupied Palestine. Not
only is this complicating the situation there, but these
policies are also stirring up bitterness and hindering
any movement towards initiating a peace process that
has been obstructed for years by undermining the
possibility of the two-State solution.

Using force against defenceless civilians and
continued settlement activity in violation of United
Nations resolutions, in particular resolution 2334 (2016),
among others, can never lead to peace or the launch
of a political process. Rather, these actions merely
serve to provoke the Palestinians and the international
community. The lack of dignified living conditions
does not help to build trust or provide the appropriate
framework for launching the peace process to achieve a
two-State solution along the lines of4 June 1967.
Jerusalem holds particular prestige not for
Jerusalemites alone, but for all those who believe in the
three Abrahamic religions, as the first Qibla and the third
of the holy shrines, thereby granting it a special legal
status that cannot be altered in any way, in accordance
with Security Council resolutions. His Majesty King
Mohammed VI, Chairman of the Al-Quds Committee,
has always paid close attention to the city of Jerusalem
and has always affirmed its historic, legal and political
position. He therefore calls on the United Nations,
especially the permanent members of the Security
Council, to assume their full responsibility in order to
avoid any change to that status or impede international
efforts to resolve the Palestinian-Israeli conflict.

His Majesty has called on more than one occasion
for no efforts to be made to undermine the status of
Jerusalem, as this is one of the final status issues.
Given this established conviction regarding the status
of Jerusalem for the adherents of the three heavenly
religions, on 30 March King Mohammed VI, Chairman
of the Al-Quds Committee, alongside the Head of the
Catholic Church, Pope Francis, signed in Rabat an appeal
for Jerusalem. This is an endorsement by His Majesty
and the Pope regarding Jerusalem and its inviolability,
stressing the spiritual aspects of Jerusalem as a city of
peace. That very unique document seeks to preserve
the status of Jerusalem and its special nature as a city
of multiple faiths, including its spiritual dimension and
unique identity.

The statement issued at the end of the historic visit
to Morocco by His Majesty King Abdullah II of the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, upon invitation from
His Majesty King Mohammed VI, stated that, given
their infinite care towards the Palestinian question, they
renewed their full support for the Palestinian people.
The aim is to restore all their legitimate rights and enable
them to establish their independent Palestinian State
within the 4 June 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, on the basis of the relevant international
resolutions, the Arab Peace Initiative and the principle
of the two-State solution. His Majesty rejects all
unilateral measures taken by Israel, the occupying
Power, to change the legal, historic or demographic
position, as well as the spiritual nature of East
Jerusalem, especially the Islamic and Christian shrines.

As for the Syrian Golan, both His Majesty the
King of Jordan and King Mohammed VI affirmed that,
in accordance with the resolutions of international
legitimacy, the Syrian Golan is an occupied territory
and that Israel's decision to annex it is illegitimate, null
and void and constitutes a violation of those resolutions,
especially the relevant Security Council resolutions. In
the same vein, King Mohammed VI has sent a team
architects and artisans to preserve the historic and
cultural aspects of Al-Aqsa Mosque, in coordination
with Jordan.

In conclusion, Morocco's position on this conflict
remains firmly based on the Arab Peace Initiative and
all principles as well as terms of reference aimed at
achieving peace. We call for an independent State of
Palestine with East Jerusalem as its capital, along the
lines of 4 June 1967, living side by side with Israel in
peace, security and harmony.

