The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of Jamaica.

My delegation joins previous speakers in
thanking Under-Secretary-General, Ibrahim Gambari,
the Adviser to the Secretary-General for Special
Assignments in Africa, for his clear and comprehensive
briefing on the situation in Angola.

We also welcome Minister Malungo and thank
him for the important statement he made on behalf of
the Government of Angola.

Jamaica continues to be very concerned about the
continuing war in Angola. Ambassador Gambari's
briefing and the Secretary-General's report clearly
remind us of the adverse effects that the years of
fighting have had on all segments of Angolan society.

UNITA's leader, Jonas Savimbi, has been given
numerous opportunities to reach a political settlement
to the conflict, yet his forces continue to perpetrate
wanton violence on the people of Angola. Those who
assist UNITA to continue the fighting are equally
culpable for the perpetuation of the human tragedy in
Angola. In this context, we wish to underline the
tribute paid to Ambassador Robert Fowler for his
leadership of the sanctions Committee against UNITA
and to thank him for his efforts to bring peace to the
people of Angola.

My delegation renews its call for the leaders of
UNITA to abide by the key provisions of the Lusaka
Protocol and to instruct their forces to lay down their
weapons and allow state administration to be extended
throughout the country. It is time for responsible
leaders of UNITA to accept that a political solution is
the only route towards securing an end to Angola's
intractable and tragic civil war.

The re-emergence of civil society in Angola is an
encouraging beginning for the return to normalcy. We
are encouraged by reports that some members of
UNITA have reacted positively to the initiative of
Angolan church leaders to mediate a negotiated peace
between UNITA and the Angolan Government. We are
fully aware of past deceptions by UNITA's leadership.
However, we believe that efforts aimed at achieving
peace must be encouraged and nurtured by the
international community.

My delegation continues to be deeply disturbed
by the precarious humanitarian situation of the
population. We note that, at the end of June, the
number of internally displaced persons was estimated
at 2.5 million, or some 20 per cent of the entire
population of the country. This number, although
representing a small decrease over the number for May,
speaks to the sense of insecurity still existing in large
sections of the country. The 25 years of conflict have
had a serious negative effect on the youth in Angola,
who continue to be killed, maimed, sexually abused,
recruited as child soldiers and deprived of access to
health care and education. We support the Secretary-
General's proposals to include Child Protection
Advisers as an integral part of the mission of the
United Nations Office In Angola (UNOA).

We welcome the efforts of the Government and
United Nations agencies to draft minimum operational
standards for the resettlement of displaced persons into
safe areas and also welcome the collaboration between
the Government, United Nations agencies and non-
governmental organizations to implement a plan of
action for food security, health and nutrition, mine
action and other vital areas. Jamaica urges the donor
community to respond generously to the next United
Nations Consolidated Appeal that will be presented in
August. The implementation of the action plan is
timely, as access to populations at risk increases as
more regions come under government administration.

We are encouraged by indications that the
Government is prepared to recognize the existence of
human rights abuses and to develop regular procedures
to address these. In this regard, the invitation, reported
yesterday, of President Dos Santos to journalist
associations and unions to participate in the drafting of
a new press law is welcome news. This invitation by
the Government marks the beginning of a debate on
press freedom, the guarantee of which will go a long
way towards ensuring that the necessary checks and
balances are in place to safeguard human rights.

We must assist the fledgling civil society in
promoting dialogue between the parties and thereby
creating an energetic political structure in which
political change is affected by the ballot box. We
realize that this is an arduous task to reverse the mind-
set created by over 25 years of war.

The United Nations, in collaboration with the
Government of Angola, must increase its role in
providing guidance for institution-building and on the
practical implications of democratization. We therefore
commend the efforts of the United Nations
Development Programme to provide support for the
capacity-building of government institutions, such as
was provided to the Ministry of Social Assistance and
Reintegration for the coordination of humanitarian
assistance.

Another critical area which must be addressed is
that of infrastructure redevelopment. We agree with the
Secretary-General's observation in his report that there
is an urgent need to begin to rebuild the destroyed
physical and social infrastructures of Angola and to
afford the people of Angola the opportunity to optimize
the potential that that country's rich natural and human
resources are capable of.

My delegation, fully supported the adoption of
resolution 1294 (2000), by which the mandate of
UNOA was extended. UNOA, which was established to
liase with the political, military, police and other
civilian authorities in Angola, has an important role to
play in exploring capacity-building, humanitarian
assistance and the promotion of human rights. We
welcome the news that the Head of UNOA will be
appointed shortly and are sure that this appointment
will result in the strengthening of collaboration
between UNOA, the Government and other parties in
seeking ways to support the current efforts aimed at
achieving sustainable peace in Angola.

Finally, we cannot forget the tragic loss of life of
United Nations officials, including Mr. Blondin Beye.
We therefore welcome the assistance of the
Government in investigating the crashes of the two
United Nations aircraft in regions recently recovered
from rebel positions. In the same vein, we welcome the
release by UNITA of the five Russian crewmen who
were taken hostage in May 1999.

I now resume my functions as the President of the
Council.

