Mr. Pamir (Turkey): At the outset, let me
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
May and wish you every success.

The statement delivered this afternoon by the
Permanent Representative of Spain on behalf of the
European Union, with which Turkey has aligned itself,
reflected our main concerns, views and expectations
with regard to the situation in the Middle East.
However, allow me briefly to emphasize certain points
at this important gathering of the Security Council.

After what has transpired in recent weeks before
the very eyes of the international community, one
wonders whether more can be said about the conflict
between Israel and Palestine. One thing is certain: it
has created perhaps the most tragic humanitarian
situation in the region in decades. We are deeply
disturbed by the fact that the full implementation of
Security Council resolutions 1402 (2002) and 1403
(2002) has not yet taken place. As long as the
withdrawal of Israeli military forces from the occupied
Palestinian territories remains to be completed, our
concerns will not vanish.

One of the belated, but nonetheless modestly
encouraging developments is the raising of the siege of
Mukata, President Arafat's compound in Ramallah. We

were appalled by the siege and never accepted such
disrespectful treatment of the legitimate leader and
President of Palestine. We hope that the agreement that
paved the way for the raising of the siege will be fully
respected by all. We also hope and expect that the
current stand-off at the holy site of the Church of the
Nativity in Bethlehem will be resolved peacefully and
that all restrictions to which Palestinian civilians are
subjected will be lifted without delay.

Turkey's unswerving resolve against terrorism
and against all forms of violence is well known.
Whenever we have met in this Chamber and discussed
the situation in the Middle East, Turkey has condemned
violence and terrorism in the strongest possible terms,
including the morally repugnant suicide attacks against
the Israeli people. We have always warned the parties
of the counterproductive consequences of the use of
violence. We continue to believe that denouncing
terrorism and violence and taking effective measures
against them can provide the basis on which peace can
be built.

A couple of days ago, in the face of the
uncontrolled situation at hand, active and on-site third-
party involvement was deemed necessary. We added
our voice to those, and in particular to that of the
Secretary-General, who called for united and firm
action by the international community to help the
parties. We welcomed and supported his unrelenting
and energetic efforts, including his initiative to create a
fact-finding team aimed at gathering accurate
information regarding the recent events in the Jenin
refugee camp. We are deeply disappointed by the
failure of this initiative and thus by the non-
implementation of Security Council resolution 1405
(2002). We share the views expressed by the Secretary-
General on this issue in his letter dated 1 May
addressed to the President of the Security Council.

Yesterday's meeting of the Secretary-General
with the "quartet" in Washington, DC, was another
step forward and helped rekindle our hopes for the
future. We are convinced that all three elements of the
newly drawn strategy are relevant and indispensable.

Turkey, with its unique position vis-a-vis the
parties, has always assumed a conciliatory role in the
resolution of the Middle East question. As the recent
crisis escalated, we remained in constant contact with
the parties and tried to be instrumental in seeking
mutually acceptable solutions. More recently, the
Turkish Foreign Minister, Mr. Cem, together with his
Greek counterpart, Mr. Papandreou, visited Israel and
Palestine on 24 and 25 April. The two Ministers held
joint high-level talks with both parties, including Prime
Minister Sharon and President Arafat, and conducted
other consultations. This initiative, which was
welcomed by the parties, not only reaffirmed Turkey's
continued commitment to the Middle East, but also
displayed a unique example of harmony and dialogue
between two neighbouring countries that are known for
their divergent views on several other issues.

Rendering humanitarian assistance to Palestinian
civilians is of great importance and urgency. To that
end, my Government has provided emergency
humanitarian assistance to the Turkish Red Crescent
Society in order to alleviate the suffering of our
Palestinian brothers. Furthermore, we are also planning
to increase our voluntary contribution to the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, in view of its emergency
appeals.

We all know that the road to a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East is arduous and
rugged, but we strongly believe at the same time that it
is attainable. The main building blocks are well known.
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973) and the principle of land for peace are the basic
milestones towards a durable peace. The political
vision is enshrined in Security Council resolution 1397
(2002), which envisages a Middle East where two
States, Israel and Palestine, live side by side in peace
and security within their internationally recognized
borders. In this context, the Saudi initiative put forward
by Crown Prince Abdullah and endorsed by the Arab
League may also play an important role. Let us hope
that all concerned will show the necessary
determination and commitment.

