Mrs. Khoudaverdian (Armenia): I would like to
thank you, Sir, for having convened this open debate
to interact and share our vision of peacekeeping and
its noble objectives and to highlight our collective
commitment to the cause of international and
regional peace. We also thank the Secretary-General
for his briefing and for his genuine efforts aimed at
strengthening United Nations peacekeeping operations.

Armenia aligns itself with the statement delivered
of behalf of the European Union. However, we would
also like to make some remarks in our national capacity.

Since 1948, United Nations peacekeeping has
evolved into a dynamic mechanism for the maintenance
of international peace and security. Today, it plays an
indispensible role in creating conditions for building
lasting peace and development in many conflict-prone
societies.

Armenia believes that the larger objective of
peacefully resolving conflicts and achieving durable
settlements can best be achieved only through a
comprehensive approach, including a considerable
investment in prevention, political facilitation and
mediation within internationally agreed forums. In that
regard, there is a need to reassess the ways in which the
United Nations and other regional organizations engage
in assisting countries emerging from conflict. We must
uphold the principle of "do no harm" and review how
we operate in different situations to ensure that our
actions do not undermine the existing mediation and
negotiation processes.

We share the views expressed by Council members
and other speakers that call for more systematic attention
to the United Nations peacekeeping dimension as
well as to post-conflict peacebuilding, and we believe
that it should be frequently reflected in the Council's
deliberations.

This open debate offers an opportunity to consider
some of the core issues related to the peacekeeping
agenda, namely, the political dimensions of
peacekeeping and peacebuilding and the relationship
between security and development.

United Nations peacekeeping operations are also
viewed as vital to building peace in post-conflict
situations through the promotion of compliance
with international norms and the basic principles of
peacekeeping, including the consent of the parties to
the conflict, impartiality and the non-use of force.

Armenia remains committed to post-conflict
peace initiatives and believes that the Security Council
should further strengthen the rule of law and advance
development initiatives by supporting peacebuilding
mechanisms such as the Peacebuilding Commission,
which helps countries emerging from conflict in their
recovery and reintegration efforts aimed at preventing a
relapse into armed conflict and at building a sustainable
peace through effective peacemaking, peacekeeping
and peacebuilding strategies.

It is noteworthy that the Peacebuilding Commission
has shouldered an important task for the United
Nations peacekeeping dimension in defining post-
conflict strategies, and we are encouraged that previous
reports indicate that it has registered achievements and
satisfactory results in some countries.

It is also important that the programmes adopted
be country-specific, needs-based and target-oriented,
so as to ensure continued adherence from the affected
population and to ensure their success.

Armenia joins previous speakers in reiterating the
need for the equal and effective participation of women
at all stages of the peace process and their involvement
in conflict prevention and resolution and the transition
from conflict to peace. Female peacekeepers act as
role models in the local environment, improving,
inter alia, access and support for local women and
contributing to empowering women in the community.
Such contributions lead to better outcomes for entire
societies.

In conclusion, allow me to pay special tribute to the
tens of thousands of Blue Helmets who over the years
have served the cause of peace under the United Nations
banner. Armenia applauds their professionalism,
dedication and sacrifice, which have been instrumental
in bringing peace, stability and hope to millions of
people affected by conflict worldwide.

