Mr. Gaye (spoke in French): I express my deep
respect and thanks to the Council for this opportunity
to take stock of the situation in the Central African
Republic.

Significant progress has been made in the protection
of populations that continue to suffer violence. The
violence is the result, particularly in recent weeks,
of intercommunal tensions related to the seasonal
migration of Fulani herders and their livestock. The
violence also continues to prevail in Bangui and in the
west of the country due to the anti-balakas, which, like
the ex-Selekas in the central and eastern parts of the
country, are seeking to overthrow the State. The still
fragile return of State authority has failed to prevent or
case community tensions.

The enclaves of at-risk populations, especially
Muslim communities, therefore remain threatened
despite the efforts of humanitarian actors and the
international forces. The humanitarian situation
remains grave throughout the country. The numbers
of the displaced have continued to rise; some 50,000
have been displaced since January. At the same
time, humanitarian access has suffered from the
fragmentation of armed groups.

(spoke in English)

Turning to the political situation, the historic local
consultations were completed in March and covered all
16 prefectures. These local consultations offered the
citizens of the Central African Republic an opportunity
to express their views on issues at the heart ofthe crisis,
includingjustice and reconciliation, peace and security,
governance and socioeconomic development priorities.
The Government's report on the local consultations
will serve as a basis for discussion and debate at the
Bangui Forum.

On 7 April, the Bangui Forum Preparatory
Commission presented its final report to the Head
of the State of the Transition, Ms. Catherine Samba-
Panza, the international community and the public.
The document includes reports from the Commission's
four thematic working groups on peace and security,
justice and reconciliation, governance, and social and
economic development.

Between I and 7 April, the Government issued
four decrees relating to the dates of the Forum, the
establishment of the presidency, and its organization and
technical committees. On the same day, the President of
the National Transitional Council issued a declaration
demanding the elimination of the decree, notably due to
the lack of consultation with the National Transitional
Council. The United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central
African Republic (MINUSCA) immediately provided
good offices, through consultations with national
stakeholders and international partners, with a view to
diffusing the tension among the transitional authorities
and promoting an approach based on consensus. This
effort resulted in the issuance yesterday of a new decree
on the composition of the Forum's presidency, which
I believe provides for a more inclusive approach. In
the same vein, during his long interaction with the
Transitional Council yesterday, the Prime Minister also
contributed to the overall reduction in tensions.

MINUSCA is also prepared to facilitate discussions
between the Transitional Authority and armed groups
prior to the Forum. These talks are intended to foster a
broad agreement on principles for security sector reform
and a disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR) strategy that will be further refined during the
Forum, and will serve as an opportunity for armed
groups to recommit to the provisions of the 23 July
2014 Cessation of Hostilities Agreement signed in
Brazzaville.

The completion of the inclusive Bangui Forum
national dialogue will be another milestone in the
transition. Commitment on the part of all national
stakeholders, including political and military leaders of
armed groups, will be critical to keeping the transition
on track and opening the way toward next steps in
the transition process, including the organization
of elections and the launch of longer-term national
reconciliation efforts. Pending agreement on a national
and inclusive DDR strategy, MINUSCA has begun
activities to support the regroupment process through
labour-intensive public works projects that have been
launched in high-risk areas and target young people at
risk, including ex-combatants.

The transition has reached a critical stage. The
organization of credible elections will mark the end of
the transition. In that regard, the electoral process is
facing challenges, including, notably, the registration
ofinternally displaced persons and refugees outside the
country. Security and financial challenges continue to
impede the work of the National Electoral Authority.
As of 2 April, the Authority had established 97 of its
142 field offices.

While MINUSCA has provided advice on operational
plans for security and electoral operations, it is of serious
concern that the basket fund of $44 million managed by
the United Nations Development Programme still has a
49-per cent funding gap. Indeed, the timely completion
of the electoral process is linked to the timely receipt of
funds for the electoral process, and we call on Member
States' prompt response to this appeal.

During the most recent meeting in Brazzaville
of the International Contact Group on the Central
African Republic on 16 March, participants urged
the Transitional Authorities to accelerate electoral
preparations and to review the legal framework in
order to identify options to simplify the process. The
International Contact Group also urged the Transitional
Authorities to respect the ineligibility clause in
the Constitutional Charter that prohibits high-level
transitional Government officials from standing for
office. The final communique reiterated the timeline
for the transition, with an end date of 15 August.

(spoke in French)

The Central African Republic is entering a crucial
phase of its return to security and stability. The recent
visit of the Security Council to the country, along with
its decision to grant MINUSCA a reinforcement of
750 soldiers, 288 police officers and 20 officers of the
prison administration, reflect its attentive support for
the Mission.

The interest and continued support of international
and regional partners remain more essential than
ever. This interest and support help to ensure not
only the normal course of the transition, but also the
continuation of humanitarian operations in the country
with adequate resources. I take this opportunity to
call on all international partners to maintain their
commitment to supporting the humanitarian operations
that the country so badly needs. To date, consolidated
United Nations support for humanitarian assistance for
the Central African Republic covers only 13 per cent of
the necessary funds.

Restoring security, promoting inclusive political
dialogue and completing the transition is only the
beginning of the long journey of the Central African
Republic to stability and sustainable development.
Central Africans continue to rely on MINUSCA for
the effective implementation of the mandate, with the
commitment and ongoing support of the Council. The
international community has a moral obligation to help
the Central African Republic and its people to remain
on the path of peace and reconciliation. That is our
collective responsibility.

