Mr. McNee (Canada): I would like, Madam
President, to thank you and the Nigerian delegation for
convening today's meeting on this important theme. I
would also like to thank both Under-Secretary-General
Holmes and the High Commissioner for Human Rights
10-43968

for their presentations this morning, and to join others
in praising John Holmes for his deep commitment and
very effective work in protecting civilians.

Since the last open debate (see S/PV.6216) on this
subject less than eight months ago, unfortunately there
has been no shortage of civilians in need of protection.
Long-standing crises in Somalia, the Sudan, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Afghanistan -
as we have just heard - have been joined by new
crises in Yemen and Kyrgyzstan. The international
community continues to grapple with protection issues
related to displacement, sexual and gender-based
violence and the forced recruitment of children into
armed conflict on a large scale.

Canada is pleased that the Council remains
actively seized of the need for strategic action, and we
believe that progress is being made. A clearer agenda
for the protection of civilians is emerging, with
increasing political engagement evident in the adoption
of four new Security Council resolutions over the past
year on the protection of civilians; women, peace and
security; and children and armed conflict. These
resolutions have been practical, providing an
operational focus with respect to peace operations, and
stronger tools in implementing the women, peace and
security agenda and the monitoring and reporting
mechanism for grave violations against children.
Canada welcomes the appointment of a Special
Representative to provide leadership and coordination
on addressing sexual violence in armed conflict.

Outside the Council, the African Union
Convention for the Protection and Assistance of
Internally Displaced Persons in Africa sends an
important signal about the seriousness with which
Africa - which is home to around half of the global
total of internally displaced persons - considers the
issue.

Nevertheless, despite these positive efforts,
regular reflection and refinement are needed for those
areas where action still falls short. Sustained,
pragmatic commitment is needed, as is the
mainstreaming of protection issues into policy and
decision-making processes. I would like briefly to
highlight three key areas of focus where positive
changes, we think, can be made: first, consistency in
the Council's approach; secondly, enhancing protection
through more effective peace operations; and, finally,
accountability.
3

First, in our view the Security Council would
benefit from better-defined trigger mechanisms to
complement the aide-memoire (see S/PRST/2009/l, annex) and assist the Council in determining when and
how to engage when civilians are at risk. Too often, it
seems that there is a tendency to overlook those
contexts of which the Council is not actively seized
and to delay action rather than to get out in front of a
crisis. In this respect, the Council would benefit from
contingency planning when parties do not respond to
its resolutions or sanctions, and from the ability and
willingness to draw on other tools at its disposal, such
as commissions of inquiry, expert panels, envoys and
preventive deployments. Canada views the expert
group as an important forum for the humanitarian
community to brief the Council informally on
protection of civilians issues.

Secondly, we must continue to encourage greater
complementarity while reducing overlap and competition
among those engaged in peacemaking, peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and humanitarian response. Those
involved in peace operations should respect
humanitarian principles, while humanitarian actors
should recognize the need to re-establish the
responsibility and legitimacy of national institutions. If
peace processes are really to take hold, the rights and
well-being of civilians, including women and girls,
must be integrated into all peace processes, peace
agreements and post-conflict recovery and
reconstruction planning and programming. This means
building a holistic approach that is not focused solely
on a given humanitarian, military or policing task but
includes action on human rights, the rule of law,
political, security, development and disarmament.

In all these efforts, the international community
must be attuned to including the voices of those affected,
including refugees and internally displaced persons. The
independent study jointly commissioned by the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, as well as the
New Horizon initiative, present a comprehensive set of
recommendations on how peace operations can be
strengthened to better meet protection concerns.
Canada welcomes the efforts of the Secretariat to close
the gap between mandates, expectations, roles and
responsibilities. My delegation looks forward to the
establishment of clear benchmarks and guidelines to
ensure that peacekeeping missions are provided with
the tools to protect civilians properly.
When it comes to engagement by regional
organizations, it is critical to ensure clarity around
roles, expectations and lines of accountability. On the
ground, special representatives of the Secretary-
General and country teams must regularly assess,
monitor and report on the implementation of these
mandates. They must be able to rely on the Council's
support and receive the training and resources needed
to fulfil their roles. In turn, Member States have a key
role to play in providing the political momentum to
drive the protection of civilians agenda forward.

(spoke in French)

Thirdly, in many conflicts it is frequently the
absence of accountability that allows violations to
thrive. Protection work is first and foremost a sustained
and multifaceted effort to develop an environment
conducive to the rule of law. Whatever the nature of
the threat to civilians, compliance with international
law by all parties concerned is the best guarantee for
ensuring their safety. Strong, independent, transparent
and dependable judicial and policing institutions are
fundamental in that respect. The restoration of law and
order to prevent further violence and encourage
accountability must be a key priority for the States
concerned, the Security Council and peace operations.

The Council has an important role to play in
calling for security system reform and transitional
justice mechanisms and for supporting those reforms.
Canada is pleased to provide direct support to the
ongoing work of the United Nations in this area,
including via the inter-agency Security Sector Reform
Task Force in order to generate an integrated, holistic
approach to those reforms.

In the absence of adequate local capacity, the
rapid deployment of international civilian law
enforcement and criminal justice experts could make
an important contribution. Canada will continue to
make important investments in this key area, on both a
multilateral and a bilateral basis. Canada can never
stress strongly enough the fact that the protection of
civilians also includes ensuring the safety and security
of those individuals who put their lives on the line
every day to reach those in need.

The past year has been difficult for humanitarian
workers who have witnessed their colleagues abducted,
threatened and sometimes killed in the discharge of
their work. This situation is unacceptable. We
recognize the efforts under way to improve protection
10-43968
of staff, including national staff, who are often the
most vulnerable. We all have an obligation to support
those on the front line of humanitarian action.

In closing, Canada sees the protection of civilians
in armed conflict as an essential element in the
maintenance of freedom, democracy, human rights and
the rule of law. We recognize that this is a complex and
multilayered issue requiring concrete action to apply the
rules that Member States and the Council have adopted.
With focused and consistent engagement, the potential
exists to make strong gains over the coming year.

