Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): The
United Kingdom would like to align itself with the
statement to be delivered later by the Ambassador of
Finland on behalf of the European Union. I would like
to thank Mr. De Soto for his briefing.

The United Kingdom is profoundly concerned by
the situation in Gaza. We are concerned that the recent
increasing intra-Palestinian violence and the continuing
Israeli military action both have resulted in a number
of Palestinian fatalities, in both Gaza and the West
Bank. The United Kingdom extends its deepest
sympathies to the families that have suffered losses.
We are also, of course, concerned about the continuing
rocket attacks on Israeli civilian targets. At the heart of
the problem is the need for Palestinians of all factions
and allegiances to refrain from violence and to work
together to restore calm.

It is easy to be despondent at the apparent lack of
progress and at the difficulties that we confront. The
political perspectives are gloomy and difficult. Yet at
the Security Council meeting in September, there was
seriousness and determination to make progress on the
Middle East peace process, a consensus on the way
forward. The events of this summer underlined why,
without solving the fundamental issues, we would face
continuing risks of conflict that would affect the
stability and prosperity of the region and, indeed, more
widely. We must therefore build upon the spirit in the
Chamber in September, including by looking forward
to the action points agreed by the Quartet at its
ministerial meeting here that month, by building on the
Quartet's relations with parties working in the region
and, essentially, by revitalizing the work of the
Quartet.
06-57842

The United Kingdom sees two basic conditions

for progress. The first is the immediate release of

Corporal Shalit; the second is progress on the political

track, which requires a valid partner with whom we can

work. On the Palestinian side, there must be someone

who has the confidence of the international community

and of Israel. We believe President Abbas is that

partner for peace. An early meeting between him and
Prime Minister Olmert is a vital first step.

But President Abbas and the Palestinian people
face tough choices in the days ahead about their
Government and about its relations with Israel and the
international community. But we should be clear that it
is Hamas that has the responsibility for the failure so
far to establish a national unity government. As the
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General has
pointed out, it was Prime Minister Haniyeh who
brought negotiations to an end. We should be clear
about what the international community is asking. A
Palestinian Government based on the Quartet's three
principles is one we could support, and with which we
could work towards peace.

But meanwhile, as long as Hamas acts against the
wishes of the majority of Palestinians, refuses to accept
a two-State solution, refuses to recognize Israel and
refuses to renounce violence, then the international
community - and I now speak for the United
Kingdom and our partners - will have to continue to
channel assistance to the Palestinian people through the
temporary international mechanism, which the Quartet
recently agreed to extend.

Bilaterally, the United Kingdom is working with
others on plans to improve security at the Karni
crossing, to enable Palestinians to export their harvest.
We are also working separately on plans to help build
the institutions basic to a Viable Palestinian State -
plans that we hope to put into effect as soon as we have
a Government with which we can work.

The conflict between Hizbollah and Israel that
began on 12 July was brought to an end on 14 August,
after members of the Council unanimously adopted
resolution 1701 (2006). It is now over two months
since the fighting ended. The situation in Lebanon has
improved significantly. The cessation of hostilities
continues to hold. The reconstruction effort is now
under way. Israeli forces have largely withdrawn, and
the Lebanese armed forces have deployed throughout
Lebanon for the first time in many years, including
06-57842

along the Blue Line. It has done so with the support of
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL), operating under an enhanced mandate. In
that connection, the Lebanese armed forces, the United
Nations and those countries contributing to UNIFIL are
to be commended for the determination they have
shown in taking forward the will of the international
community, and doing so speedily.

For our part, the United Kingdom remains
committed to the full and speediest possible
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006). We continue
to work with the United Nations and international
partners to ensure that Prime Minister Siniora and the
Government of Lebanon have our full support in their
efforts to secure and maintain Lebanon's sovereignty
and prosperity.

But we are concerned by the role that Syria and
Iran have played in financing and arming groups in
Lebanon. We have repeatedly called upon them to stop
their support for Hizbollah and to end their interference
in Lebanese internal affairs, in accordance with
resolutions 1559 (2004), 1680 (2006) and 1701 (2006).
Both of those countries, if they chose to do so, could
play a constructive role in furthering the aims of peace
in the Middle East. But while they continue to support
and encourage extremism, they only threaten the
stability of the region and put peace in the Middle East
further out of reach. We continue to urge all countries
to implement the Security Council's requirements and
to provide firm support to the Government of Lebanon
in meeting the challenges ahead.

We have made remarkable progress on the ground
in Lebanon in recent weeks, but let us all be very clear:
All of that progress will be at risk if those who do not
share our objectives of a stable, independent and
prosperous Lebanon succeed in destabilizing its
legitimate Government. That is what we have to guard
against.

In conclusion, despite the difficulties, there are
signs of progress. It seems to me that what is clear to
the Council is that we have to keep the faith in
recognizing the vital need to continue to address this
issue, make progress and take every opportunity that
we can find - all of us - to continue to work for the
comprehensive peace and understanding that have been
set out so many times in resolutions by the Council.

