Mrs. Albright (United States of America): The United
States welcomes the candid and detailed report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Tajikistan and
supports the Secretary-General's recommendation that the
mandate of the United Nations Mission of Observers in
Tajikistan (UNMOT) be extended for another six months.
In doing so, though, we would like to underline our serious
concern about the deterioration of the military situation in
Tajikistan and the continued lack of progress in the United
Nations-mediated inter-Tajik talks.

As the Secretary-General notes in his report, Tajik
Government and opposition forces are now engaged in
some of the most serious fighting in the country since the
end of the civil war in 1992. The two sides continue to
profess their commitment to the standing cease-fire but, in
practice, have reinforced their troops, conducted offensives
and counter-offensives and shown little inclination to end
this dangerous spiral. There have also been reports that
areas of northern Afghanistan have been bombed or shelled
in recent months, apparently in connection with the Tajik
conflict. We urge, in the strongest terms, both sides to end
the fighting now and abide strictly by the terms of the
cease-fire.

The lack of progress in the peace talks is also a
serious problem. The last two sessions of the talks appear
to have made little headway towards a resolution of the
conflict, despite the best efforts of the United Nations
Special Envoy, Mr. Piriz-Ballon. We are dismayed by the
seeming inability of the two sides thus far to agree even on
confidence-building measures, such as prisoner exchanges.

One key element towards national reconciliation would
be resumption of the operations of the Joint Commission
for monitoring the cease-fire accord. We support the
resolution's call on the United Tajik Opposition to accept
the written security guarantees recently put forward by the
Government. At the same time, we urge the Government to
intensify its investigation into the 24 February kidnapping
of the opposition Co-Chairman of the Joint Commission,
who is still missing.

The two sides must also abide by their commitment
to allow UNMOT observers freedom of movement and
unfettered access to areas where cease-fire violations may
have occurred. The Secretary-General reports that
UNMOT's activities have been severely impeded by both
sides. This would appear to call into question the parties'
commitment to UNMOT's mission.

We welcome the new Special Representative,
Mr. Merrem, and commend his active efforts to get the
next round of talks under way as soon as possible. We
regret that the Government was unable to accept
Mr. Merrem's invitation to begin the talks on 17 June.
We understand that the talks could occur in the first part
of July, and urge the Tajik parties not to let this date slip
any further.

Finally, I want to underline my Government's strong
endorsement of the passage in this resolution calling for
a review of UNMOT's future in Tajikistan should
prospects for the peace process not improve during the
mandate period. UNMOT's presence in Tajikistan is a
concrete demonstration of the international community's
commitment to helping the Tajik parties achieve peace
and national reconciliation. However, UNMOT can be
truly effective only if the parties themselves recommit
themselves to these objectives.

