Mr. Zaayman (South Africa): South Africa
welcomes the convening of this open debate. Since
the dawn of our democracy in 1994, South Africa has
been steadfast in its commitment to multilateralism in
addressing the peace and security challenges facing the
global community, including the horizontal and vertical
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (WMD)
and their means of delivery. South Africa reaffirms that
no cause could ever justify the use or threat of use of
weapons of mass destruction anywhere, by anyone or
under any circumstances.

Nuclear weapons remain the most indiscriminate
and inhumane weapons ever to have been developed.
Together with the vast majority of the international
community, we believe that all efforts should
consequently be made to ensure that those weapons are
never used again, under any circumstances. The pursuit
of nuclear disarmament is, therefore, not only a legal
obligation, but also a moral and ethical imperative.

It is in that context that my delegation welcomes
the convening of the United Nations conference to
negotiate a legally binding instrument to prohibit
nuclear weapons. My delegation would like to stress
that the instrument being negotiated is not a proverbial
silver bullet that can cure all ills. Its main purpose is
to encourage progress towards the total elimination of
all nuclear weapons by stigmatizing and delegitimizing
such weapons on a global scale.

We share the concern of the international community
about the threat posed by non-State actors acquiring
weapons of mass destruction and in this regard remain
committed to the strengthening of transfer controls
as called for in resolution 1540 (2004). We recognize
the need for international assistance and cooperation,
especially for States that may not have the requisite
resources to give effect to their obligations. In our view,
accomplishing the full implementation of resolution

1540 (2004) requires continuous and sustained efforts
at the national, regional and international levels.

At the national level, South Africa has over the
years strengthened its implementation capacity through
comprehensive national legislation focusing on WMDs
and their means of delivery. Our domestic legislation
is subject to continuous review, taking into account
new technological developments and experiences in
national implementation.

While dealing with the aforementioned challenges,
it is imperative that unwarranted restrictions not be
imposed on the inalienable right of Member States,
particularly developing countries, to use any related
materials, equipment and technologies for peaceful
purposes. In this regard, the opportunities provided
by nuclear technologies in the implementation of the
Sustainable Development Goals, particularly in areas
such as food security, public-health technologies and
clean energy, cannot be overlooked.

Furthermore, the exchange of scientific information,
equipment and materials for peaceful purposes is
greatly needed in Africa to deal with the spread of
infectious diseases, which could derail socioeconomic
growth and development if not adequately addressed.

South Africa's experience with the implementation
of control regimes has demonstrated that the challenges
of WMDs and their delivery systems can be addressed
by, first, strengthening national legislation and
implementation capacities; secondly, accelerating the
provision of capacity-building and technical expertise,
especially to developing countries, including in Africa;
thirdly, strengthening international cooperation
with other related international organizations;
fourthly, ensuring adequate and predictable funding
for the relevant international organizations and
implementation support structures so as to enable them
to implement their mandates; fifthly, strengthening
cooperation between regional organizations and the
relevant multilateral organizations; and, sixthly and
finally, enhancing cooperation with civil society and
the private sector.

In conclusion, the threat of WMD proliferation
can be dealt with effectively only through increased
international cooperation and assistance as well as the
strengthening of the relevant multilateral instruments
and institutions. What is required is a faithful and
balanced implementation of the various international
legally binding instruments.

