Mr. Temenov (Kazakhstan): We commend the
presidency for putting the spotlight on a comprehensive
approach to building and sustaining peace in the
Sahel region. The delegation of Kazakhstan would
also like to thank Mr. Ibrahim Thiaw, Special Adviser
of the Secretary-General for the Sahel; Mr. Ion
Jinga, Permanent Representative of Romania, in his
capacity as Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission;
Mr. Hafez Ghanem; and Mr. Remy Rioux for their
insightful briefings.

We would like to commend the Government of
C6te d'Ivoire, other countries of the region and regional
and subregional actors, as well as the World Bank and
international donors, for their efforts to strengthen
peace and security throughout the region. We also praise
Mr. Thiaw and Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Chambas for advancing the recalibration of the
United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel.

We support strengthened regional and subregional
cooperation, which is extremely vital in order to have
an effective impact. Such collaborative efforts have
yielded the latest positive political and economic
developments that we have witnessed in Sahel countries.
At the same time, several challenges continue to affect
stability in the region. The security situation continues
to deteriorate owing to the further spread of terrorist
and extremist groups. That insecurity is further
aggravated by the alliance of those groups with actors
involved in transnational organized crime and drug and
human trafficking, as well as arms proliferation in the
region. The effects of climate change, food insecurity,
forced displacement, rapid population growth and weak
governance also add to the complexity of the situation.

Kazakhstan is a strong proponent of the
three-pronged strategy to achieve regional peace and
stability through: first, strengthening the security-
development nexus; secondly, adopting a regional
approach; and, thirdly, streamlining the United Nations
system to deliver as one. While we welcome the United
Nations reform on repositioning the development
system with greater coordination among the various
relevant United Nations agencies at the country level,
we now have to go further and increase coordination
at the regional level to advance peace and development
on a comprehensive and efficient basis. Such a
comprehensive overall strategy would prove to be a
most effective and sustainable tool to address common
threats facing the Sahel and neighbouring countries.
In our View, the recently calibrated United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel, the United Nations
Support Plan for the Sahel and the reviewed African
Union Strategy for the Sahel Region will form a robust
and comprehensive framework that will embrace all the
measures needed to achieve peace and prosperity in the
Sahel. We call on all stakeholders to make every effort
to implement those strategies. Let me focus on some
issues that we believe are important for the overall
success of those strategies.

The first concerns the joint regional counter-
terrorism efforts through the Joint Force of the Group
of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel). We welcome increased
national and regional ownership in addressing the
threat posed by terrorism and extremism, and support
the full operationalization of the Joint Force of the
G-5 Sahel. In order to succeed, there is a need for the
unanimous political support of the Security Council,
increased technical assistance from Member States and
predictable and long-term sustainable funding. In turn,
the G5-Sahel States should strengthen coordination
and complementarity between the Joint Force and other
security forces in the region, including the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali, and ensure that operations are better
aligned with broader regional initiatives.

Secondly, we share the assessment of Special
Adviser Thiaw that, in order to effectively address
instability in the region, any military approach
and humanitarian assistance should go hand in
hand in addressing the root causes of conflict and
development efforts in an integrated, complex and
well-coordinated manner, reinforced by long-term
sustainable funding. Our efforts need to focus on the
structural drivers of instability by decreasing poverty,
providing basic services, creating better opportunities
for education and employment, strengthening local
governance and mitigating the impact of climate
change. We therefore strongly support United Nations
peacebuilding programmes, as well as all the regional
and international efforts aimed at building resilience
in human and environmental systems and increasing
peace and prosperity in the region. We commend in
particular the Alliance for the Sahel initiative for
launching development and rapid-impact projects
aimed at creating new jobs and supporting rural areas
with improved infrastructure and services.

Finally, we underscore the importance of
preventing the radicalization of young women and
men by investing in education and employment and
promoting the meaningful inclusion of women and
youth in political and development processes. In that
regard, we welcome the convening of the first annual
Youth Regional Forum for Peace and Security, held
in Ouagadougou this month, and call on all parties to
redouble their efforts to strengthen the role of young
people in the consolidation of peace and security in
the Sahel.

In joining multilateral action, Kazakhstan therefore
remains committed to assisting the Sahel countries to
fulfil their vision for peace, progress and prosperity.
We will continue to work together with the Council and
key actors to find a solution for achieving lasting peace
in the region.

