Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in French): | would like at the outset to thank the Special Coordinator, Mr. Mladenov, for his detailed briefing and him and his team for their tireless efforts. The Israeli-Palestinian conflict is at an impasse. The situation on the ground remains unstable in both Gaza and the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and the parties seem further apart than ever. Our priority today must therefore be the resumption of negotiations. First of all, we call on Israelis and Palestinians to come to the negotiating table without preconditions and to resume meaningful negotiations. This is indeed the only way to achieve a just, comprehensive and lasting peace. We also call on all parties to refrain from any unilateral action that could jeopardize the resumption of these negotiations. This conflict, which has been the subject of many Council resolutions, will find a positive solution only if these resolutions and international law are respected. Belgium, together with its European partners, remains committed to a negotiated and viable two-State solution, with Jerusalem as the future capital of both States, based on agreed parameters and international law. My second point concerns the normalization of relations between Israel and the Arab world, which is an important element for peace and stability in the region. We welcome the agreements reached between Israel and Bahrain and between Israel and the United Arab Emirates. We hope that these developments will create a new momentum towards the resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict on the basis of the two-State solution. The announcement of the suspension of plans to formalize the annexation of certain parts of the occupied Palestinian territory is a step in the right direction. However, we urge Israel to definitively abandon its annexation plans. Annexation, regardless of its scope and how it is described, is a serious violation of international law. Moreover, annexation would definitively close the door to the resumption of negotiations and deal a final blow to the two-State solution. Now more than ever, it is time to reverse the negative trends on the ground. We call for full respect for and full implementation of resolution 2334 (2016). We also call on the Palestinian Authority to resume fiscal and security coordination with Israel, given its impact on the Palestinian people. The third point of my intervention concerns settlements. Israel's illegal settlement activities, which are accompanied by expropriations, demolitions, confiscations and displacements of population, must cease immediately. We are deeply concerned about the recent increase in demolitions, despite indications by the Israeli authorities that they are refraining from demolishing inhabited Palestinian homes. The demolitions have also included water, sanitation and hygiene facilities, further limiting Palestinian access to basic services and commodities, which is particularly worrisome in the context of the current pandemic. My fourth point concerns Gaza. Belgium welcomes the relative calm that has prevailed in Gaza following the escalations in August and calls on all parties to exercise the utmost restraint. We recall the obligation of the parties to respect international humanitarian law and to ensure the protection of the civilian population. We welcome the de-escalation efforts in this regard, including those of the United Nations, to temporarily facilitate the transfer of patients out of Gaza. If we want to reverse the trend in Gaza, we must invest at both the humanitarian and political levels. We call on all parties to ensure the free access of humanitarian actors and underscore the crucial role of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East. At the political level, the only just solution is the lifting of the blockade and the full reopening of the crossings, while taking Israel's legitimate security concerns into account. My fifth point concerns the organization of elections in Gaza and the West Bank. A strong, accountable, inclusive and functional Palestinian Government, based on respect for the rule of law and human rights, is essential to the two-State solution. Elections are an important element in this regard. We welcome the recent efforts of the Palestinian factions towards reconciliation and hope that these will pave the way for genuine, free, fair and inclusive legislative and presidential elections throughout the Palestinian territory, including in East Jerusalem. Finally, I would like to express Belgium's concern about the continued hostile actions and policies against civil society and human rights defenders. Their work contributes to creating an environment that is conducive to peace and respect for human rights. They are an important element of an open and democratic society and, therefore, must be allowed to carry out their work without impediment.
