Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): We thank the Security
Council presidency for organizing this open debate on
a highly pertinent issue. We appreciate the valuable
thoughts shared by the briefers.

Emerging from the ashes of our independence
war in 1971, Bangladesh undertook an arduous yet
sustained process, moving from post-conflict recovery
and reconstruction to nation-building in four decades.
As a nation, we have yet to close certain chapters ofthat
defining event, as is evident from our ongoing efforts
to break the culture of impunity regarding the crimes
against humanity and the genocide committed during
the war.

The defeated ideologies of the war also tend
to resurface at times to undermine the democratic,
pluralist, non-communal and secular values that we
cherish as a nation. Our journey from a war-ravaged,
aid-dependent economy to one that is now marked by
strong macroeconomic fundamentals, steady economic
growth, inclusive socioeconomic development, a sound
trade and investment regime and a determined effort
to move towards a low-carbon pathway has also been
marked by many trials and successes.

That serves to reinforce the point that peacebuilding
per se is not a quick or easy fix that can take place in a
linear, prescriptive fashion. Each conflict setting must
carve out its own course for recovery and reconstruction
leading to durable peace, in which the international
community can play a supportive, catalytic role. Those
insights have motivated Bangladesh to remain engaged
with the work of the Peacebuilding Commission from
the outset, assuming its chairmanship in 2012 and
organizing the Commission's first high-level meeting
the same year, under the stewardship of our Prime
Minister Sheikh Hasina.

As we see it, there would be a gap in our
understanding of peacebuilding if we were to consider it
only from the context of post-conf lict recovery. Without
sustained, long-term efforts to address the underlying
drivers of conflict, sufficient alacrity to read the
early warning signs on the ground and a combination
of will and agility to pre-empt and prevent conflicts,
peacebuilding might risk becoming merely an ad hoc,
piecemeal exercise. That is the overarching message
that we have drawn from the report (see S/2015/490)
of the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of the
Peacebuilding Architecture, which makes a compelling
case for changing the mindset here about the way we
view and engage with peacebuilding in the United
Nations. In that spirit, we wish to flag five issues that
we believe are cardinal to the current initiative of the
review of the peacebuilding architecture.
First, peacebuilding mustbe owned and appropriated
by the principal organs of the United Nations, in due
recognition of the interaction among peace and security
and development and human rights. As witnessed
during the review exercise, each constituency has
certain values to add to peacebuilding efforts without
compromising their respective mandates.

Secondly, the desired coherence in peacebuilding
will critically hinge on the level of commitment
demonstrated by the Security Council on behalf of
United Nations peacebuilding efforts. The Council's
focused and meaningful utilization of the existing
resources is expected to enhance the value of the
Peacebuilding Commission's advisory role and the
Peacebuilding Fund's needs-driven financing support.

Thirdly, the Peacebuilding Commission's
convening capacity must be leveraged to further
broaden its orientation and engagements and relieve
it of its rather formulaic, agenda-based approach. The
interface between the Peacebuilding Commission and
the Peacebuilding Fund must be visible in terms oftheir
respective outcomes, again without conceding their
comparative advantages.

Fourthly, the notion of sustaining peace, as
elaborated in the Advisory Group's report, is such an
all-encompassing construct that it inevitably brings to
the foreground the question of adequate, predictable
and sustained financing for peacebuilding efforts.
In recognition of the useful services rendered by the
Peacebuilding Fund, we see merit in the suggestion to
create an assured financing stream for the Fund based
on assessed contributions. If we are truly committed
to giving peacebuilding a chance under United Nations
auspices, we should work on finding creative ways to
match the predictability of financing with the flexible,
rapid-response capacity of the Fund.

Fifthly, and lastly, the primacy of national ownership
defined by inclusive and accountable processes should
remain at the heart of peacebuilding efforts. As we see
again and again, prescriptions from outside, without
sufficient buy-in among a cross-section of national
actors, including women and youth, have never had a
lasting impact. The potential role of peacebuilding in
contributing to participatory political processes, human
development, social justice and institution-building
should ideally be driven by national consensus in
conflict-affected situations.

To conclude, we urge the Council to ensure that the
ongoing peacebuilding architecture review will turn
out to be a real game-changing exercise in this seminal
year for the United Nations peace and security agenda.

