Mr. anald (Norway): Let me first echo other
delegations in thanking you, Mr. President, for
organizing this open meeting of the Security Council to
consider the draft resolution on the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction (WMD). We appreciate
that all Member States are being given an opportunity
to present their views before the Council takes action
on this draft resolution.

We welcome that the Security Council is
addressing the dangers posed by the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction. At the same time, the
General Assembly has an important role to play in all
non-proliferation efforts.

I would now like to offer some views on the draft
resolution. First, Norway agrees that the Security
Council should adopt a resolution addressing the most
pressing proliferation challenges. The proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction (WMD) is a threat to
international peace and security. We need the Security
Council to send a clear message that taking part in the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
constitutes a serious criminal offence.

Secondly, the draft resolution places far-reaching
and legally binding demands on all Member States. It
is vital that all States should take the necessary steps to
make sure that they can live up to their multilateral
non-proliferation obligations. Those steps should cover
areas such as national legislation, law enforcement,
export controls, border controls and protection of
sensitive materials.

Thirdly, the present draft resolution emphasizes
the role and relevance of global disarmament and non-
proliferation treaties. That is an element to which
Norway attaches particular importance. The global
treaties have set universal norms, which should be
adhered to by all Member States. We call for the full
universalization of, and compliance with, the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), the
Chemical Weapons Convention and the Biological and
Toxin Weapons Convention.

The international community must preserve the
integrity and authority of the global treaties and work
to further strengthen those instruments. We need
credible verification mechanisms. The NPT is a
cornerstone of our collective security. The upcoming
Review Conference must be used to further strengthen
the Treaty.

Fourthly, we agree with the draft resolution's
statement that there is a need for further dialogue and
cooperation on non-proliferation issues, as well as
cooperative action to prevent illicit trafficking in the
means of delivery of weapons of mass destruction. The
Proliferation Security Initiative represents a very useful
response to the new proliferation challenges. Norway is
taking an active part in the Initiative. We will also
continue to contribute to the Group of Eight Global
Partnership, particularly in so far as the safe handling
and storage of spent nuclear fuel and radioactive waste
is concerned. Let me further reiterate Norway's support
for the European Union's strategy to prevent the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.

Fifthly, Norway welcomes the proposal to set up
a committee tasked with making sure that the new
resolution is fully implemented. Such a committee
should be given enough time to do its work properly.
We assume that all relevant expertise will be mobilized
in that endeavour.

Non-proliferation and disarmament are two sides
of the same coin. The irreversible destruction of
stockpiles of WMD is the best guarantee that such
weapons do not fall in the wrong hands. Norway is
therefore convinced that disarmament must remain an
integral component of an effective non-proliferation
strategy. That element should be duly reflected in the
resolution to be adopted by the Security Council.

In concluding, Norway agrees that the Security
Council should adopt a resolution that will fill critical
gaps in international non-proliferation efforts. We hope
the draft resolution will be adopted in a timely manner.

