Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I would like to thank Mr. El-Ghassim
Wane, Assistant Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, for his substantial briefing.

Russia supports a speedy and appropriate response
by the international community to the challenges and
threats facing the African continent generally and
the Sahelo-Saharan region in particular. We have
consistently supported a united international effort
that will enable us to agree on specific approaches to
combating the threat of terrorism, with an emphasis
on cooperation with the countries of the region in
strengthening their anti-terrorist activities. However,
we believe that in order to achieve lasting peace in
Africa, the role of the Africans themselves is becoming
increasingly important. In that regard, we welcome
the establishment by the countries of the region of
the Group of Five for the Sahel joint force to counter
terrorism, and we support resolution 2359 (2017), which
approved its deployment.

The full-scale deployment of the joint force on the
ground will help to deal with a number of challenges,
not just combating the terrorist threat. Terrorists work
closely with various criminal groups, pirates and
smugglers. They exploit national and transnational
security gaps to carry out their illicit activities. In
essence, they capitalize on chaos, instability and the
suffering of civilians. They provide material support
to terrorists, and, as a result, drug and weapons
smuggling as well as uncontrolled and illicit migration
flourish in the region. The serious nature of the ongoing
danger posed by terrorist groups in the Sahel region
was once again made clear by the 13 August attack
on a hotel in Burkina Faso and on the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali unit and Malian soldiers yesterday. We strongly
condemn these bloody attacks against civilians and
peacekeepers. We extend our condolences to the
families and friends of those who died and wish the
victims a speedy recovery. Without a victory over the
terrorist hydra, it will be impossible to achieve political
stabilization or to make significant progress in solving
social and economic problems.

At the same time, military measures alone cannot
solve these problems. In order to counter extremist
ideology, its breeding ground needs to be eliminated by
better tackling pressing social and economic problems
and by strengthening Government institutions in that
part of the African continent.

In that regard, the consistent implementation of the
United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel is now
more pertinent than ever. There is a need to increase
the return from its mechanism. What is crucial in these
efforts is the coordinating role of the United Nations
and its close cooperation with African structures and
different States. Furthermore, their opinion is a priority
in this process.

For the international community, the Sahelo-
Saharan region is facing a lot of work in terms of
assistance regarding the approaches developed by the
African countries themselves, and Russia is prepared
to continue supporting them. It is also important for
external assistance not to devolve into the imposition of
one-size-fits-all solutions that include elements foreign
to African States. It was precisely external interference
and the destruction of statehood in Libya that led to the
wholesale destabilization of the country and the Sahel
region as a whole.

