Mr. Mahtar (India): I thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing this open debate. Given the paucity of time,
I will come to the substance directly.

First, we think that the openness of this debate is
constricted by imposing a time limit of three minutes
on non-members and no time limit for members.

Secondly, one of the more important issues before
the United Nations in the coming year will be the
selection of the next Secretary-General. There is a great
deal of debate on the prerogatives of the Security Council
and the General Assembly in that matter. At the heart,
however, is the question of the prerogatives of the five
permanent member and the rest of the membership of
the United Nations. To a large extent, that is determined
by something as seemingly innocuous as the working
methods of the Council.

My delegation has pressed for the Council to
recommend two or more names to the General
Assembly. While the pronouncements of the General
Assembly do not specifically provide for it, there is, in
our view, no legal impediment for the Council to do so.
An important step would also be to do away with secret
straw polls using different coloured slips that allow the
five permanent members to exercise the veto without
even taking ownership of it. Discussions should be held
in official meetings of the Council, preferably open
ones but not necessarily so. The Secretary-General
should issue reports, as is usual, summarizing the
proceedings. Except for April, June and October, it will
be elected members who will preside over the Council
in every month of 2016. It will be for them to decide
whether or not the selection of the Secretary-General
will remain the sole preserve of the five permanent
members.

Thirdly, in the debate about transparency, we need to
mention that the most non-transparent of the subsidiary
bodies of the Security Council is the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) - the
Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee. No information is
shared on the criteria for listing or delisting individuals
and organizations on whom sanctions are applied. It is
our apprehension that there may in fact be no criteria
at all and that any of the 15 members may be allowed
to exercise a veto without assigning any reason and
without the wider membership being informed of
their having done so. In April, the new Chair of the
1267 Committee organized a briefing for the wider
membership of the United Nations and said that he
would do so periodically. However, no meeting has
since been held. His predecessor had also kept the work
of the Committee cloaked in secrecy.

Fourthly, Article 44 of the Charter requires that
consultations be held with troop-contributing countries
before the mandates of peacekeeping operations are
finalized. Regrettably, that has never happened. Again,
we look towards the elected members of the Council to
make a new beginning.

Fifthly, there should be transparency in determining
the list of speakers in open debates. In our View,
priority should be given to Member States rather than
organizations with consultative status. With regard to
non-members, there would be merit in beginning with
Ministers followed by plenipotentiary envoys and then
others.

We appreciate that the outcome of this debate will
be adopted after all speakers have spoken. We would
request that on the next occasion of an open debate
an informal discussion should also be arranged with
non-members of the Council on the content of the
outcome. That would go a long way towards enhancing
its acceptability.

In conclusion, I must say that the problems
afflicting the Security Council go deeper than its
working methods. While a focus on working methods
is useful, it can in no way be a substitute for reforming
the Council in a manner that would give its decisions
legitimacy and acceptability.

