The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of France.

I would like to thank Mr. Guehenno, Ms. Malcorra
and Ambassador Gasana for their briefings.
It is logical for the General Assembly to have
yesterday considered the report on civilian capacity in
the aftermath of conflict (see S/2011/85), which the
Chairman of the Peacebuilding Commission introduced
during today's debate, just as it is that the Secretariat
has already begun to follow-up the proposals of the
Senior Advisory Group led by Jean-Marie Guehenno.
The implementation of the report requires a joint effort
by the entire United Nations, including the
commitment of the Secretariat and the support of
Member States, as was the case with the Brahimi report
on peacekeeping operations and military capacities
(S/2000/809).

The report on civilian capacity in the aftermath of
conflict is part of our efforts to improve the
performance of the United Nations on the ground. We
have a collective interest in ensuring that its goals are
achieved. Moreover, we should avoid ideological
debates and focus on the essential, namely, how to get
the most benefit from the report that has been
presented to us and how to help the Secretariat to
implement it in the best way possible.

I should like to focus on three issues that are at
the heart of the reflection carried out by the experts
that are of direct concern to the Security Council.

First of all, the priority is national ownership. As
we have said frequently in Security Council debates,
there can be no lasting reconstruction without national
ownership. In that regard, as rightly pointed out in the
report, local human resources within civilian capacity
support structures in post-conflict countries is of
crucial importance.

Secondly, partnerships must be expanded. The
Senior Advisory Group has suggested establishing a
civilian partnerships cell to facilitate matching needs
with the capacities of different countries. That is
exactly what France proposed in the context of the
Group of Eight working group on peacekeeping and
peacebuilding, which we currently chair. In that regard,
countries of the South can provide more civilian
capacity. That does not mean that the countries of the
North can forego their responsibility in the areas of
peacekeeping and development. It is not a matter of
transferring the burden, but rather of taking advantage
of more effective expertise by virtue of being closer to
reality on the ground. The goal should be to strengthen
the trilateral cooperation between donors, those that
provide personnel and the host country. This is a
concern for everyone.

Lastly, we should encourage initiative on the
ground. We therefore support the idea proposed by the
Senior Advisory Group to provide a broader margin for
decision-making to Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General in the internal management of
civilian resources. This is a productive proposal that
could improve coordination with the funds,
programmes and agencies in the use of their resources,
thereby contributing to instilling a culture based on
results in the management of resources.

As we see routinely in our debates in the Council,
the needs with regard to civilian capacity are
numerous, varied and tend to increase with the
complexity of the situations in which United Nations
intervention is required. The United Nations must
therefore be able to adapt, often in a short span of time.
Effectiveness requires a certain level of flexibility in
the use of civilian capacity. It also requires rigorous
and responsible management of financial and human
resources.

Following up on these recommendations cannot
be done without the participation of all Member States
and on the basis of consensus. The recommendations to
be made by the Secretary-General should be considered
by the entire membership, in particular at the Fifth
Committee. We cannot properly carry out these
important reforms without moving ahead gradually and
in unison.

I once again thank Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno for
the excellent work done by the Senior Advisory Group
on civilian capacity. I also thank the Chairman of the
Peacebuilding Commission for his interest in the
report. Lastly, I think that I can say on behalf of the
entire Council that we have every confidence in
Ms. Susana Malcorra in connection with the follow-up
she has initiated on the experts' proposals. We shall
closely consider the next report on the Secretary-
General on this subject.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.10p.m.
