The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Angola, Argentina, Brazil, Canada, Lesotho, Luxembourg,
Malawi, Mozambique, South Africa and Zimbabwe, in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Van Dunem
"Mbinda" (Angola) took a seat at the Council table;
Mr. Petrella (Argentina), Mr. Valle (Brazil), Mr.
Karsgaard (Canada), Mr. Mangoaela (Lesotho), Ms.
Lucas (Luxembourg), Mr. Rubadiri (Malawi), Mr. Dos
Santos (Mozambique), Mr. Jele (South Africa) and Mr.
Mapuranga (Zimbabwe) took the seats reserved for
them at the side of the Council Chamber.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
progress report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Observer Mission in Angola (MONUA), document
S/ 1997/640.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/l997/669, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by Portugal, the Russian Federation
and the United States of America.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following revisions to be made in the
text of the draft resolution contained in document
S/ 1997/669 in its provisional form: in the third
preambular paragraph, the word "of" should be added
after the word "implementation"; in operative paragraph
4 (a), the words "of adult" should be added before the
word "members"; in paragraph 4 (b), the word "adult"
should be added before the word "members"; and in
paragraph 11 (a), the words "of adult members of" should
be added before the words "their immediate families".

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following other documents:
S/ 1997/600, letter dated 31 July 1997 from the Permanent
Representative of Brazil to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council, transmitting the
text of a letter dated 28 July 1997 from the Minister of
External Relations of Brazil addressed to the President of
the Security Council; and S/l997/658, letter dated 20
August 1997 from the Permanent Representative of
Luxembourg to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting the text of the statement
by the Presidency of the European Union concerning the
peace process in Angola issued on 13 August 1997.

The first speaker on my list is the representative of
Angola, to whom I give the floor.


