Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): You
are particularly welcome, Mr. President. Your presence
and that of the Secretary-General emphasize the
importance of this subject.

I would like to thank the speakers for their
presentations and to align myself with the statement to
be delivered later by the presidency of the European
Union.

I would also like to pay tribute to the Special
Representative, Radhika Coomaraswamy, and her
Office, to Ann Veneman and UNICEF, and to the other
United Nations agencies involved, together with civil
society organizations such as Save the Children and the
work that it does. Their unstinting and committed work
on this agenda is inspiring and altogether necessary.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2006/826)
is a sobering read and clearly demonstrates that there
are significant challenges ahead if the international
community is to turn the existing momentum into
widespread progress on the ground, where it matters.
The United Kingdom is concerned that the use of child
soldiers appears increasingly to be crossing borders
and migrating within regions. We need to look for ways
to refine existing strategies for demobilizing,
rehabilitating and reintegrating children who are
associated with armed groups. The particular needs of
girls must be fully reflected in such strategies.

We would also like to see further development of
the useful monitoring and reporting mechanism. The
report on the mechanism by the Office of Internal
Oversight Services, to which a number of my
colleagues have alluded, made some important
recommendations, which the Working Group should
now take forward.

Over the past decade, the international
community has played a crucial role in highlighting the
issue of children and armed conflict and in developing
a framework within which these issues can be
addressed. We should build on that progress. With that
in mind, the United Kingdom supports the Special
Representative's proposal to undertake a strategic
review of the agenda on children and armed conflict.
We also welcome the way in which some parties to
armed conflicts have taken steps towards tackling these
problems.

But much more needs to be done. Parties
involved in armed conflicts must quickly develop and
implement action plans to halt the recruitment and use
of child soldiers. They must facilitate the process of
information-gathering for the monitoring and reporting
mechanism. They should make every effort to assist the
demobilization, rehabilitation and reintegration of child
soldiers. The international community must stand ready
to help them do so. A systematic approach, coordinated
among all members of the United Nations family, is
needed to implement action in individual theatres,
including, where relevant, the dimension of resolution
1325 (2000) that applies to girls.

But where progress in developing action plans or
in facilitating the operation of the monitoring and
reporting system is found to be inadequate, the
international community must be prepared to consider
taking action against the parties involved. Those
individuals who commit egregious violations against
children must be held to account. The Security Council
has an important role to play in that respect.

One specific case this morning requires urgent
attention. The complaints about very serious incidents
in Sri Lanka need to be addressed and due legal
process applied. Ambassador Rock's presentation to
the Working Group will be an important step.

In conclusion, let me reaffirm that the United
Kingdom remains committed to playing a full and
active role in the Council and its Working Group. I pay
tribute in particular to Ambassador De La Sabliere for
his contribution. All of us here have a collective
obligation to bring an end to the suffering that children
in armed conflicts face around the world today.

