Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): At the Security Council's
Arria formula meeting on climate change last month,
many countries, including Japan, pointed out that
climate change can act as a threat multiplier to natural
disasters and other phenomena, especially for small
island developing States (SIDS). For example, the
rise in sea level caused by climate change can pose a
threat to a nation's existence. That should be regarded
as an issue of national and regional security. It is also
important to address other issues such as development,
disaster risk reduction and the illicit exploitation of
natural resources.

To help SIDS overcome these challenges, Japan has
made efforts in this field. Let me elaborate.

First, we served as a member of the Bureau of the
Preparatory Committee for the Third International
Conference on SIDS, held in Samoa in September
of last year. Japan has committed itself to helping
implement recommendations made at the Conference,
which include addressing the priorities of SIDS, such as
climate change and disaster risk reduction. We pledged
to train 5,000 experts from SIDS on those issues over
the next three years.

Secondly, in May this year, Japan held the Seventh
Pacific Island Leaders Meeting in Iwaki, Fukushima. At
that summit the participating leaders discussed issues of
priority such as disaster risk reduction, climate change
and maritime issues and fisheries. Prime Minister
Abe announced that Japan would provide development
assistance amounting to ¥55 billion over the next three
years for the priorities of the Pacific SIDS. We also
announced our intention to provide assistance for the
development of the Pacific Climate Change Centre
and capacity-building, which support efforts to tackle
climate change by the Pacific region as a whole.

Thirdly, Japan's efforts to support SIDS are not
limited to the Pacific region. Prime Minister Abe
visited Trinidad and Tobago and held the first Japan-
CARICOM. Summit in July 2014. Prime Minister Abe
recognized the importance of assisting CARICOM
member States based on criteria other than per-capita
income, considering their particular vulnerabilities as
SIDS. On that occasion, Japan also announced grant
aid of ¥1.5 billion towards climate change efforts for
eight Caribbean States, in partnership with the United
Nations Development Programme. As expressed at the
Summit, Japan will continue to enhance its assistance
to CARICOM. member States in disaster risk reduction,
environment and energy.

Finally, Japan hosted the Fifth Tokyo International
Conference on African Development (TICAD V)
in June 2013. Japan's assistance in the framework of
TICAD V for African SIDS includes the installation
of a climate radar system and support for preventing
coastal erosion. We have been steadily implementing
our commitments.

As I have outlined, Japan has been actively working
on the issues of SIDS around the world and will continue
to support them with our partners in the United Nations
system to address their current and future challenges.

