Mr. Damdin (Mongolia): Let me begin by
expressing my sincere appreciation to Minister Sergey
Lavrov for inviting me to speak at this ministerial
debate. I also thank other speakers for their remarks.

Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations is essential to
effectively addressing the complex challenges facing
the world today, especially those related to terrorism,
violent extremism and transnational organized crime.
The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy and its reviews have been instrumental in
providing the international community with solid and
updated guidance on addressing terrorism along its
four mutually reinforcing pillars. Furthermore, the
establishment of the United Nations Office of Counter-
Terrorism and the subsequent signing of the Global
Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact among the
36 United Nations entities, in addition to INTERPOL
and the World Customs Organization, laid the solid
groundwork for the whole-of-United Nations approach
to tackling the threats of terrorism. We expect that
such initiatives will further strengthen United Nations
cooperation with the relevant regional organizations
and better target its assistance to Member States in
enhancing their anti-terrorism and anti-organized
crime capacities.

Mongolia stands strongly committed to our common
struggle against the scourge of terrorism, having
become aparty to all United Nations conventions against
terrorism and organized crime applicable to it, and is
taking all necessary measures for their implementation.
Moreover, as an observer of the SCO, we concluded
the Protocol between the Anti-Terrorist Coordination
Council of Mongolia and the Regional Anti-Terrorist
Structure of the SCO (RATS) in 2014, thereby actively
engaging in various activities organized under the
auspices of RATS.

In addition to our global and regional efforts to
counter terrorism, we have also been cooperating with
the countries of the region. Thus, Mongolia signed
cooperation agreements in combating terrorism with
the Kyrgyz Republic and the Russian Federation, as well
as an agreement on cooperation in combating crimes
with the People's Republic of China. Those agreements
provide the legal basis for information-sharing and the
exchange of best practices and for conducting other
preventive measures among the relevant organizations.

As suggested by the concept note (S/2019/742, annex) circulated for today's meeting, I would like to
share some thoughts concerning possible modalities and
approaches to enhancing our cooperation in countering
the global terrorist threat.
First, there needs to be a more focused targeting of
capacity-building assistance - one of the pillars of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. I
wish to recall that in my statementback in 2007 at thejoint
Mongolia-Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe conference on countering terrorism, held
in Mongolia, I proposed the individual action plan of
small and medium-size developing countries on making
their territories immune from terrorism. The proposal
was made on the basis of the expectation that, after the
universal tightening of security regimes in most of the
developed countries following the 9/11 terrorist attack,
terrorist cells would be pushed to settle in weaker
economies, where rules and regulations tend to be
loose, weak and, often, corrupt.

After more than a decade, we can see that that
anticipation has become a reality. Today, we are
witnessing the trend of terrorist cells finding their
refuge and strengthening and spreading their hold in
some weaker economies to the extent that they are
capable not only of occasional strikes but also waging
wars. On the other hand, the situation is further
exacerbated by the phenomenon of home-grown
terrorism in developed countries.

Therefore, developed countries and international
organizations ought to provide technical assistance
to vulnerable countries in consolidating their
anti-terrorism and anti-organized crime capacities. As
a result of such technical assistance and cooperation,
we should have, ideally, a uniform anti-terrorism
capacity throughout the global legal jurisdiction. Once
the capacity of all countries is brought to the required
level, no space will be left for terrorists and criminals
to nest in and no Government will be too weak to
fight terrorism.

Secondly, we need to effectively address the growing
nexus between terrorism and transnational organized
crime, including trafficking in drugs, weapons and
persons. Profits from such illicit trafficking are
primarily used for financing terrorism. We should also
be aware of the emerging tendency to target and drag
nationals of smaller developing countries into drug-
trafficking and other related crimes. In order to prevent
them from being seduced and lured into such illicit
activities, preventive measures through international
cooperation ought to be put in place.

Thirdly, the engagement of youth is critical
to preventing and countering violent extremism
and terrorism. Rapid advances in cyberspace and
digital communication technologies bring not only
considerable benefits to societies but also risks
associated with its abuse by terrorist actors. With a
View to better utilizing social media in promoting a
culture of peace, non-violence, tolerance and mutual
understanding among youth around the world, my
Ministry, in collaboration with Facebook, organized a
Peacebook Forum in U1aanbaatar, Mongolia, in April.

At the High-level Interregional Conference on
a Whole-of-Society Approach to Preventing and
Countering Violent Extremism and Radicalization
that Lead to Terrorism, organized by the Government
of Mongolia in collaboration with the Organization on
Security and Cooperation in Europe and the United
Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism, held in June this
year in U1aanbaatar, we had a separate discussion on
inter- and intrareligious dialogue, within the religious
freedom discourse being supported and promoted by
the United States Administration.

Another initiative of ours related to employing
advances in technology for peace is the creation of a
completely digital peacebook journal of international
relations, which would publish and popularize research
on global issues by scholars and peacebuilders from
around the world. The benefits for young people in
creating such a journal would include the promotion
of a culture of peace, tolerance, intercultural and
interreligious dialogue and the enhancement of the voice
and participation of young people in decision-making
for the prevention and resolution of conflicts, including
decisions to counter violent extremism and terrorism.

Mongolia also supports other important initiatives
aimed at eliminating terrorist and violent extremist
content online, including the Global Counterterrorism
Forum and Tech against Terrorism, as well as the
Christchurch Call to Action.

In conclusion, let me reiterate our firm belief that
the very goal of preventing and countering terrorism
cannot be achieved by a single country. Therefore, our
joint efforts in implementing the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy will be more productive if
supported by effective collaboration with the relevant
regional and subregional organizations. In that context,
I see today's meeting as an excellent opportunity to
foster multi-stakeholder cooperation in countering
terrorist threats.

