Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): Let me start by joining
other speakers in welcoming High Representative
Valentin Inzko I would also like to express Croatia's
appreciation for his briefing and comprehensive report
(S/2015/84l, annex), as well as for his hard work and
dedication in carrying out his important mandate.

Croatia aligns itself with the statement just
delivered by the obsever of the European Union (EU),
and I shall add several remarks in my national capacity.
In just a few days, on 21 November, we will
mark the twentieth anniversary of the Dayton Peace
Agreement. There is no doubt that the Agreement
was a major diplomatic achievement that stopped the
bloodshed and brought much needed peace to Bosnia
and Herzegovina. It also established a complex and
specific political system based on ethnic representation,
resting on genuine equality among three constitutive
peoples. For Croatia, it remains the key element for the
stability and functionality of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The territorial integrity, stability and functionality of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, as a sovereign and united
country, are fundamental prerequisites for the stability
and prosperity of South-East Europe.

It is therefore unfortunate and deeply troubling that
the twentieth anniversary of Dayton is being marred
by secessionist and inflammatory rhetoric that is not
only politically unacceptable but also potentially
harmful for the reforms which Bosnia and Herzegovina
has to go through. We strongly oppose and condemn
the secessionist statements and divisive actions that
have been recently undertaken by Republika Srpska.
We condemn the decision of the members of the
National Assembly of the Republika Srpska to call
for a referendum on High Representative decisions
concerning the Court and the Prosecutor's Office of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Conducting such a referendum
would have a detrimental effect on the sovereignty and
integrity of the state of Bosnia and Herzegovina, in clear
violation of the Dayton Peace Agreement. Furthermore,
it would overshadow the Reform Agenda and pivotal
socioeconomic issues waiting to be resolved. The legal
uncertainty that would arise after the referendum could
have multiple negative implications, including for
security.

We strongly believe that the steady and forward-
looking European integration process is the most
efficient and constructive way to reach the internal
consolidation of Bosnia and Herzegovina and lay
strong foundations for its prosperous future. Croatia
firmly supports the new EU approach for Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We fully support the ongoing engagement
of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina on the
new EU initiative for that country, and we hope that it
will continue to support the implementation of much-
needed political and economic reforms that require the
consensus of all political parties in the country.

The entry into force of the Stabilization and
Association Agreement on 1 June was is a first concrete
step in the country's process of European integration
and the first contractual relation between Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the EU. It paves the way for the two
sides to work more closely together. The Agreement
is a first concrete institutional framework for the
implementation of all necessary reforms. Bosnia and
Herzegovina needs to fully uphold its commitments
and obligations under the Agreement, including those
relating to its adaptation following the accession of
Croatia to the European Union in 2013.

The adoption of the Reform Agenda in July, which
is aimed at improving socioeconomic conditions and
the rule of law and tackling corruption, is certainly
a positive sign. It is an important step in the right
direction, and all those who are carrying it should be
supported and encouraged.

As far as Bosnia and Herzegovina's advancement to
NATO is concerned, we believe that the intensification
of the NATO integration process is also of importance
to the stability and security of the country. We invite
the political leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
intensify their efforts regarding the implementation
of the six parties' political agreement on the issue of
registering immovable defence properties and to work
constructively to implement the agreement in order to
start the first Membership Action Plan cycle for Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

The security and stability of Bosnia and
Herzegovina are vital to the security of the whole
European continent. Therefore, Croatia continues
to support the executive mandate of the European
Union-led peacekeeping force Operation Althea. Its
presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina continues to serve
as a support to the authorities in maintaining a safe and
secure environment, if needed, in situations of security
threats. It also has an important role in capacity-
building and training.

In Croatia's view, the executive mandate should
not be seen in any way as an obstacle to the country's
process of Euro-Atlantic integration. On the contrary, it
should be seen as a part of the comprehensive approach
of the European Union to Bosnia and Herzegovina
and an important element of its commitment to the
European future of the country.

Croatia advocates, and will continue to do so, for a
sharp and permanent focus on Bosnia and Herzegovina
at the European and international levels. That important
country, with all its rich and often troubled history,
and untapped potential, deserves our full and constant
attention. We believe that the future of Bosnia and
Herzegovina is within the community of States and
nations of the European Union and NATO. We are
ready to render our full support as a neighbour, friend
and partner.

The President ofthe Republic ofCroatia, Ms. Kolinda
Grabar-Kitarovie, recently stated in Sarajevo that:

"Bosnia and Herzegovina is Europe's treasure,
which needs to be recognized and accented. Bosnia
and Herzegovina is not Europe's problem, but rather
an opportunity for affirming the idea of European
cooperation and unity in diversity - a historical
project of peace."

We sincerely hope that, 20 years after the end of
the war that caused unspeakable atrocities - such as
the genocide in Srebrenica, the twentieth anniversary
of which we commemorated a few months ago - the
twentieth anniversary of Dayton will be an opportunity
not only to take stock of the past 20 years but, even
more so, to look towards the future, the secure, stable
and prosperous future that Bosnia and Herzegovina
deserves in every way.

