Mr. Woldegerima (Ethiopia): We would like to
thank Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix
and all the Force Commanders for their respective
briefings. We also join others in paying tribute to the
brave men and women who are serving in different
peacekeeping missions around the world under the
United Nations umbrella as we mark International
Peacekeeping Day tomorrow.

We would like to focus our remarks on the
unprecedented challenge faced by peacekeepers
today, as explained by the Force Commanders in
their presentations to us. As one of the major troop-
contributing countries to United Nations peacekeeping,
we share the issues and concerns raised by the Force
Commanders. There is no doubt that peacekeepers
are increasingly deployed to protect civilians and
support complex political processes amid ongoing
fighting in high-risk situations characterized by
asymmetrical threats.

Targeted attacks against peacekeepers and
innocent civilians are not only on the rise but they have
increasingly become the norm rather than the exception.
The recent incidence of attacks that led to the deaths of
peacekeepers in the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic and the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali are clear
indications that these threats are growing in scale,
frequency and complexity. It is therefore imperative
that peacekeeping missions adapt to changing security
dynamics. For this reason, devising the right political
strategies and operational approaches has never been
so critical. In this regard, we would like to suggest
the following.

First, and this has been reiterated by many, the need
for pragmatic and flexible interpretations of the basic
principles of United Nations peacekeeping cannot be
overemphasized. The traditional peacekeeping versus
peace enforcement debate should add the minimum
be looked at in a more nuanced manner. Peacekeepers
cannot and should not remain indifferent in the face of
significant threats either to themselves or to innocent
civilians whom they are supposed to protect. What the
Force Commanders said today is instructive, and there
is really a need to look at this issue.

Secondly, peacekeepers should have robust
mandates with a clear concept of operational rules of
engagement based on a thorough situational analysis,
threat assessment and planning. This will allow them
to have a robust posture in defending themselves and
in protecting civilians in the face of mortal danger.
However, having a clear mandate, concept of operation
and rules of engagement is not enough.

Therefore, my third point is that peacekeepers need
to have sufficient capacity that is credible enough to
deter spoilers who threaten the mission's mandate,
civilians and peacekeepers themselves. We need to
ensure that peacekeepers have adequate equipment,
including force enablers and multipliers, to be able to
counter hostilities and fulfil their mandate effectively
in an asymmetrical environment. Peacekeepers must
also get adequate training and acquire the skills that
are needed to operate in a volatile security situation.

We know that these things are easier said than
done, and we have no illusions that the strategic
and operational challenges that were mentioned
previously will be easily overcome, but in the light of
the seriousness of the matter it is imperative that they
be addressed as promptly as possible. Otherwise, the
commitment to the protection of civilians will remain
mere words to be repeated ad nauseam.

Finally, I do not wish to add more questions to
what has already been asked by other delegations, as
some of the issues we wanted to raise have already
been raised. I simply want to conclude by thanking
all the Force Commanders for their efforts under
difficult circumstances.

