The President (spoke in Russian): 1 would now like
to make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Russian Federation.

Today, various regions of the world are
undergoing large-scale and sometimes unpredictable
transformations. The international community is
obliged to respond to such processes, including by
adapting United Nations peacekeeping, one of our
principal tools for maintaining international peace and
security. United Nations peacekeeping operations are
deployed in complex and dangerous conditions, and
increasingly often in situations of domestic political
crisis complicated by difficult humanitarian and
socioeconomic circumstances. Challenges such as the
spread ofweapons, organized crime, terrorism and drug
trafficking across borders have become more acute.

These factors are affecting not only individual
aspects of United Nations peacekeeping but in a
number of cases also its principles. This requires
thorough discussion and understanding on the part of
Member States and the Secretariat in order to formulate
consistent and balanced approaches, overcome
the fragmented nature of the political and legal
foundations, develop appropriate doctrines and prepare
timely regulatory documents based on analysis of the
experience gained, analysis that should continue to be
guided by the unshakeable positions of the Charter of
the United Nations and the basic principles of United
Nations peacekeeping. The most important factor is
a genuine partnership in joint peacekeeping efforts
between the members of the international community.

One growing trend is the so-called strengthening
of peacekeeping mandates, including by authorizing
their use of preventive force. Such mandates include
that of the Force Intervention Brigade within the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali has similar tasks. This experience has
raised a number of unresolved legal, technical, staff and
logistical issues for the Organization with the potential
for adverse effects on the missions' effectiveness, the
image of the United Nations and, most importantly, the
peacekeepers' security.

We are certain that these issues should be addressed
in an intergovernmental format within the specialized
United Nations entities and with the active involvement
of the troop-contributing countries (TCCs). This is
essential in order to ensure that when the Security
Council establishes individual mandates it relies on
approaches that are agreed on system-wide. At the
same time, when considering emerging challenges in
this context, however complex, it is impossible to avoid
discussing whether robust United Nations peacekeeping
is the only way to improve the effectiveness of the
maintenance of international peace and security and
whether stronger mandates can be a substitute for the
painstaking search for political solutions. It is clear
that peacebuilding's chief task is still, as it has always
been, creating the conditions for political dialogue,
eradicating the root causes of conflicts and crises
and achieving national reconciliation - which means
achieving lasting peace.

Robust mandates cannot become business as usual
and should be carefully calibrated according to the
specific situation. Expanding such practices, which
essentially imply the peacekeepers' support for one
side of the conflict, as well as the possible loss of their
protected status under international humanitarian law,
will inevitably increase the political costs to the image
of the United Nations and the security risks not only
for the Blue Helmets but for other civilian personnel on
the ground. Humanitarian and country team staff could
become targets as well. This raises the question of how
the United Nations will handle such consequences.

We have recently encountered such new phenomena
as the presence of several different peacekeeping forces
in one country, which creates additional challenges.
While not disputing the potential positive contributions
of national and regional forces, we believe that in order
to do what must be done, there must be appropriate
coordination between them, ideally through a single
peacekeeping mission under United Nations auspices.

An equally important aspect of modern
peacekeeping is the use of advanced technical
equipment, particularly experimental use unarmed,
unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs). There is no question
that United Nations peacekeeping must keep up with the
times, and technology can help implement mandates and
improve security for Blue Helmets. On the other hand, it
is not an end in itself, but simply a tool that by virtue of
its novelty requires the establishment of a political and
legal framework for its use, emphasizing its operational
and financial performance by comparison with already
proven equipment such as traditional aircraft and the
UNOSAT satellite data processing system.

The multifunctional nature of UAVs naturally
raises the question of the modalities for controlling
the information received and of preserving its
confidentiality. We consider it important to ensure
transparency for such processes. In that regard, since
the start of UAV use in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo Russia has urged that the experience
be carefully studied. It is no secret that there have
been problems as well as positive indications in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We believe that
those aspects and the lessons learned will be reflected
in an annex to the Secretary-General's annual report
on the implementation of the recommendations
of the General Assembly's Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations. In that context, we welcome
the Secretariat's establishment of an Expert Panel on
the use of new technologies. We hope to see impartial
and technically sound results from its work that take
into account the views of Member States, including
TCCs.

The relevance of inter-mission cooperation has
been proven in situations in neighbouring peacekeeping
operations have deteriorated due to a lack of troops and
air assets. However, recent proposals by the Secretary-
General, including for the creation of a rapid reaction
force in Cote d'Ivoire, suggest an attempt to make such
methods a regular practice. We are not convinced of
the advisability of handing decision-making control
over the cross-border activity of this contingent to the
Secretariat even in a situation where, as we understand
it, the troop-contributing country has consented.
The Security Council should also be responsible
for evaluating problems arising on the ground and
justifying such redeployment.

Mandates encompassing multiple components
have become a reality, and they include large-scale
peacebuilding tasks. However, it has taken several
years for all the aspects of this approach to emerge. In
analysing the results of a number of missions, we will
have to rethink the algorithm for establishing priorities
and their relationship to assistance. We are convinced
that the chief efforts of peacekeeping operations should
be focused on halting violence and reducing the risk
of its renewal to a minimum. From the beginning,
peacekeeping operation mandates have included long-
term social, humanitarian and human-rights tasks that
are often not adapted to a particular country's context
and are frequently unjustified. Moreover, specialized
United Nations entities exist to accomplish such
directives, and they should be used.

The General Assembly's Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations plays a central role in
formulating common approaches to peacebuilding for
Member States and corresponding directives for the
Secretariat. Logistical, budget and staffing issues should
be discussed in the Fifth Committee. We see clear added
value in drawing upon the capability of the experts of the
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations. Effective
discussions within such bodies are important to ensure
that the Council takes informed decisions in developing
individual mandates for peacekeeping missions, taking
the views of TCCs and the situation on the ground into
account. We are convinced that cooperation between
the General Assembly and the Security Council will
strengthen the strategic partnership in peacekeeping of
the United Nations, which has a key advantage as the sole
universal and legitimate body.

I now resume my function as President of the Council.

I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate the texts in writing and to deliver
a condensed version when speaking in the Chamber.

I wish to inform all concerned that we will continue
this open debate through the lunch hour, as we have a
large number of speakers.

I now give the floor to the representative of India.

