Mr. Cardenas (Argentina) (interpretation from Spanish): At the outset, Sir, allow me to express the
satisfaction of my delegation at seeing you presiding over
this meeting, heading the delegation of China, and to
thank you for the work you and your delegation have
done throughout this month. I should also like to convey
my thanks to the delegation of Botswana for its work last
month, carried out with efficiency and a great sense of
humour, through its Ambassador.

Today, in the light of the comprehensive report of
the Secretary-General, the Council decided on the renewal
of the United Nations presence in the Republic of Croatia,
the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina and The Former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. Three years have
elapsed since the establishment and original deployment
of the United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR),
which has undoubtedly become the most ambitious and
complex peace-keeping operation ever to be organized by
the United Nations in its 50-year history.

 

This operation attests to the effort, as well as the
generous sacrifice, which the international community has
made, and continues to make, for the States which made up
the former Yugoslavia. Regrettably, this sacrifice can be
measured by the many human lives lost and the significant
volume of resources dedicated to this difficult operation.

The Argentine Republic has been contributing to this
effort ever since the initial deployment of UNPROFOR,
with an infantry battalion deployed in Western Slavonia, in
the Republic of Croatia, as well as with military observers
and civilian police deployed in the Republic of Croatia and
the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina. To date, almost
7,000 members of the Argentine armed forces have done
the 15 ,000-kilometre round trip to and from the Balkans in
order to offer the solidarity of the people of Argentina to
the people of the Balkans.

Argentina, like other troop-contributing countries, has,
with the loss of some of its men, borne its tragic share of
the sacrifice that the international community has
generously chosen to make in order to contribute to the
achievement of a lasting peace in the Balkans.

The United Nations Protection Force is a peace-
keeping operation, subject to all the conditions and
limitations entailed in such an operation. When the
international community decides to establish a peace-
keeping force, it does so on the understanding that the
forces deployed are not there to fight, nor to take sides in
a conflict, but, rather - with an entirely different logic -
that of peace - to assist in creating conditions for the
parties themselves to make progress in the search for a
negotiated solution. This assumes, first, that the parties have
decided that armed confrontation is no longer a valid option
and, secondly, that they sincerely wish to engage in
peaceful dialogue and to show mutual respect and tolerance.

The parties to the conflict must understand that the
United Nations is there essentially to allow for the
development of the necessary conditions for dialogue and
negotiations.

This afternoon we have adopted three resolutions
which establish three peace-keeping operations based on
UNPROFOR.

The United Nations Confidence Restoration Operation
in Croatia (UNCRO) is probably the most novel of the
three. The Government of Croatia has requested the United
Nations to reconsider the methods and objectives of the
deployment of the United Nations Force in its country. We

 

would like to emphasize in this context the successful
efforts made by the Vice-President of the United States
working with the President of the Republic of Croatia.
They were decisive in the achievement of the consensus
reflected in the resolutions that were considered today.

Therefore, there has now been established with
respect to Croatia a new operation with a different
mandate, and we hope that in the coming weeks there will
be agreement on the details, which will undoubtedly be of
great importance for the success of the operation. The
Argentine Republic is by and large ready to retain its men
in theatre in accordance with United Nations decisions.

We hope, however, that this new stage will mean a
renewed commitment by the parties to this new operation,
which will make it possible for our troops and those of
other contingents to work in a cooperative way, with
mutual respect and in safety.

The Argentine Republic, while recognizing and
supporting the Republic of Croatia's objective of respect
for its independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity,
as well as its desire to exercise effective control and
authority over its entire territory, believes that conditions
in the Republic of Croatia already exist for rapid progress
and for the consolidation and perfection of the important
agreements, including economic agreements, concluded
with the Croatian Serbs. For all these reasons, it would be
a serious mistake to waste this opportunity and to venture
along different paths that could lead to unforeseeable
consequences, not only for Croatia, but also for the whole
region.

With regard to Bosnia and Herzegovina, the new
resolution renews the mandate of UNPROFOR for eight
months. That Force has carried out a very difficult and
sensitive task in a conflict where, regrettably, despite the
continued efforts of the international community, the
solution still appears uncertain.

The Secretary-General's report and other information
from the field confirm that the situation is delicate.
Recent days have seen major violations of the cease-fire
which could, God forbid, result in a general spread of the
armed confrontation. In this context, we are concerned by
the increased number of incidents in the long-suffering
city of Sarajevo.

We are also concerned by the lack of cooperation of
the various parties with UNPROFOR's personnel and
tasks. As we have said before, the United Nations, while

 

recognizing the territorial integrity of the Republic of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, is there to take no other side but
that of peace. In the weeks to come we really shall see if
there is any true commitment to preserving the cease-fire.
If there is none, the Security Council will then have to
weigh up its potential courses of action, including the
extreme option which would be to withdraw the Force.

In The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
thank God, the situation is different; here we have what is
in effect the first preventive deployment, now known as the
United Nations Preventive Deployment Force
(UNPREDEP), which has been a successful experiment.
This should not make us forget, however, that the situation
in The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia is
precarious indeed, especially in the economic and social
fields, which, unfortunately, are suffering deeply as a result
of the economic sanctions imposed multilaterally on the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro)
and, unilaterally, on The Former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia itself by a State Member of the United Nations.
We hope that, with the cooperation of the various parties,
this situation can be got back on track by a solution that
would allow The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
to grow in peace and prosperity.

I would reiterate that the Argentine Republic is deeply
committed, along with the international community, to
trying to assist the States that once made up Yugoslavia.
This commitment is still in force. However, I must make
clear that it is up to the parties in question to make the
main efforts in the search for peace. The adoption of these
three resolutions is tangible proof of the international
communities' commitment, but that commitment is
nevertheless not without limits.
Before I end my statement, my delegation wishes to
offer a special thanks to the Secretary-General, to his
Special Representative Mr. Yasushi Akashi, to all the
troops and civilian personnel of UNPROFOR and to their
families, and also to the humanitarian and other regional
and private organizations which, with their truly tireless
efforts, have contributed and continue to contribute to this
task.

