I thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his briefing today. The situation in the Sahel remains one of the United States top security concerns in Africa, and the challenges of the coronavirus disease pandemic make it all the more important for the international community to work together. The Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) remains the long-term solution to re-establishing security in the Sahel. The United States is committed to supporting the Joint Force by providing equipment, training and advisory support to fill critical capability gaps on a bilateral basis, and continues to call on other countries to do the same. We commend the steady progress we have seen over the past few months in Joint Force operations. But Joint Force operations alone will not be enough. Root causes of conflict must be addressed through coordinated humanitarian aid and long-term assistance in health, agriculture, citizen-responsive governance, democracy and human rights. We urge the signatory parties to the Algiers accord to act on their commitments and swiftly implement the agreement. The provisions of the accord will have a stabilizing effect not just in northern Mali but also in the entire Sahel region. Once the Government of Mali and those of its partner countries take real, substantive action on the accord, they can focus more resources and attention on terrorist threats that are spreading in the region. The sustainability of our collective efforts to stabilize the region will depend on the progress of the Governments, civil society and the private sector in G-5 Sahel States to create effective, citizen-responsive governance, increase access to opportunity for all citizens and respect and embrace human rights, accountability, and inclusiveness. Also critical will be increasing the meaningful participation of women, youth and marginalized groups in decision-making. Together, these endeavours can achieve durable peace and stability and unleash the potential of this vital region and its people.
