The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Russian Federation.

We are grateful to Mr. Ladsous for his substantive
analysis of the situation in Afghanistan. We took note
with interest of the assessment by the Deputy Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan, Mr. Ludin. We are
grateful to Mr. De Mistura for the account he gave, and
also for his work as Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan. We would like to
wish every success to Mr. Kubis.

Over the past decade, the Afghan people have
achieved a great deal, above all with respect to
establishing political institutions and economic
recovery. Despite that, the way the current situation is
developing does not, unfortunately, inspire optimism.
Instability is prevalent across the entire territory of
Afghanistan. Terrorist attacks and the assassination of
politicians and peaceful civilians continue. There have
been major losses within the Coalition and Afghan
forces.

The International Security Assistance Force
(ISAF), when working with the Afghan authorities,
must take more decisive steps to curb the threat from
the Taliban and Al Qaeda. It is important to respect the
sovereignty of other States in the planning and conduct
of counter-terrorist operations. Civilian casualties are
unacceptable. While we note the efforts of the
international forces to minimize such casualties, we
also trust that they will be more effective in the future.
That would be more helpful in normalizing the overall
situation.

The decrease in the number of foreign troops
must be accompanied by an increase in the level of
combat readiness of Afghan forces so that they
themselves can counter terrorism and drug-related
crime. The task of training Afghan forces in combat
readiness is one of the objectives that the Security
Council set when it created the mandate of ISAF.
Furthermore, we again stress that the international
military presence must have a temporary character.
ISAF must leave Afghanistan after reporting to the
Security Council on the fulfilment of its mandate,
which authorized its deployment in that country.

It is common knowledge that in Afghanistan,
terrorism is closely tied to drug-related crime. Drug
trafficking has become one of the main sources fuelling
terrorist activity and has become a threat to
international peace and stability. The drug threat must
receive a comprehensive response from the
international community with respect to all its aspects,
from destroying drug crops to listing the names of drug
barons on the sanctions list. In that context, we assign
great importance to the Third Ministerial Conference
of the Paris Pact, on "Drug Routes from Afghanistan,"
to be held on 18 February in Vienna.

The national reconciliation process remains a key
part of Afghan settlement. The process must continue
under the leadership of Afghan authorities, but the
insurgents must comply with the three familiar
conditions: to recognize the Constitution, to repudiate
Al Qaeda and other terrorist and extremist
organizations, and to disarm. The quid pro quo for
those criteria is that they will be automatically
removed from the sanctions list. The Security Council
sanctions regime is the paramount instrument for
countering terrorism.

The situation cannot be resolved solely by force.
The country's economy must be boosted. We support
the Istanbul Conference's focus on strengthening
regional cooperation. We need to comprehensively
develop and perfect cooperation within existing
regional frameworks, such as the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization, the Collective Security
Treaty Organization, the Dushanbe Quartet - Russia,
Afghanistan, Pakistan and Tajikistan - the Economic
Cooperation Organization and the South Asian
Association for Regional Cooperation. We view the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization as a crucial
platform for regional contributions to the international
efforts for a settlement in Afghanistan. Afghanistan and
its neighbours are already participating in its work.

The United Nations Assistance Mission in should
maintain its function of coordinating international
civilian efforts in Afghanistan. To that end, planning
for the future presence of the United Nations in the
country, for its role in organizing the elections process
and for national reconciliation requires listening
carefully to the wishes of the Afghan people
themselves.
We are convinced that the coordinated efforts of
the international community and the Afghan
Government, which the Istanbul and Bonn Conferences
were intended to support, will lead to the restoration of
a peaceful, sovereign and neutral Afghanistan free of
terrorism and drugs.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

Following consultations among the members of
the Security Council, I have been authorized to make
this statement on their behalf:

"The Security Council welcomes the
International Afghanistan Conference 'Afghanistan
and the International Community: From
Transition to the Transformation Decade' in Bonn
on 5 December 2011 and its conference
conclusions (S/2011/762).

"The Security Council welcomes also the
declaration in Bonn that the process of transition,
to be completed by the end of 2014, should be
followed by a Decade of Transformation (2015- 2024) in which Afghanistan consolidates its
sovereignty through strengthening a fully
functioning, sustainable State in the service of its
people.

"The Security Council welcomes furthermore,
against this background, the strategic consensus
between the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan and
the international community on a renewed and
enduring partnership for this Transformation
Decade which entails firm mutual commitments.

"The Security Council notes that the
process of Transition entails the assumption of
the leadership responsibility by the Government
of Afghanistan.

"The Security Council commends the
outcome of the 'Istanbul Conference for
Afghanistan: Security and Cooperation in the
Heart ofAsia' of2 November 2011.

"The Security Council underlines the
crucial role of the United Nations in Afghanistan,
expresses its gratitude for Staffan de Mistura's
outstanding contribution to UNAMA's work, and
looks forward to working with the Secretary
General's incoming Special Representative, Jan
Kubis.
"The Security Council welcomes the
intention of the Government of Japan to host a
ministerial conference in Tokyo in July of 2012."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2011/22.

We will now resume our discussion. I give the
floor to the representative of Canada.

