Mr. Monteiro (Portugal): The Presidency of the
European Union has already stated the common Views of
its member States on this subject. Therefore, I will
emphasize only certain elements of my country's position
with regard to the situation in Afghanistan.

Since the Council last discussed the disturbing
situation in Afghanistan on 16 April 1997, the political
and humanitarian situation in the country has deteriorated
further. The latest fighting and escalation of the conflict
in Afghanistan clearly indicate that at least one of the
parties is convinced that it is in a position to take over
militarily the whole country.

 

In reality, the warring factions must recognize that the
conflict cannot be settled on the battlefield. Any thought of
a conclusive military victory by one party is an illusion.
The past 20 years of war in Afghanistan lead us to believe
that a military victory by one of the warring parties will not
bring the fighting to an end.

Portugal stands for a political settlement in
Afghanistan on the basis of the decisions of the General
Assembly and Security Council, and for the preservation of
the unity and territorial integrity of the country. We
therefore call on all factions to agree to an immediate
ceasefire and to enter into negotiations under United
Nations auspices aimed at achieving a broadly
representative Government acceptable to all Afghans.

With the recent escalation of fighting, the
humanitarian situation in Afghanistan has deteriorated
further. I would like to express our deep concern at this
tragic situation in which the Afghan people finds itself.
Moreover, recent measures taken by the Taliban resulted in
the evacuation of all United Nations humanitarian
personnel. The humanitarian impact of the evacuation of
humanitarian personnel could be disastrous.

My Government strongly condemns the attacks on
United Nations personnel and urges the Taliban to fully
investigate the recent attacks against two staff members of
the United Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan, which
resulted in the death of an Italian national.

Portugal strongly deplores the fact that foreign
countries, instead of using their influence on the warring
factions positively, continue to fuel the conflict with arms,
personnel and logistical support. Although the enmity
between the Afghan factions is deep, we are convinced that
to a great extent it is foreign intervention that has prolonged
the fighting. Like others, we call for an immediate end to
such interference.

We remain deeply concerned with the reports of
widespread violations of human rights in Afghanistan, in
particular the continuing and intolerable discrimination
imposed by the Taliban against women. All factions must
understand that they are responsible not only for complying
with humanitarian law, but also for respecting and
implementing international human rights standards
regarding each and every citizen in Afghanistan.

We are also particularly alarmed by the fact that the
fighting and the polarization of forces is increasingly taking
place along ethnic lines, thus making it more complicated
to find a peaceful political solution. In this regard, we
would like to express our concern over the reported
capture by the Taliban of the Consulate-General of the
Islamic Republic of Iran in Mazar-e-Sharif and with the
fate of the civilian population of the Hazarajat region.

Another two sources of grave concern are drug-
trafficking and the continuing presence of terrorists and
terrorist training camps in Afghanistan, both factors with
far-reaching negative effects inside and outside
Afghanistan. They constitute a serious threat to peace and
security in the whole region. In fact, these completely
intolerable and destabilizing practices represent global
threats, and they must cease immediately.

In conclusion, we fully support the draft resolution
before us, which we co-sponsor. We urge the Afghan
factions to fully comply with it to put an end to the
suffering of the Afghan people.

