Mr. Doss (spoke in French): The report
(8/2009/472) of the Secretary-General before the
Security Council provides an assessment of the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the activities of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC). Overall, the Forces armees de la
Republique democratique du Congo (FARDC) have
made progress in their operations against foreign
armed groups, and especially against the Forces
democratiques de liberation du Rwanda (FDLR), which
have been pushed out of most populated areas and now
find themselves dispersed and weakened. The
integration of Congolese armed groups is continuing.
Displaced persons and refugees are in the process of
returning to their homes. Nevertheless, serious risks
and threats persist. We must not allow ourselves to
become complacent.
09-56206

The FDLR have been scattered, but they are not
yet neutralized. Armed attacks are continuing in both
Kivus and in Orientale province, where residual
elements of the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) are
carrying out sporadic raids. The return of displaced
persons and refugees after many years has led to ethnic
tension and land disputes. Ongoing sexual violence
poses an enormous challenge. The return of security
has raised the hopes of the population, who now want
to see a real peace dividend.

(spoke in English)

When I spoke to the Council a year ago, the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo was
increasingly grave. We faced a security crisis of
enormous dimensions following the resumption of
hostilities with the Congres national pour la defense du
people (CNDP). A year on, there is now a real prospect
that the conflicts that have for so long blighted the
eastern Congo can be ended. There has been progress
on a number of fronts.

FARDC operations in the Kivus and in Orientale
province have significantly eroded the strike capacity
and domination of the FDLR and the LRA. Since the
beginning of the year, 1,126 FDLR combatants and
1,622 of their dependents have been repatriated by the
MONUC team for disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and resettlement or repatriation. That is
more than double the repatriation rate for the same
period last year. An additional 11,383 Rwandan
civilians, many of whom had been held hostage by the
FDLR, have returned to Rwanda with the assistance of
MONUC and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees.

Two major figures wanted by the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda for their involvement in
the Rwanda genocide have been arrested and
transferred to Arusha. I do not believe that would have
happened without the military pressure that we have
brought to bear on the FDLR.

Most of the internally displaced persons who had
been regrouped in camps on the outskirts of Goma as a
consequence of the earlier conflict with the CNDP have
returned home, although there is still a very high
number of displaced people in North and South Kivu
who are waiting for further improvements in the
security situation before they go back to their villages.
Significantly, more than 2,000 children have been
separated from armed groups and the FARDC since the
09-56206
beginning of the year, with the help of MONUC and
UNICEF.

The integration of the CNDP and other Congolese
armed groups is approaching completion. Over 120
political prisoners were recently released and returned
to the East, with MONUC's assistance. The
stabilization programme is now moving into areas
freed from the control of armed groups, opening the
way for the return of State authority.

Despite those positive developments, I do not
want to imply that the troubles of eastern Congo are a
thing of the past. The fast-track integration of up to
20,000 elements of former armed groups, some with
very bad human rights records, into the FARDC has
aggravated existing problems of indiscipline. Civilians
in remote areas continue to suffer reprisals from the
FDLR. There have been new population displacements
and human rights Violations. There is still an
appallingly high level of violence against women.
Large numbers of people remain displaced and difficult
to access, especially during periods of combat. The
implementation of the 23 March agreements with the
armed groups has been slower than we would have
wished.

Looking ahead, we see several issues that must be
addressed if the momentum generated by the
agreements reached between the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Rwanda in December 2008 and the
23 March agreements with the armed groups is to be
maintained.

First, the areas cleared of FDLR presence by the
FARDC must be fully secured to ensure continuing
protection for the population and to allow internally
displaced persons to return home.

Secondly, major operations against the remaining
FDLR strongholds should be completed as soon as
possible, with proper regard for the protection of
civilians.

Thirdly, in areas that have been secured, the
stabilization effort must be accelerated, giving priority
to the control of mining sites to deprive armed
elements of revenue, and backed up by the deployment
of armed police and the reconstruction of roads and
administrative infrastructure.

Fourthly, non-military initiatives designed to
encourage defections and surrenders among the
3
remaining FDLR combatants must be further
intensified.

Finally, but most importantly, the discipline of
the FARDC and the national police, which itself is a
vital dimension of protection, requires constant
attention to signal and ensure that impunity will not be
accepted.

How will MONUC help to address these
concerns? The Council has directed us to focus our
attention on protection. We have identified protection
hotspots. Last year, we launched mobile operating
bases so that we could respond more flexibly to the
rapidly changing military environment. MONUC
military is now present in more than 50 different
locations throughout the Kivus and in five locations in
areas LRA-affected in North-East Democratic Republic
of the Congo, principally in Orientale province.

The Council is aware that we have created joint
protection teams, which have deployed into security-
sensitive areas to assist the military and local
authorities to analyse, anticipate and respond to
specific threats against civilians. More than 50 joint
protection missions have been launched in North and
South Kivu, and we have started expanding this
practice to the remaining areas of instability and
vulnerability in Orientale province. Deployment of
these missions is guided by a rapid response and early
warning cell that draws on information from a variety
of sources, including civil society and surveillance
networks established by the military at the provincial
level. I believe we have circulated a map to the
members of the Council showing the dispersion of all
of those mission bases throughout the two Kivus.

We are also using these mechanisms to monitor
the performance of individual FARDC battalions and,
as necessary, asking the military leadership of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to take corrective
action when we see disciplinary problems. This will be
the basis for any decision we may make on the
necessity of withdrawing support if we see a blatant
disregard for international humanitarian law.

President Kabila himself has now declared a
zero-tolerance policy for acts of sexual and gender-
based violence, and the Government is acting against
looting, corruption and other undisciplined behaviour
in the armed forces. The five commanders who were
identified by the Security Council have all been
removed from command and, we are assured, will be

prosecuted. Two are already under arrest, two more
have been put under house surveillance or arrest in
Kinshasa, and the last one has absconded. The FARDC
has established a military court for the Kivus, which
has handed down more than 30 sentences to soldiers
found guilty of serious crimes. High-level commanders
have been relieved of their duties for misconduct.

The refurbishment of Ndolo military prison in
Kinshasa is nearly complete and will enable us to
transfer military prisoners - serious offenders - from
the East to secure facilities in Kinshasa. MONUC itself
is helping to establish prosecution support cells and
joint investigation teams within the military to assist
them to act more speedily in investigating and
prosecuting serious crimes, including rape. Partner
assistance in this initiative is critical.

I would like to underscore that we cannot make
significant progress if we do not work on all of these
areas simultaneously. We can arrest people and we can
try them, but if they are not in secure facilities they can
escape and return to do what they did before. So it is
very important that we have this joint approach as we
try to tackle the problem of impunity in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

To underscore MONUC's full support for the
President's zero-tolerance policy and to reinforce that
policy, MONUC has told the Government that it will
withdraw support from battalions that show a blatant
disregard for international humanitarian law.

MONUC is the first mission in which the Force
Commander has issued a specific directive on civilian
protection to all contingents. Under that directive,
MONUC Blue Helmets provide protection against
attacks by the FDLR and other armed elements, patrol
key routes to facilitate the safe delivery of
humanitarian assistance, and indeed go well beyond
those responsibilities. For example, on market days we
provide armed escorts for thousands of villagers, in
particular women, who wish to travel to market in
safety, free of harassment and illegal taxation by armed
groups.

All of these activities have been integrated into a
comprehensive civilian protection strategy developed
by MONUC, the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and the protection cluster.
Our protection efforts, however, are a daily
exercise in managing scarce resources and, I must say,
making hard choices. The Council is well aware of the
strain on MONUC's military and logistical assets. I
therefore want to pay tribute to the contingents and
civilian personnel who are working to project
MONUC's presence into very demanding areas
throughout the East.

In the past few weeks, the first elements of the
additional 3,000 uniformed personnel authorized by the
Council last year have begun to arrive in theatre and
are being deployed exclusively in the East to further
extend and reinforce our protection capacity. Another
battalion is also being transferred from Kinshasa to
Orientale province to backstop the operations against
the LRA. With this transfer, only 500 United Nations
troops will be left in the entire western area of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Unfortunately, the limited helicopter and fixed-
wing aircraft capacity is still a huge constraint on our
ability to quickly deploy and sustain MONUC forces in
places where they are most needed. This is
compounded, I might add, by our lack of tactical
intelligence. We have yet to receive any support in that
area, even though it was authorized by the Council a
year ago.

Despite the efforts made by the FARDC and
MONUC to improve and extend protection, it is
obviously not possible to protect everyone, everywhere,
all of the time in the Kivus, an area the size of
California with a population of almost 10 million. So
inevitably the question arises: Should Kimia ll be
halted?

Some observers have suggested that Kimia II
operations should be suspended in order to give the
FARDC time to get its house in order and improve
discipline. We believe, however, that reducing the
pressure now would give the FDLR time to regroup
and rearm. It would also send an ambiguous message
to some elements of the FARDC who have in the past
cooperated with the FDLR. Suspension would
therefore undermine the FARDC's resolve and
paradoxically, in our View, further weaken discipline
by removing the immediate pressure for reform created
by Kimia II. Rwanda might also see this as a step
backwards from the rapprochement that has opened up
an entirely new perspective for the Kivus since the
agreement with the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
A suspension would also make it more difficult
for the Government to impose State authority and

prevent the re-emergence of other armed groups that
might well draw the conclusion that attacks against
civilians will force the Government to give in to their
demands. Above all, a suspension of operation Kimia 11
would be celebrated as a victory by the FDLR. It
would strengthen the ties between the leadership
abroad and the combatants on the ground, thus
obviating years of efforts at sensitization aimed at
weakening these links.

We do, however, agree that military pressure
alone is not enough and should be part of a
multifaceted approach to the FDLR problem that
recognizes the need for enhanced measures to protect
civilians and other action designed to encourage FDLR
defections and the weakening of FDLR support outside
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The Council will recall my earlier appeal for
countries hosting FDLR leaders abroad to take legal
action to neutralize their influence on the conflict. The
Council's commitment and cooperation in this regard
are particularly important. FDLR leaders abroad have
sustained a propaganda campaign against operation
Kimia II, discouraging rank-and-file combatants from
surrendering. Additional pressure must be brought to
bear on exiled leaders to change their attitude or sever
their communications with combatants on the ground.

MONUC has proposed that the Congolese
Government and host countries of FDLR leaders in
exile explore the possibility of criminalizing the FDLR
under the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime. There is
overwhelming evidence of crimes in the Kivus, and if
this initiative gained international support it would also
serve as a powerful disincentive to those involved in
illegal trading networks with the FDLR.

Allow me now to report briefly on the integration
of Congolese armed groups into the national army.
More and more remnant groups are joining this
process. They have been motivated by a combination
of military pressure and dialogue. Although the official
integration process is over, the FARDC continues to
receive and to integrate those who surrender. At the
same time, the army hierarchy is endeavouring to
improve the conditions of service for newly integrated
soldiers, although the timely payment of salaries is still
a major problem that needs to be resolved urgently. We
find that when salaries are not paid on time, discipline
deteriorates, looting begins and other kinds of violence
follow, especially violence against women. So it is
absolutely essential that the problem of timely pay be
resolved.

In the framework of the stabilization programme,
barracks are being constructed for these troops, with
the assistance of the United Kingdom and the
Netherlands. A MONUC training programme for newly
integrated troops will start in January at two or three
planned training centres, with the support of training
specialists from the Tanzanian army, who will join
MONUC as a formed contingent.

These activities are intended to consolidate
military integration and improve the discipline and
efficiency of the FARDC. They are the first steps
towards army reform, which in itself is an important
long-term project that will require substantial
international support. The Conseil superieur de la
defense has endorsed an army reform plan that has
been submitted to Parliament for review. The Minister
of Defence will discuss its implementation with
international partners once parliamentary approval has
been obtained.

MONUC has worked with the mediation, led by
Presidents Obasanjo and Mkapa, to follow up on the
23 March agreements. As I have already mentioned, we
have assisted with the release of former CNDP
prisoners. We are mobilizing resources for war-
wounded and for a training programme for the
integrated police units. We shall also continue to press
for a solution to the territorial administration in areas
where ex-CNDP cadres still retain control on the
ground. We will work with all concerned to ensure that
the commitment to the 23 March agreements does not
falter.

Because of time constraints, I will not discuss a
number of other areas of concern and activity of
MONUC. Let me mention, however, the local
elections. Despite assurances from the Government
that the local elections will be held before the general
elections currently planned or scheduled for mid-2011,
the timetable and dates for those local elections have
not yet been announced and may well be pushed back
again until late 2010. Also, the necessary enabling
legislation has yet to be adopted by the legislature. We
have informed the Congolese authorities that when
they are ready we will be ready, but obviously the
initiative lies with them and not with us.

The report of the Secretary-General also mentions
the dismissal of a large number of magistrates. There is
concern regarding the establishment of mechanisms to
ensure judicial independence and accountability,
including the Conseil superieur de la magistrature.
Current tensions regarding the respective roles of the
Conseil and the Ministry of Justice, and the paucity of
budgetary resources, are impediments to progress in
establishing an effective justice sector, which is a key
pillar of security sector reform.

As grave as the problem is with regard to the
courts, the situation of prisons in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is even more critical. As the
current level of national funding renders significant
progress impossible, donor resources are urgently
required to help us maintain the minimum
humanitarian standards expected of a national prison
system.

In closing, I want to make some observations, if I
may be allowed, about MONUC'S mandate, which will
be reviewed by this Council at the end of the year.
Resolution 1856 (2008) lists 41 tasks, which have
given us considerable flexibility in a rapidly changing
environment. However, it has also generated many
demands and high expectations that perhaps need to be
rationalized. The preparation of an integrated strategic
framework, as requested by the Secretary-General's
Policy Committee, provides us with an opportunity to
reflect on how this might be done.

The framework, which is a joint undertaking of
MONUC and the United Nations country team, will
outline the key challenges facing the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. It will indicate how the United
Nations might assist the country and respond in a
cohesive manner, taking full account of the
Government's own stated priorities and the directives
of this Council as regards the focus and deployment of
MONUC's resources.

The integrated strategic framework builds on
other initiatives developed by the United Nations in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, notably the United
Nations strategy to combat sexual violence, the
strategy on protection of civilians, the stabilization
programme for the East, and the multidimensional
approach to dealing with the FDLR. The framework
will consider challenges that do not fall directly under
the mandate of MONUC but are of direct concern to
the wider United Nations system. Nevertheless, we
anticipate that the strategic framework will highlight
issues that should be part of the MONUC mandate
review. These will include the progress of the peace
process, security sector reform, protection and the rule
of law, conflict prevention and resolution, stabilization
in the East and the democratic process and elections.

We shall also consider the possible structural
arrangements required to implement such a strategic
framework. In line with the Security Council's
directives, MONUC has already deployed 95 per cent of
the Mission's military resources to the East and, outside
of the headquarters establishment, almost 90 per cent of
the international civilian staff, drawn from all
substantive sections, are also in eastern areas. We have
conducted a review of ongoing United Nations
operations in the western provinces and identified areas
of responsibility that could be progressively transferred
to the United Nations country team with minimal
continued support from MONUC.

In October 2008, the Council approved a surge
capacity for MONUC, which is under deployment.
Assuming that the surge is successful and that major
military operations against foreign armed groups can
be concluded in 2010, MONUC could then begin a
phased troop drawdown at a pace consonant with the
security situation on the ground. Should the Council so
wish, this would permit the United Nations to
reallocate, within a declining overall budget, additional
resources to an intensified programme of security
sector reform and, more broadly, to the strengthening
of the rule of law as a prelude to the eventual departure
of the United Nations peacekeeping presence.

In the next report of the Secretary-General to the
Council, we shall present the key elements of the
integrated strategic framework as a contribution to the
Council's review of MONUC's mandate and the
possible reconfiguration of the Mission structure.

In all of the activities, I want to add, MONUC
works closely with Congolese authorities at the
national and provincial levels. We also work with the
special envoys of the Secretary-General, the African
Union, the European Union and representatives of
individual Member States. We value in particular the
contribution of the European Union security sector
reform and police missions to security sector reform, as
well as the support of several Member States to the
United Nations Security and Stabilization Support
Strategy for the East.
(spoke in French)

In November, MONUC will have been present in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo for 10 years.
Beginning as a small observer mission, it grew to
become the largest United Nations mission in the
world. Over the course of the decade, it has overseen
the ceasefire and the withdrawal of foreign troops,
stabilized the security situation, accompanied the inter-
Congolese dialogue and the transfer and
demobilization of armed groups in Kivu and elsewhere,
facilitated the first free and transparent elections in 40
years, and helped the Government to manage the crisis
in the Kivus and to combat armed forces.

We are proud to have worked with the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in its peace process,
which has seen many reversals and developments, but
certain essential objectives set out in the Sun City
Agreement and that underpin MONUC's presence in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo remain to be
achieved. These include the training of a professional
republican army, the restoration of State authority
throughout the national territory, reconciliation and the
effective reconstruction of the country. I believe that
the simultaneous tasks of stabilization and pacification
must continue, with the support of MONUC and the
material and diplomatic support of the Security
Council.

