Mr. Zlauvinen: We are few days away from the fiftieth anniversary ofthe Treaty onthe Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and almost two months from the 2020 Review Conference of the Parties to the NPT. It is therefore timely and important for the Security Council to discuss and reaffirm its commitment to the international disarmament and non-proliferation system built on the basis of the NPT, as well as international cooperation on the peaceful uses of nuclear science and technology for the development that it enables. The Treaty and its Review Conference represent an almost universal forum to discuss issues that are central to international peace and security, and that gives the NPT a unique level of legitimacy that is recognized by the international community. It is also clear that issues concerning disarmament and arms control have been an important part of the United Nations since its inception. For example, Article 26 of the Charter of the United Nations confers upon the Security Council the responsibility for disarmament and the "regulation of armaments". For almost 50 years, the NPT has proven to be crucial to maintaining international security and providing access to peaceful nuclear applications. It is incumbent on all States parties to continue to work together and ensure that the international cooperation provided for by the Treaty continues into the future. As we near the moment when the international community will get together here in New York to review the implementation of the Treaty, discuss all related issues and, I hope, agree on an outcome document that provides for a way forward, we will take into account not just the immediate context, with its limitations and opportunities, but also the medium term and the future of peaceful cooperation on these issues that we hope to see. The 2020 Review Conference is therefore coming at a time of growing concerns and uncertainties. National and regional expectations are growing. Tensions - both old and new - are converging on the NPT as a magnet. Nevertheless, when we look at the past 50 years, we can hardly say that we are living in the best or the worst of times, and we can clearly see that the Treaty has successfully seen us through many times of tension and change in the past. We hope that it will continue do so at the Review Conference. It may be true that much of the quantifiable progress made under the Treaty was achieved in the past, but we sometimes underplay its fundamental and unique achievement in establishing an efficient non-proliferation system and underpinning growing technical and scientific cooperation for the benefit of all humankind. Those achievements are now taken for granted, yet 50 or even 25 years ago they seemed to be unattainable dreams. That is something that we need to consider as we undertake our responsibility at the upcoming Review Conference - to sustain what we have achieved and move forward with our eyes set on the next 50 years. In that challenging context, we need to be ambitious and aim to make progress in every possible area. To that end, it is of great importance to consider the three pillars of the NPT in a balanced manner so that we can reach our shared goal of a comprehensive and forward-looking outcome. I believe that the three pillars are, in and of themselves, equally important and mutually reinforcing. We know that we need to ramp up consideration of the peaceful uses of nuclear applications. That is a set of issues that is fundamentally relevant to the development of our societies and has been relegated in the debate for too long. I believe that the fiftieth anniversary of the Treaty calls on all of us to recommit to its full implementation and to strengthening it with a forward-looking perspective. The Review Conference is a conference of the parties, and therefore its outcome will depend on the resolve and commitments shown by all parties when the time comes for compromises to be made and agreements to be reached. As President-designate of the Review Conference, I encourage all parties to come to the Conference with the ambition and resolve to engage in an open and frank exchange on the implementation of the Treaty and to strengthen our joint commitment to its legally binding provisions, which are the indispensable basis for all international cooperation and progress in the field of peaceful uses, nuclear science, technology and applications in all States parties. In addition, I believe that the next Review Conference needs to widen its reach and open up to all voices and ideas. The NPT cannot be a closed club. We need to make sure that the next generation of leadersand practitioners are included in the conversation; that the voices of women and the gender perspective are considered and included in our conclusions and that operators, regulators, practitioners, academics and scientists are also part of the discussions. It is important to use the political momentum of the fiftieth anniversary to get over false dichotomies. There is no reason for us not to make progress on every issue where progress is possible. As Isee it, the Review Conference is an opportunity for all of us not only to review the implementation of the Treaty, but to recommit to its objectives by strengthening its contribution to peace, security and development in all our countries. I will endeavour to provide the leadership needed to make sure that the discussions among the parties reflect their commitment and bring about a successful and shared outcome of the Review Conference on the occasion of the fiftieth anniversary of the Treaty.
