The President: I should like to inform the
Council that l have received letters from the
representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Rwanda
and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in
the discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I extend a warm welcome to Mr. Jean de Dieu
Mucyo, Minister for Justice of Rwanda.

At the invitation ofthe President, Mr. Mucyo
(Rwanda) took the seat reservedfor him at the
side ofthe Council Chamber.

At the invitation ofthe President, Mr. Kusljugic
(Bosnia and Herzegovina) and Mr. Sahovie
(Federal Republic of Yugoslavia) took the seats
reservedfor them at the side ofthe Council
Chamber.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
decides to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Judge Claude Jorda,
President of the International Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia
since 1991.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I welcome Judge Jorda and invite him to take a
seat at the Council table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council decides to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Judge
Navanethem Pillay, President of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious Violations
of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens
Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations
Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States
between 1 January 1994 and 31 December 1994.

It is so decided.

I welcome Judge Pillay and invite her to take a
seat at the Council table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council decides to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Ms.
Carla Del Ponte, Prosecutor of the International
Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia
since 1991 and of the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the
Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January
1994 and 31 December 1994.

It is so decided.

I welcome Ms. Del Ponte and invite her to take a
seat at the Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings from the Presidents and Prosecutor of the
International Tribunals for the Former Yugoslavia and
Rwanda.
I give the floor to Judge Jorda, President of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, to
whom the Council has extended an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure, in order to
brief the Council.


