Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish
to thank Secretary-General Guterres for his briefing.
We listened to the statements made by Mr. Prendergast.

The maintenance of international peace and
security is an important purpose of the Charter of
the United Nations and the primary responsibility
of the Security Council, as entrusted by the Charter.
Nowadays, complex factors are at play throughout
world, the emergence of regional hotspot issues is
increasing, and traditional and non-traditional security
challenges are intertwined. Against that background,
the international community should act in concert to
prevent and resolve conflicts in order to build long-
lasting peace and universal security.

First, it is important to adhere to the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations
and settle disputes by peaceful means. Sovereign
equality, the peaceful settlement of disputes and
non-interference in the internal affairs of States are
the basic principles that guide international affairs.
Countries must develop equal partnerships through
consultation and mutual understanding. All parties to
conflict must insist on consultations on an equal basis
and resolve their differences through peaceful means,
such as dialogue and negotiations. The mechanisms
and means of addressing matters of international peace
and security must be further refined in order to better
resolve conflicts, defuse tensions and eliminate wars
and conflicts.

Secondly, both the symptoms and the root causes of
conflicts must be tackled. The international community
should focus on addressing the root causes of conflict,
such as poverty and underdevelopment, in an effort to
comprehensively promote the implementation of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, strengthen
global development partnerships, honour assistance
commitments and help developing countries improve
the livelihood of their people, exploring development
paths that suit their national conditions and helping
them to enhance their own capabilities for development.
We should promote development through peace and

consolidate peace through development so that people
in conflict areas can enjoy the peace dividends as soon
as possible.

Thirdly, it is important to build a new international
peace and security partnership featuring cooperation
and win-win outcomes. All parties should establish a
new vision of common, comprehensive, cooperative and
sustainable security, and respond to challenges in the
area of international peace and security in a mutually
beneficial manner. The Security Council should play a
central role in the collective security mechanism and
work side by side and in a coordinated manner with the
relevant United Nations agencies to establish synergies.
Regional and subregional organizations, such as the
African Union, enjoy advantages in terms of shared
geography, history and culture, and should therefore
play important roles in maintaining peace and security
in the region.

China is a builder and defender of world
peace and actively participates in United Nations
peacekeeping operations and mediation activities
related to international and regional hotspot issues,
while advocating the settlement of disputes through
dialogue and negotiations. We firmly uphold the basic
norms of international relations based on the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations
and promote international relations that are mutually
respectful, fair, just and characterized by cooperation
and win-win outcomes. The Beijing Summit of the
Forum on China-Africa Cooperation was successfully
held on 3 and 4 September. Leaders of China and Africa
announced new measures to strengthen comprehensive
cooperation between China and Africa around the theme
"Towards an even stronger China-Africa community
with a shared future" through win-win cooperation.
Eight major initiatives have been identified for the next
three years and beyond.

In the area of peace and security, China has
decided to establish a China-Africa peace and security
cooperation fund to support peace and security and
stability in Central Africa, while continuing to provide
free military aid and assistance to the African Union.
We support national and regional efforts, including in
the regions of the Sahel, the Gulf of Aden and the Gulf
of Guinea, to maintain regional security and support
counter-terrorism efforts.

The Forum on China-Africa Cooperation has been
established to provide a platform for China and Africa to
strengthen exchanges in the area of peace and security.

We are making efforts to promote the implementation
of 50 security assistance projects, including the Belt
and Road Initiative, social security, United Nations
peacekeeping, combating piracy and counter-terrorism.
Within the United Nations framework, we will continue
to actively participate in United Nations peacekeeping
operations in Africa and to mobilize the international
community to strengthen support for the African
Standby Force and build rapid-reaction forces to
respond to crises. China will continue to work with
the international community, adhere to multilateralism
and support the United Nations in playing a central role
in making greater contributions to the maintenance of
international peace and security.

This year marks the fifteenth anniversary of the
adoption of the United Nations Convention against
Corruption. Corruption is the common enemy of
humankind. Substantially reducing corruption and
bribery in all their forms and strengthening the recovery
and return of stolen assets are included as targets
in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
The international community needs to strengthen
cooperation, resolutely fight corruption and prevent
gaps and loopholes that could be used to the benefit
of corrupt actors. China is a party to the Convention
against Corruption and actively participates in the
relevant discussions in the General Assembly and other
relevant mechanisms to support the United Nations role
as the main cooperative channel to combat corruption.
China stands ready to work with Governments and
the relevant international agencies to continuously
contribute to deepening international cooperation to
counter corruption.

