Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
should like at the outset, Sir, to congratulate you on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
this month. I am confident that, with your experience
and diplomatic skill, you will successfully guide the
work of the Council this month. I should like also to
take this opportunity to congratulate my good friend
Ambassador Akram on his successful leadership of the
work of the Council last month.

I should like first warmly to welcome Mr. Bryant,
Chairman of the National Transitional Government of
Liberia, who has travelled so far to be with us. His
statement was very helpful to the Council's
understanding of the current situation in Liberia. I
should like also to thank Mr. Klein, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
briefing in connection with the report of the Secretary-
General.

The past year has been very eventful for Liberia.
With the resolute assistance of the international
community, the long period of war and turmoil in
Liberia has come to an end and the long-hoped-for
peace has arrived. Since the establishment of the
National Transitional Government of Liberia, headed
by Chairman Bryant, serious efforts have been made to
implement the Comprehensive Peace Agreement,
promote the peace process, bring about national
reconciliation and undertake the process of national
recovery and economic reconstruction. Liberia is
embarking on a new and historic phase of
development. We are sincerely gratified to see the
positive change in the situation in Liberia, and we offer
our heartfelt congratulations to the National
Transitional Government of Liberia for the tangible
achievements made since it took office.

We sincerely hope that all sides in Liberia, on the
basis of the achievements already registered, will seize
this opportunity to strengthen cooperation and work
together to promote the stability and development of
the nation.

In our view, there are three priority tasks. The
first is to endeavour to extend the Government's
authority throughout the territory of Liberia. The
second is to expedite the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration process, and the third is to ensure
effective control over national resources.

Chairman Bryant has expressed the wish that the
sanctions on Liberia be lifted as soon as possible. We
fully understand that wish. We endorse the idea that the
Security Council should make a decision on that
question as soon as possible.

Since its deployment under the leadership of Mr.
Klein, the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL)
has overcome many difficulties and has worked to
nurture and safeguard peace and stability in Liberia.
We commend the work done by the Mission and hope
that, in the light of the development of the situation, it
will further strengthen its coordination and cooperation
with the National Transitional Government of Liberia
and help it to promote capacity-building.

We call on the international community
expeditiously to fulfil its pledged commitments and to
help Liberia to consolidate peace and realize
development. Liberia is an important West African
country whose peace and stability are important to the
region as a whole. We hope that the National
Transitional Government of Liberia will further
strengthen good-neighbourly relations with the
countries of the region and support UNMIL in the
framework of continued and strengthened
communication and cooperation with United Nations
missions in other West African countries, in the
common effort to achieve peace and development in
the region as a whole.

We look forward to the forthcoming
recommendations of the Council mission that will soon
leave for West Africa with respect to a comprehensive
strategy and solutions to cross-border issues.

China has actively supported the peace process
and post-war reconstruction in Liberia. Chinese
peacekeepers are participating in UNMIL, including in
engineering, transportation and medical units. China
has also provided, to the extent of its capabilities,
economic and financial assistance to the Liberian
Government. We are prepared to work with other
members of the international community in continuing
tirelessly efforts to achieve comprehensive and lasting
peace and stability in Liberia.

