Mrs. Cordova Soria (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia thanks the Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, for his briefing. We also thank
the President of Serbia, Mr. Aleksandar Vueic', for his
remarks, and Mr. Hashim Thaci for his statement.

Bolivia calls for the implementation of resolution
1244 (1999), including respect for the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and independence of the Republic
of Serbia. The resolution remains in full force, for
which supervision by the international community
is necessary. That resolution provides the only legal
framework for the international security presence,
which in this case is fulfilled by the Kosovo Force,
responsible for ensuring a safe environment in the
province. Any obstacle preventing the Kosovo Force
from fulfilling its responsibilities would be inconsistent
with the resolution I have just mentioned.

In that context, the adoption of three draft laws by
the Assembly of Kosovo aimed at strengthening the role
and the capacity of the Kosovo Security Force is cause
for alarm. We reiterate that any attempt to transform
the Kosovo Security Force into an armed force would
run counter to resolution 1244 (1999) and international
law. We call on the Kosovo authorities to refrain from
that action.

We urge all interested parties to act with restraint
and to refrain from undertaking such actions, which
could increase tensions and lead to a new setback in
the dialogue facilitated by the European Union for
the normalization of relations between Belgrade and
Pristina. Furthermore, we also view with concern
the increase in import tariffs by Kosovo against
Serbia, which can be seen as another provocation that
undermines that dialogue.

We believe that it is important that the parties comply
with the commitments made in that context. Along
those lines, we take note of the efforts of the European
Union and the mediation of its High Representative for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy in order to make
progress in implementing the existing agreements.

Finally, we urge the parties to work towards a
peaceful solution through dialogue through a firm
commitment, based on confidence-building measures,
to using good offices to ease tensions and peaceful
means to seek consensus-based solutions, in line with
the obligation to negotiate, as stipulated by international
law. Such means should make it possible to preserve
peace, while promoting political dialogue and respect
for human rights, taking into account the well-being of
the region and its population.

