The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Djibouti, Eritrea and Somalia, in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the consideration of the item, without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Miss Kadra
Ahmed Hassan (Djibouti), Mr. Desta (Eritrea)
and Mr. Dhakkar (Somalia) took seats at the
Council table.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Lynn Pascoe,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2010/327, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on Eritrea, and document
S/2010/372, which contains a letter dated 12 July 2010
2
from the Chairman of the Security Council Committee
pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009)
concerning Somalia and Eritrea addressed to the
President of the Security Council.

I wish also to draw the attention of Council
members to document S/2010/29l, which contains a
letter dated 7 June 2010 from the Charge d'affaires
ad interim of the Permanent Mission of Qatar to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General, and
document S/2010/350, which contains a letter dated
30 June 2010 from the Permanent Representative of
Eritrea to the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing a by Mr. Lynn Pascoe, to whom I now give the
floor.


