Mrs. Schwalger (New Zealand): I thank all the
briefers and I commend Uruguay for organizing
today's debate.

New Zealand aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs
of Spain.

As we have already heard today, millions of
civilians living in areas of armed conflict around the
world face grave dangers. All too often parties to
armed conflict are placing military advantage ahead
of international humanitarian law. This fact, combined
with the increasing trend for hostilities to take place
in urban settings, has devastated civilian populations.
In some cases their suffering has been exacerbated
through the deliberate obstruction of humanitarian aid
and violent attacks on medical facilities.

The use of indiscriminate explosive weapons
in populated areas is a distressing illustration of
the disrespect for international humanitarian law
demonstrated by some parties to armed conflict.
Explosive weapons in populated areas have destroyed
hospitals, schools, places of worship and vital
infrastructure. Millions of civilians have been displaced
and those who remain struggle to access essential
services, including medical care. The consequences
can be catastrophic and will be felt long into the future.

Given these negative trends, we welcome the
Secretary-General's leadership on protecting civilians
in armed conflict and his path to protection. We are
pleased that he is focused on this critical issue. We are
convinced that there is more that the United Nations can
and should be doing to prevent conflict. We commend
the Secretary-General's determination to mobilize the
United Nations system towards this goal in a holistic
manner. We also welcome his focus on protecting the
medical and humanitarian mission and tackling the
challenges associated with the mass displacement of
civilian populations affected by conflict.

We sit in this Chamber, a year since resolution
2286 (2016) was unanimously adopted by the Security
Council, with a historic number of sponsors. As one
of the drafters of resolution 2286 (2016), New Zealand
was pleased to work with four other Security Council
members to develop this response to attacks on
health-care workers and facilities. However, since that
resolution was adopted, we have continued to witness
outrages that shock our collective conscience. Rather
than providing care to those wounded in conflict,
doctors and nurses continue to be counted among the
casualties in significant numbers. Hospitals have been
levelled. Central tenets of international humanitarian
law are routinely violated with impunity in some parts
of the world.

All Member States, not only those who are parties
to armed conflict, have a responsibility to take action.
Violations of international humanitarian law must
continue to be condemned and violators brought to
justice. We encourage all Member States to implement
the recommendations made by the Secretary-General
pursuant to resolution 2286 (2016) in order to better
protect the wounded, medical personnel and medical
facilities in armed conflict.

For New Zealand's part, we continue to build a
strong understanding of international humanitarian
law at all levels within our Defence Force. We are
using practical and innovative tools to ensure that all
members of the New Zealand Defence Force have ready
access to a concise code of conduct, whether they are
in an office or in the field on active duty. This includes
fundamental provisions of international law pertaining
to the protection of civilians and the medical mission.
But we have to take this one step further. Our troops,
in New Zealand, are also required to prevent violations,
and where they do occur, to report them.

Resolution 2286 (2016) established a reporting
architecture which will ensure that the question of
attacks on the medical mission will continue to receive
regular attention by the Council. The Council should
continue to demand compliance with international law
and take decisions to do everything possible to protect
civilians caught up in armed conflict.

Together with the Secretary-General's path to
protection and action on this issue by all Member
States, we hope that some relief will be brought to
the millions of innocent civilians suffering in armed
conflicts around the world. New Zealand pays tribute
to the International Committee of the Red Cross,
Human Rights Watch, Me'decins Sans Frontieres and all
international humanitarian [NOTE: speaker did not say
"humanitarian"] organizations for the work they do in
supporting civilians and the medical community they
serve. We know it is an uphill battle to sustain active
engagement by Member States on this issue, including
by those sitting at this table, but it is ajob that they must
do and we will always support them.

