Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My delegation thanks Mr. Jenea, Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, and Mr. Grandi,
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
for their excellent briefings on the current situation
in Myanmar and for the work that they are doing in
managing the crisis in that country.

cote d'Ivoire welcomes the holding of this meeting
dedicated to the crisis in Myanmar, a country in which
one of the most serious humanitarian crises of our time
is taking place. Today it is estimated that almost 888,000
internally displaced and refugees, most of whom are
women and children, are facing a major humanitarian
crisis. That situation calls for special attention from
the international community, in particular the United
Nations, which must take appropriate measures aimed
at finding a lasting and sustainable solution to the daily
tragedy that those segments ofthe population are living.

I would like to structure my statement on three
main points, namely, the return of Rohingya refugees to
their country, the question of the fight against impunity
with regard to serious human rights violations and the
need to maintain peace and security in the region.
With regard to the first point, my delegation believes
that the return of the Rohingya people to their homes
of origin is a moral obligation for the international
community. Accordingly, Cote d'Ivoire is concerned
about recent developments concerning the reportedly
constant flow of people from Myanmar to neighbouring
Bangladesh. My delegation therefore calls on the
international community, as well as all other actors,
to act so as to find concrete solutions to the crisis, in
particular by providing needed humanitarian assistance
and facilitating the voluntary return of all those displaced
back to their land in a dignified and safe manner
pursuant to presidential statement S/PRST/2017/22,
issued on 6 November 2017. In that regard, Cote
d'Ivoire welcomes the agreement of 23 November 2017
between the Governments of Myanmar and Bangladesh
on the repatriation of displaced persons in Rakhine
state. Accordingly, my country now calls on the two
States to take all appropriate measures for the effective
and successful implementation of that agreement for
the well-being of the Rohingya people, and on all other
actors, in particular the international community, to
support those countries in their efforts.

My country is concerned about limitations that
have been placed upon humanitarian access, the
freedom of expression of the media and the freedom of
movement of independent observers. Needless to say,
such obstacles cast doubt on the possibility of a safe
return of refugees. Moreover, Cote d'Ivoire commends
the Government and the people of Bangladesh for
the humanitarian commitment that they are showing
towards those who have been affected by the crisis.
My country encourages the Government of Myanmar
to make greater efforts to ensure peace and security
in the country and improve the living conditions of all
segments ofits population. Cote d'Ivoire also welcomes
the commitment of the Government of Myanmar to
implement the recommendations of the Advisory
Commission on Rakhine State, led by former Secretary-
General Kofi Annan. Concrete solutions that ensure a
decent and sustainable future for returnees are needed
as part of an approach based on the inclusive economic
and social development of Rakhine state.

With regard to the fight against impunity, my
delegation condemns the serious human rights violations,
the incitement leading to religious and ethnic hatred and
the violence directed against Rohingya people. C6te
d'Ivoire is particularly concerned about recent reports
concerning the summary and extrajudicial executions
of Rohingya individuals by the Government armed
forces, militias and self-defence groups. My country
urges the Myanmar authorities to halt such acts and
bring their perpetrators to justice.

With regard to the third point - the need to
maintain peace and security in the region - my
delegation condemns the attacks perpetrated by the
Arakan Rohingya Salvation Army against the Myanmar
security forces. Cote d'Ivoire is concerned about how
terrorist groups such as Al-Qaida and the Islamic
State might exploit the situation under the pretext of
solidarity with Muslim communities, thereby leading
to destabilizing terrorist activities.

Before concluding, my delegation encourages a
regional approach to resolving the crisis. In that regard,
it welcomes the actions taken by the States of the region,
in particular the mission by the Parliamentarians for
Human Rights of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations, which visited refugees on the ground. Similarly,
cote d'Ivoire calls on the international community
to play a decisive role in supporting Myanmar in its
search for peace and stability, as well as in its national
reconstruction efforts.

