Mr. Danforth (United States of America): For
years, a number of nations in Africa, Europe and North
America have worked hard to encourage a peace
process in Sudan. We hoped for a country that would
be a model of ethnic reconciliation. We anticipated
helping Sudan build its infrastructure, allowing it to
develop its resources and agricultural potential. The
last thing we wanted to do was lay the groundwork for
sanctions.

But the Government of Sudan has left us no
choice. It has done the unthinkable. It has fostered an
armed attack on its own civilian population. It has
created a humanitarian disaster. So, the resolution just
adopted is our necessary response if we are to help
save the people of Darfur.

Actions of the Government of Sudan and its
Janjaweed proxies have led to 30,000 deaths in Darfur
since February 2003. They have caused more than 1
million people to flee their homes, some 200,000
having crossed the border into Chad. Perhaps 300,000
more people face death by hunger and disease in the
next six months. Even if the violence stopped today, it
would take 15 months before new crops could be raised
and harvested.

The responsibility for this disaster lies squarely
with the Government of Sudan. To suppress a rebel
uprising begun in early 2003, the Government
commenced a campaign of terror against innocent
civilians. Government aircraft bombed villages.
Exploiting an ancient rivalry between Arab African
herdsmen and groups of largely black Africans who are
farmers, the Government armed the Janjaweed militias
and unleashed them against black civilians.

The Janjaweed followed the Government aircraft,
burning villages, destroying crops, murdering men and
raping women. Rape has been a principal tactic of the
Janjaweed. Congressman Frank Wolf of Virginia
showed me the statement of 44 women of the Tinah
region who had been raped just days before his visit to
Darfur.

Darfur is not an isolated example of the
Government of Sudan's practice of arming militias and
encouraging them to attack civilians. In the late 1990s
and early in this century, it used the same tactic in an
effort to depopulate the oil-producing part of the
country, arming militia which then attacked civilians
and plundered and burned villages.

Some said that the Council should give the
Government of Sudan more time before adopting this
resolution. The United States did not agree. On 3 July,
the Government issued a joint communique with the
Secretary-General. That was nearly four weeks ago.

In the joint communique, the Government of
Sudan committed itself to numerous specific actions
focused on humanitarian assistance, human rights,
security and political settlement of the conflict in
Darfur. The Government promised to deploy a strong,
credible and respected police force in all areas of
internally displaced persons (IDPs). It has not kept that
promise. The Government promised to ensure that no
militias are present in all areas surrounding IDP camps.
It has not kept that promise. The Government promised
that it would immediately start to disarm the
Janjaweed. It has not kept that promise. The
Government promised to ensure that immediate action
would be taken to rebuild the confidence of the people
of Darfur. It has not kept that promise.

Twenty-seven days have passed since the
Government of Sudan made its solemn commitments to
the Secretary-General. While precise numbers are
difficult to ascertain, the latest World Health
Organization estimates suggest that between 240 and
440 people die every day as a result of this conflict.
That means that up to 11,000 people have died since
the 3 July communique, and more people die every day
that the Government stonewalls the international
community. It is time to start the clock ticking on the
Government of Sudan.

The resolution just adopted calls on the
Government of Sudan to do all in its power to facilitate
humanitarian relief. It endorses the deployment of
international monitors and a protection force. It
imposes an arms embargo specifically focused on
Darfur and it provides a monthly progress-monitoring
mechanism, with the prospect of sanctions if the
Government of Sudan fails to fulfil its commitments. It
calls for the Government of Sudan to work with the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr.
Jan Pronk, to investigate human rights abuses and
violations of international humanitarian law. The
resolution, in stern and unambiguous terms, puts the
Government of Sudan on notice that it must fulfil the
commitments it made on 3 July. Sudan must know that
serious measures - international sanctions - are
looming if the Government refuses to do so.

Mr. Jan Egeland, Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, has said that without
international pressure, the Government of Sudan would
not have allowed increased humanitarian access to
Darfur. The Government of Sudan has not provided
security, without which people seeking and providing
aid would only be targets for the Janjaweed. Without
pressure, it will not do so. This resolution applies that
pressure.

Many people who are concerned about Darfur
would say that this resolution does not go far enough.
Last week, the Congress of the United States passed
resolutions referring to the atrocities in Darfur as
genocide. Many people would want the Security
Council to do the same. Perhaps they are right. But it is
important that we not become bogged down over
words. It is essential that the Security Council act
quickly, decisively and with unity. We need to fix this
humanitarian problem now.

The current resolution, while not labelling the
present situation in Darfur as genocide, does explicitly
condemn "acts of violence with an ethnic
dimension". The resolution anticipates sanctions
against the Government of Sudan if the regular
monthly reporting cycle reveals a lack of compliance.
The resolution gives the Government of Sudan one
small window of opportunity to improve the situation
dramatically in days and weeks, not months or years.

The purpose of this resolution is to relieve the
suffering of Darfur, not to punish Sudan. Indeed, the
hope of my Government - and I am sure of every
member of the Council - is that Sudan fulfils its
potential as a peaceful and stable nation, with diverse
people living together in peace. The choice is up to the
Government of Sudan.

It may be the case that the Government of Sudan
thinks that time is on its side, that with the passage of
time, other crises will supplant Darfur on the world
stage. It may be that the Government of Sudan thinks
that our attention will be fleeting and that it can soon
continue with its business in Darfur free from action by
the community of nations.

This resolution guarantees that Darfur will be
before the Security Council and before the world next
month and the month after that - and for as long as it
takes to ensure that the people of Darfur can live in
peace.

