Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes the Security Council's unanimous adoption
of resolution 2379 (2017).

The Iraqi Government, under the leadership
of Prime Minister Al Abadi, has made substantial
progress in advancing institutional reform of the
Government, promoting national reconciliation, easing
the humanitarian situation and fostering economic
development. China commends those efforts. We hope
that Iraq will achieve national security and stability at
an early date and that the Iraqi people will soon lead a
peaceful and stable life.

The terrorist acts in Iraq committed by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) seriously threaten the
peace and security ofIraq, as well as those ofthe region
and the world. China commends the Iraqi Government
for its unrelenting efforts in combatting ISIL and the
progress it has achieved in combatting terrorism. China
supports Iraq in its efforts to bring ISIL members to
justice, in accordance with its domestic laws, and
supports the international community in providing
assistance to the Iraqi Government at its request.

Resolution 2379 (2017) specifies the principle
of respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity,
independence and unity of Iraq, in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations; establishes an investigative team to assist
the Iraqi Government in collecting evidence of ISIL's
crimes committed in Iraq; and emphasizes that the
investigative team shall respect the sovereignty and
jurisprudence of Iraq and carry out its responsibilities
strictly in accordance with the mandate requested by
Iraq, and that the Iraqi Government must agree to the
use of evidence.

The Iraqi Government recognizes the content of
the resolution and China supports this. We hope that the
resolution will be implemented effectively and play a
constructive role in strengthening the capacity-building
of the Iraqi Government in seeking accountability for
terrorist organizations in Iraq.

The international counter-terrorism situation
remains serious. Terrorist organizations, such as
ISIL and Al-Qaida, are conducting terrorist activities
and spreading extremist ideologies in many different
ways. The international community should strengthen
cooperation, support all counter-terrorism efforts,
including those of Iraq, unify standards, adopt effective
measures, and resolutely combat terrorist organizations
listed by the Security Council.

China shall continue to work with Iraq and all
other countries in ajoint effort to make new progress in
international counter-terrorism cooperation.

