Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): I would like to first
congratulate you, Mr. President, for assuming the
presidency of the Council for the month of January and
thank you for convening this first debate of the new
year

As we are beginning a new year, I would also like
to welcome the new members of the Council. Let me
take a moment to thank Japan for its work in 2009 as a
lead country for the issue of Afghanistan in the
Security Council and to welcome Turkey to that role in
2010. I look forward to working closely with them this
yean

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his presence in the Council and his remarks today
and for his most recent report on Afghanistan
(8/2009/674), and in particular for making Afghanistan
one of his priorities and for the personal attention he
has dedicated to Afghanistan in past months. Further,
especially in the face of the tragedy of 28 October
2009, I would like to thank the United Nations and all
of its entities, including this body, for the substantial
and invaluable aid that has been extended to the
Afghan people in past decades.

In addition, as this is the last appearance of
Mr. Eide in this Council in his capacity as Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, let me offer
him my own heartfelt thanks and the sincere gratitude
of the people and Government of Afghanistan. He has
shown tremendous dedication to the cause of peace and
stability in Afghanistan and has displayed ingenuity
and persistence under extremely challenging
circumstances. He has pushed for a stronger United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
and for practical steps towards real progress in
Afghanistan. Perhaps most importantly, he has
consistently worked - most recently during the
elections - for closer cooperation and better
understanding between all parties in and outside of
Afghanistan. We thank him.

With the conclusion of the presidential
elections - an important but difficult milestone -
Afghanistan has reached a new beginning, defined by a
five-year mandate to bring Afghans closer to taking
control of their own future. In his inaugural address,
President Karzai outlined his plan to fulfil that
mandate. He committed himself and his Administration
to peace, to the physical and economic security of the
Afghan people, to national participation and
reconciliation, to good governance and to the fight
against corruption.

Most importantly, we all share the same ultimate
goal: to prepare and empower Afghans to take charge
of their own destinies. In the next five years, the
central goal of the Afghan Government will be
preparing for the transition to full Afghan rule by
strengthening Afghanistan's sovereignty and national
ownership. We aim to consolidate national authority
and improve the Government's capacity and
institutions. We call upon the international community
to ensure that every action taken in Afghanistan is in
support of those efforts.

The formation of a new Afghan Government is an
important first step in this new beginning. After the
parliament's rejection of some of the ministerial
nominees, the President is preparing to introduce new
candidates and has instructed parliament to finalize
their votes of confidence before they recess for the
winter. We are eager to avoid any delay in the
formation of the Government and any vacuum in
management that could be counterproductive for
Afghanistan at such a delicate time.

Next, the Afghan Government and the
international community must look together at the
challenges facing us and forge a compact that clearly
identifies our strategies and responsibilities. On
28 January, a conference will be held in London,
chaired jointly by President Karzai, Prime Minister
Brown and the Secretary-General. That conference will

be followed closely by a second in Kabul. The London
Conference will prepare a road map - as Mr. Eide just
put it - for future efforts, which will be transformed
into a detailed action plan in Kabul, possibly in March.
In London, focus will be directed towards security and
the Afghanization of security and defence, social and
economic development, good governance and
international and regional cooperation. For each of
those areas, we will need to clearly define the
respective roles of the Afghan Government and the
international community.

Afghans are ready to take responsibility for
securing our people and defending ourselves against
our enemies. In three years' time, the Afghan National
Security Forces will assume responsibility for security
and defence in conflict areas in the south and east of
Afghanistan. In five years, with the necessary training,
equipment and long-term resources from the
international community, we will assume full
responsibility for security and defence across the entire
country. The international forces will be able to
transition simultaneously to a role focused on training
and enabling local forces.

However, there is a general consensus that peace
and stability in Afghanistan cannot be reached through
purely military means. As a result, the Government of
Afghanistan has always been, and remains, committed
to reconciliation and the integration of former
combatants into all levels of Afghanistan's civilian and
security structures. Afghanistan's Government has
opened its door to all Afghans willing to participate in
the stabilization and reconstruction of their country, in
line with the Afghan Constitution and with respect for
human rights.

But while reconciliation is an Afghan-led effort,
it cannot be achieved by the Afghan Government alone.
We ask this Council to conduct a review of the
consolidated list established under resolution 1267
(1999) with a view to possibly removing from the
sanctions list, upon request by the Afghan Government,
elements of the Taliban willing to renounce violence
and join the peace process.

Afghans continue to face crippling poverty and
widespread unemployment, and their trust is wearing
thin. Social and economic development and good
governance remain important priorities for
Afghanistan. However, it cannot sustain those efforts
without the continued assistance of its international

partners. The London Conference will be an
opportunity for the Government of Afghanistan and
international friends to coordinate their development
and capacity-building efforts so that Afghanistan may
eventually mobilize its resources, generate income and
jobs for its people and begin to support its institutions.

As the Secretary-General concluded in his report,
reinforced efforts towards coordination of donor aid
and civilian and military strategies are vital for our
efforts in Afghanistan. Afghanistan supports the central
coordinating role of UNAMA, as mandated by this
Council. We should discuss further what shape any
additional mechanisms might take and how they would
relate to the relevant actors. Crucially, any focus on
coordination must strengthen Afghan institutions and
encourage Afghan national ownership, rather than
promoting parallel governance structures.

Afghanistan is fast approaching its parliamentary
elections, which will occur at the end of May, as
required by the Constitution. We must ensure a credible
process. In that regard, the lessons learned from last
year's elections will be important. We feel that any
suggestion that the elections be postponed ignores
constitutional requirements and will damage the
integrity of the process. The rule of law must be
maintained, even as that law evolves to reflect lessons
learned.

In conclusion, a true partnership between
Afghanistan and the international community is
important for success in Afghanistan. That partnership
will require realism - about timing, about resources
and about abilities - and a clear understanding of our
roles and responsibilities. Most important, that
partnership should be based on supporting and
encouraging strong Afghan national ownership, in
particular as we seek to transfer security and defence
responsibilities. Afghanization and the promotion of
Afghan capacity and leadership must be the ultimate
aim of all of our activities and the central consideration
during discussions going forward.

