Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would first like to thank Germany for convening today's
meeting. I would also like to thank Mrs. Nakamitsu,
High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, and
Mr. Amaro, Director General of the International
Atomic Energy Agency, for their briefings.

The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT) is the cornerstone of the international
nuclear disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation
regime. Since its adoption 50 years ago, the Treaty
has provided an important institutional guarantee for
avoiding nuclear war, preventing nuclear proliferation
and promoting nuclear energy for the benefit of
humankind. It has played an important role in
maintaining international peace and security.

The tenth Review Conference of the Parties to
the NPT will be held in 2020 on the occasion of the
fiftieth anniversary of the Treaty's entry into force and
the twenty-fifth anniversary of its indefinite extension.
Security Council members recall the achievements of
the Treaty and reaffirm their strong support for it at
this historic moment of great importance in terms of
safeguarding the NPT regime and promoting global
security governance.

The tenth round of the Treaty review process has now
reached a critical stage. However, the overall situation
does not give reason for much optimism. Differences
in the area of nuclear disarmament are heightened.
Unilateralism and double standards with regard to
non-proliferation are prevalent. The multilateral arms
control regime and order are being undermined. Under
those new circumstances the international community
should uphold the concept of a community of shared
future for humankind, be mindful of the bigger picture
of maintaining international peace and security, show
political wisdom, strengthen unity and cooperation and
jointly steer the 2020 Review Conference towards a
pragmatic outcome.

First, States should shoulder their responsibility
effectively and maintain global strategic stability.
Nuclear-weapon States should abandon the Cold War
mentality and zero-sum concept, discard the nuclear
deterrence policy based on the pre-emptive use of
nuclear weapons and diminish the role played by
nuclear weapons in their national security policies so
as to effectively reduce the risk of nuclear war.

China calls on Russia and the United States
to continue to resolve their differences through
negotiations and consultations, return to compliance
with the obligations under the Intermediate-Range
Nuclear Forces Treaty as soon as possible and explore
extending the existing treaty between the United States
of America and the Russian Federation on nuclear
disarmament.

Secondly, States must adhere to international
rules and uphold the multilateral arms control regime.
The international community should firmly support
multilateralism and the internationally recognized
principle of promoting the three pillars of the NPT in
a balanced manner and work together to preserve the
authority of the United Nations and the Conference
on Disarmament in Geneva in the area of multilateral
arms control.

Thirdly, States should strengthen dialogue and
consultation and safeguard the Treaty regime. The
authority, effectiveness and universality of the Treaty
must be strengthened and not undermined. In nuclear
disarmament principles such as maintaining global
strategic stability, undiminished security for all and
a step-by-step process must be followed. The regional
hotspot nuclear issues should be resolved peacefully
and by political and diplomatic means on the basis of
respect for international law. All parties should actively
encourage and promote cooperation on the peaceful use
of nuclear energy and make it a hallmark of the current
round of the Treaty review process.

On the issue of a Middle East zone free of nuclear
weapons and other weapons of mass destruction, the
United Nations will hold a meeting later this year to
discuss relevant issues. All parties should actively
cooperate to facilitate the smooth conduct of the
meeting, thereby creating conditions for the successful
holding of the 2020 Review Conference.

As the coordinator of the cooperation process
among the Permanent Five, China hosted a formal
conference among the five nuclear-weapon States
in Beijing in January. The Beijing conference sent a
clear political message on the importance of upholding
the NPT regime. The five nuclear-weapon States
committed to jointly safeguarding the NPT regime,
comprehensively and fully implementing the Treaty,
promoting its universality and working to make the
2020 Review Conference a success. They reiterated
their readiness to respect the principle of undiminished
security for all and to work to achieve greater progress
on nuclear disarmament. They affirmed that they would
do their utmost to resolve nuclear non-proliferation
issues by political and diplomatic means. They remain
committed to promoting international cooperation on
the peaceful use of nuclear weapons and to supporting
the efforts to establish nuclear-weapon-free zones in
South-East Asia and the Middle East.

Since it is committed to the path of peaceful
development, China poses no threat to any country
and will never pursue its own absolute security to the
detriment of the interests of other countries. China will
continue to implement the new concept of a common
comprehensive, cooperative and sustainable security
through its concrete actions, steadfastly uphold the
authority, universality and effectiveness of the Treaty
and make its own contribution to the maintenance of
international peace and security.

