Ms. King (Australia): I would like to thank Special
Representative Moussa for his briefing today. This is an
important opportunity for the Council to discuss all the
critical challenges facing the Central African Region
and the important role of the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) in addressing
them. I would like to focus my remarks on three
interrelated issues: addressing the crisis in the Central
African Republic, maintaining momentum on efforts to
permanently eradicate the threat posed by the Lord's
Resistance Army (LRA), and supporting UNOCA and
regionally led efforts to address other challenges to
Central Africa's peace and security.

First and foremost, we must address the
deteriorating security situation and grave human
rights and humanitarian crisis in the Central African
Republic. We have heard stark warnings of increasing
interreligious violence in the Central African Republic
and the risk of the situation spiralling further out of
control, with devastating consequences for the country
itself and, as Mr. Moussa has said, potentially the
wider region as well. The crisis demands an urgent and
comprehensive response, and the Council must fulfil
its commitment to considering all potential options to
stabilize the situation.

Australia strongly supports the implementation
of resolution 2121 (2013), which strengthened the
mandate of the United Nations Peacebuilding Office
in the Central African Republic (BINUCA). We must
now consider the options put forward by the Secretary-
General on international support for the African-led
International Support Mission in the Central African
Republic (MISCA) and the potential transition to a
United Nations peacekeeping operation. In our View,
form should follow function; we should take forward
the option or options that will best address the situation
in the Central African Republic now and in the longer
term. We should maintain momentum in the coming
weeks in order to respond swiftly. We know that the
cost of inaction will be unacceptable.
Secondly, we must maintain momentum to
permanently eliminate the threat posed by the Lord's
Resistance Army. We know all too well that the LRA
thrives in security vacuums and in environments of
weak or absent State authority. The total breakdown
in security and law and order in the Central African
Republic has given the LRA room to operate.

We welcome the resumption of the activities
of the Ugandan contingent of the African Union
(AU) Regional Task Force. Yet the LRA has had an
opportunity to regroup by retreating into rural areas
beyond the Regional Task Force's area of operations.
This only underscores the importance of increasing
coordination between the Regional Task Force, MISCA
and BINUCA.

The threat posed by the LRA is diminished but not
extinguished. Earlier this week, we heard concerning
reports from the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) of suspected LRA attacks and abductions in
Western Equatoria - the first in South Sudan in over
two years. A resumption of LRA activity was observed
in north-east DRC earlier in November, breaking two
months of relative calm. Arrest warrants issued in
July 2005 by the International Criminal Court against
Joseph Kony and other senior LRA remain unexecuted
eight years on.

Enhanced regional and international efforts to
combat the LRA have yielded positive results. We
commend the African Union Regional Cooperation
Initiative against the Lord's Resistance Army and the
significant progress made in operationalizing the AU
Regional Task Force. As the Secretary-General's report
notes, military operations have degraded the LRA and
its ability to establish bases, reduced the number of
attacks, and increased pressure on LRA combatants to
defect. We need to seize the current opportunity to put
an end once and for all to this abhorrent group and to
the atrocities it has committed against civilians.

Additional efforts are clearly needed to enhance the
implementation of the United Nations regional strategy.
UNOCA has an importance coordinating role to play
in helping to translate the strategy into tangible results
on the ground. This requires the full commitment of
all stakeholders, the LRA-affected countries - which
have primary responsibility - regional organizations,
the entire United Nations system and international
partners. As the LRA's tactics continue to evolve, cross-
border coordination and information-sharing are all the
more important to enhance the protection of civilians,
in particular women and children, who have suffered
greatly at the hands of the LRA. The United Nations
peacekeeping and political missions in the region - the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, UNMISS and
BINUCA - have a vital role to play in this regard,
and should further enhance their cooperation with the
AU Regional Task Force.

Finally, we must support UNOCA and regionally
led efforts to address other, often-related challenges to
Central Africa's peace and security. One such challenge
is the issue of poaching and trafficking of wildlife in
the Central Africa region, which has reached alarming
levels, as noted in the Secretary-General's report. Aside
for the ecological impact and cruelty of these practices,
such illicit activities are used to finance transnational
criminal networks and armed rebel groups, including
the LRA. It is increasingly viewed by countries of
the region as a threat to their security. We therefore
encourage further regional and international efforts
to address poaching. We welcome the assistance being
provided by UNOCA to regional efforts to address this
and other challenges facing Central Africa. I would like
to underscore Australia's belief in the important role
that UNOCA has to play in conflict prevention, early
warning and mediation.
Let me conclude by reaffirming Australia's full
support for Special Representative Moussa and UNOCA
in all their efforts.

