Mr. Ndiaye (Senegal) (spoke in French): Since I
am speaking in the Security Council for the first time
since the General Assembly entrusted Senegal with
non-permanent membership of the Council, I would
like to reiterate our sincere thanks to the Member States
of our Organization for this display of confidence in us,
which we greatly appreciate. This is the third time that
Senegal has held a seat in the Council. I would like to
take this opportunity to reaffirm the commitment of
Senegal and its President, Mr. Macky Sall, to the ideals
of global peace, security and justice.

I would like to begin by welcoming Uruguay's
laudable initiative in holding a ministerial-level open
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including
Palestine. Today's meeting is once again being held
amid escalating violence on the ground involving many
civilian casualties, children among them, in the region,
including in the occupied Palestinian territories. In
Palestine in particular, we are seeing increasing acts
of violence, intimidation and provocation, not the
least of which are confiscations of Palestinian land,
demolitions of their houses and creeping colonization.
Such actions are likely to stir up hatred and extremism
in both Palestine and Israel and thereby encourage an
escalation of violence and insecurity between their
peoples.

Moreover, in the face of international condemnation
and the relevant UnitedNations decisions, the Palestinian
people in Gaza continue to endure an unacceptable
blockade that is depriving children, women, the
disabled and the elderly of rights as fundamental as
education and health. The same is true of the arbitrary
detention, frequently through administrative means,
of many Palestinians, including minors, as well as the
strategies designed to alter Jerusalem demographically,
geographically and culturally, which have only
exacerbated this decades-long conflict.

The meeting on Jerusalem held in Jakarta,
Indonesia, on 14 and 15 December 2015, at the initiative
of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People, together with the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation and the Indonesian
Government, has focused attention on the danger of
the forced Judaization of Jerusalem, the city that is a
symbol of the three monotheistic religions. This policy
runs the risk of turning a political crisis into a religious
conflict, with incalculable consequences for the entire
region.

This tragic situation should oppress our collective
consciousness and for more than one reason compel the
Security Council to act to meet its obligations to the
Palestinian people according to a specific timetable and
with the support of the expanded Quartet. The time has
come for our Organization, 70 years after its founding
and particularly with regard to its essential mandate
to deal with issues of peace and security, to shoulder
its responsibility for ensuring that its resolutions are
effectively implemented in order to culminate, as was
the case with the State of Israel, in the establishment of
a Palestinian State, within secure and internationally
recognized borders, in accordance with the 1948 United
Nations partition plan. We must relaunch negotiations
between the Israelis and Palestinians, based on a
specific timetable, in order to arrive at a definitive
peace agreement. It would also be advisable for the
Israeli Government, which has affirmed its willingness
to work for a lasting two-State solution for Israel and
Palestine on numerous occasions, to take advantage of
the opportunities offered by the Arab Peace Initiative,
which is based on achieving a comprehensive peace,
beyond Palestine alone, with all Arab countries.

In the meantime, the Council should consider
taking precautionary measures to enforce the status
quo in Jerusalem's holy sites as well as ensuring
international protection for the Palestinian people. In
that regard, Senegal supports the proposal, made by
France, to deploy international observers to help reduce
tensions in the region. Senegal calls on the Palestinian
political actors - namely, Fatah and Hamas - to join
the momentum of the Cairo agreement to quell their
internal differences and work towards the formation
of a Government of national unity, with a view to
facilitating the relaunching of the political process with
the State of Israel.

I would like to take this opportunity to recall the
urgency involved in rebuilding Gaza. I therefore launch
an appeal that the pledges - totalling $4 billion - made
at the 2014 Cairo conference on Palestine be honoured.
The same urgency applies to the international
community in continuing its efforts to provide the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East with the effective means
to allow it to pursue its critical work on behalf of the
millions of Palestinian refugees in the Middle East,
particularly in the areas of health and education.

Senegal encourages and supports the Palestinian
Government in its strategy aimed at joining international
organizations and conventions in order to achieve
lasting peace with Israel, based on international law
and according to a peaceful approach. The progress
made by the State of Palestine on the international
level, such as its recognition by 136 countries, the
presence of its flag at Headquarters since 30 September
and its accession, in 2015, to the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court are to be welcomed. Our
beliefis that a solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
based on two States - Palestine with East Jerusalem as
its capital, existing alongside Israel - would promote
better management of the security and socioeconomic
challenges that are facing the Middle East, where
terrorism and violent extremism are on the verge of
becoming a global threat.

Before concluding, I would like mention the
observation made by the President of Senegal, Macky
Sall, in his speech of 29 November 2015 on the occasion
of the celebration of the International Day of Solidarity
with the Palestinian People:

"Violence, in all its forms, is neither acceptable
nor tolerable, and a state of war is certainly not the
normal human condition. A peaceful solution is the
only destiny that the Palestinian and Israeli peoples
deserve, in the same manner as other peoples who
have been able to end their differences through
dialogue."

Based on that, Senegal, faithful to its principles and
policies, will continue to work so that dialogue and
consultation are favoured as a means to achieving the
two-State solution, particularly in the context of the
aforementioned Committee, which our country has had
the honour of chairing since its founding, 40 years ago.

