Mr. Cooney (Ireland): I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Guehenno for introducing the
Secretary-General's latest report, which outlines
proposals for the transition to phase III of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC). I would also like to
thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict, Mr. Otunnu,
who is of course no stranger to this table, for his report.
Ireland shares his many concerns and welcomes
reported progress on the demobilization of child
soldiers - although, of course, much, more needs to be
done. I would also like to recognize the constructive
and forward-looking intervention of Foreign Minister
She Okitundu, and to thank him for the warm welcome
that was extended to the Security Council delegation
during our recent visit to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. Of course, like others, I would also like to
pay tribute to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kamel Morjane, and to the men
and women of MONUC for their untiring work on
behalf of the international community.
Sweden will later speak on behalf of the
European Union. Ireland fully associates itself with
that intervention.

The Security Council mission returned from the
Great Lakes region reasonably optimistic about the
prospects for a resolution of the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Since then there
have been some positive developments, but there have
also been disappointments. The onus is now on the
signatories to the Lusaka Agreement to honour their
commitments under the Agreement and to resist the
temptation to use the ceasefire and the redeployment of
forces to seek advantage over their fellow signatories.
All sides must accept that the conflict is over and that
the future lies in cooperation and the mutual and
progressive implementation of the Lusaka accord.

In its various resolutions and statements, and in
its various meetings with the parties, the Security
Council has always striven to demonstrate a sense of
balance and proportion in its demands. Ireland believes
that this has been acknowledged and welcomed by the
parties and that it has allowed the Council to make a
real contribution to the modest progress that has been
achieved to date.

It is in that spirit that we express our concern at
the reported incidents of non-cooperation by the
Mouvement pour la liberation du congo (MLC) and the
Rassemblement congolais pour la democratie (RCD).
We call on the MLC to complete the programme of
redeployment of its forces in sector one, and on the
RCD-Goma to comply with the Council's demand that
it withdraw its troops from Kisangani. We urge all
foreign Governments to implement their commitments
under the Lusaka Agreement to withdraw their forces
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. And we
call for all parties, in particular the Governments of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Zimbabwe, to
refuse all support to the so-called negative forces, as
well as to Mayi-Mayi groups violating the ceasefire.

The exploitation of the resources of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo by foreign
Governments, which is a result of the conflict, must
end with immediate effect.

Turning to the proposal of the Secretary-General,
we regret that only Angola and Uganda have so far
provided MONUC with information on the numbers,
dispositions and armaments of forces in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in respect to the withdrawal of
foreign forces and disarmament, demobilization,
repatriation, reintegration and resettlement. We
reluctantly concur with the Secretary-General that as a
result there is not presently sufficient basis for further
action by the United Nations in sustaining and
supporting the initiatives taken by the parties in these
areas.

However, we also agree with the Secretary-
General that preparations for phase III of MONUC'S
operations, as envisaged in the Secretary-General's
seventh report, should proceed. We feel that particular
effort should be made to address the situation in the
Kivus, as resolution of the conflict or conflicts there is
central to ending violence in the wider region. We
particularly welcome the proposal to deploy a civilian
component to advise and assist the local authorities in
discharging their duty to ensure the security of the
population. We welcome too the intention to attach to
MONUC specialists in human rights, humanitarian
assistance, child protection and gender-awareness, and
we hope that they will be able to provide support to the
local authorities in developing their own capacity.

We support, too, the emphasis placed on the
gender perspective and stress that the particular impact
of the conflict on women and girls should be factored
into all aspects of MONUC's work. We particularly
support the appointment of a Deputy Special
Representative of the Secretary-General who is to be
charged with coordination within MONUC and
between MONUC and other United Nations agencies
and donors.

As regards the dire humanitarian situation of the
Congolese people, which is highlighted by the
Secretary-General, we support the call for the
establishment of humanitarian corridors to allow
resumption of trade in food and other goods between
Kinshasa and eastern and northern provinces. We call
on the Government and the rebel groups to work
together to this end.

We note that it is envisaged that the role of
MONUC in the transitional phase will be limited to
monitoring developments and reporting on them to the
Council. We fully agree that the parties to the conflict
bear the primary responsibility for the safety of the
civilian population. We also recognize the practical
limitations placed on the United Nations, not least
because of the geographical and logistical difficulties
of the operation. Nevertheless, like my Singaporean
colleague, I would point out that the mere presence of
the United Nations on the ground will create a sense of
expectation to which we must be ready to respond as
developments unfold.

I would like to conclude on a positive note by
urging that all Congolese parties work closely with the
facilitator of the inter-Congolese dialogue, Sir
Ketumile Masire, and his team to bring about early
progress in the establishment of viable democratic
government in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The success of the inter-Congolese dialogue is
essential to the long-term peace and stability of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the wider
region.

During the Council's visit to Kinshasa, a friend of
the Congo described the country - blessed as it is by
its great natural and human resources - as a safe to
which the key had been lost. The inter-Congolese
dialogue gives the Congolese people the opportunity to
refashion that key and thereby unblock their enormous
potential and put it to use to the benefit of the entire
Congolese people.

