Mr. Argiiello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to start by expressing my delegation's great
appreciation for this opportunity to participate in the
work of the Council in these open debates, which allow
us to express our positions and, above all, allow
countries not Council members to interact with the
Council. For reasons of time, I have decided to shorten
my statement, but copies of the original will be
distributed.
Allow me, Mr. President, to thank you for this
opportunity to comment on the latest developments in
the legal and political activities of the Security Council
with regard to the issue of threats to international
security caused by terrorist acts.

Argentina has been victim of bloody attacks in its
own territory. This week is another sad anniversary of
the attack on the Embassy of Israel. We remain
committed to bringing to justice the perpetrators of
these tragic acts.

My country regrets that no progress has been
made in the work of the Sixth Committee's working
group charged with finalizing the negotiation of the
comprehensive convention on the fight against
terrorism. We believe that if we had had that legal
instrument during the past months it would have
allowed us to better frame and identify the barbaric
terrorist acts that we referred to and to prosecute those
responsible and condemn them legally and politically.
The convention must be finalized, even more so now,
after the adoption of the United Nations Counter-
Terrorism Strategy that was approved by the General
Assembly, which is to be revised this year.

We align ourselves with the statement made today
by the Ambassador Heller of Mexico on behalf of the
Rio Group. As he indicated, the mandate review in
accordance with the Security Council resolution will
allow us to take stock of the new institutional and
operational arrangements submitted for our
consideration, which should be accompanied by
in-depth political action to resolve the political
problems underlying terrorism, in particular the
conflict in the Middle East.

We should not neglect to point out that more
emphasis could be given to the work to ensure
compliance with human rights in the fight against
terrorism, especially with regard to the Counter-
Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED) and the
Special Rapporteur on this subject. This is an essential
aspect to which Argentina has always attached great
importance. We support the proposals regarding
personnel, especially the need to have experts of
diverse disciplines.

Perhaps further attention should be given to
strengthening relations with international organizations
of the United Nations system with specific
competencies in the mentioned areas, for example
maritime or aerial security. We also believe that the
work of CTED, the Counter-Terrorism Committee and
INTERPOL could be further enhanced in light of
resolution 1699 (2006), an aspect that perhaps could
have been considered in further detail in the document.

