I thank the German presidency for having organized this meeting. Almost 10 years have elapsed since Libyans expressed their desire for freedom and democracy. The quest of the Libyan people for democracy that started with the February revolution in 2011 continues unabated, and their aspirations are very much alive. Attempts at resurrecting a totalitarian regime will only cause further destabilization in Libya and the entire region. It has been more than a year now since General Haftar launched his aggression against the Government of National Accord (GNA), the legitimate Government of Libya that was endorsed by the Security Council. From the outset, Turkey has stated its position loud and clear: there can be no military solution to the ongoing conflict in Libya. We have consistently supported and contributed to international efforts - whether in Rome; Skhirat, Morocco; Paris; Moscow; or Berlin - in order to revitalize a Libyan-led, Libyan-owned political process under United Nations auspices. A viable and genuine political process can be advanced only once a sustainable ceasefire has been achieved in the country. Despite the explicit provisions of resolution 2259 (2015), many actors have engaged with the parallel entities in Libya. That attitude has served as a licence for Haftar to continue his aggression against the legitimate Government, denounce the Libyan Political Agreement and even declare his own military dictatorship. Placing the aggressor on an equal footing with the legitimate United Nations-recognized Government is wrong and counterproductive. That grave mistake must be corrected. Inthe case of supporters of Haftar, the provision of brazen political and military support to that warlord in pursuit of subversive objectives against the legitimate Government is incompatible with international law and the relevant United Nations resolutions, and harmful to peace and stability in Libya and beyond. Putting the blame on Turkey, as some countries have done during this meeting, all the while working at cross-purposes with the United Nations-led political process, amounts to hypocrisy and cannot be accepted. Any unilateral initiative put forward in the absence of the legitimate Government is ill-fated and cannot be conducive to a political process. The Berlin framework provides the necessary architecture for intra-Libyan talks under United Nations auspices. Another major shortcoming relates to the European Union Naval Force Mediterranean Operation IRINI, which was launched without due consultations with the GNA. In an environment in which Haftar acquires all the arms and support he needs by land and air, the operation in practice sanctions only the legitimate Government. That issue must be addressed. In that context, the French claims concerning the nature of the incident between our ships are simply unsubstantiated. Turkey regards it as an international obligation to support the GNA in its endeavours to safeguard legitimacy and civilian lives. With the technical and training assistance that we provided upon the Government's request, the GNA was able to sustain a balance on the ground, and a larger humanitarian crisis has been prevented. The continuing illegal oil blockade is another issue of critical importance to the Libyan people. Libya has lost more than $6 billion since last January owing to the seven-month-long oil blockade. That blockade should be lifted and control of oil facilities returned to the National Oil Corporation. The discovery of mass graves in the city of Tarhouna is a grim reminder of the scope of the atrocities and human suffering in Libya. This must be a wakeup call for all sides that have condoned or supported Haftar's aggression to varying degrees. The international community and the relevant organizations must take urgent steps to investigate this matter. As such, we welcome the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court's decision to deploy a mission to conduct investigations on the ground. The Human Rights Council's decision to set up a fact-finding mission to Libya is also expected to deliver results on this important matter. The mines and improvised explosive devices placed in neighbourhoods by Haftar's militias before they retreated is yet another brutal method aimed at terrorizing civilians. Those war crimes must be investigated and all perpetrators held accountable. Before concluding, I would like to reiterate Turkey's commitment to helping to achieve a sustainable political solution in Libya. For that purpose, we will continue our contributions in the Berlin follow-up mechanisms and the working groups.
