Mr. Lancry (Israel): I would like to congratulate
the President on his assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council. I would like also to take this
opportunity to congratulate his predecessor,
Ambassador van Walsum, for his most capable
leadership.

At the outset, I would like to express my
satisfaction at the recent renewal of official high-level
contacts between Israel and the Palestinians, in
particular the agreement of both parties to attend
meetings in Washington this week. It is my hope that
by turning to the framework of negotiations we can
peacefully find a way to resolve all outstanding issues,
including the question under deliberation today.

We do think that the core of the matter is clear.
Although many would have us believe otherwise, what
we are witnessing is the deliberate choice by the
Palestinian leadership to simultaneously pursue the
intifada, as well as the welcome resumption of
dialogue. The current confrontation, which was
deliberately initiated by the Palestinian leadership,
continues to be nurtured in various ways as a strategic
choice on their part.

If there is any lingering doubt that this is in fact
the case, I would invite the Council to ask itself who is
benefiting here. Whose interest does it serve to
perpetuate a variable-intensity conflict of the kind we
have been experiencing? Even a cursory consideration
of the facts suggests that this conflict clearly serves the
interests of the Palestinian leadership rather than the
interests of Israel. In the aftermath of the Camp David
Summit, Chairman Arafat found himself increasingly
isolated, even criticized in certain circles, for failing to
be forthcoming in reaching a final peace agreement
with Israel. Barely four months later, the Palestinian
cause is the beneficiary of front-page coverage from
the international media. While Israel has been unjustly
portrayed as the militaristic aggressor, the Palestinian
leadership has benefited tremendously by avoiding the
implementation of the necessary steps to which it
committed itself to bring about a final settlement.

S/PV.4248

 

It now seems as if the leading role that the
Palestinian leadership has played in the current spate of
violence is finally being admitted. The Palestinian
semi-official daily Al Ayyam reported on 6 December
that the Palestinian Minister of Telecommunications,
Imad Al Falouji, confirmed that the Palestinian
Authority had begun preparations for the outbreak of
the current intifada from the moment the Camp David
talks concluded, in accordance with instructions given
by Chairman Arafat himself. Mr. Falouji went on to
state that Arafat launched this intifada as the
culminating stage of "Palestinian steadfastness" in the
negotiations, and not merely as a protest against Israeli
opposition leader Ariel Sharon's visit to the Temple
Mount. Here is the original Arabic.

(spoke in Arabic)

"Imad Al Falouji, the Telecommunications
Minister, stressed that the Palestinian Authority
began preparations for the outbreak of the current
intifada after returning from the Camp David
negotiations, on the order of President Yasser
Arafat, who anticipated the outbreak of the
intifada as the culminating stage of Palestinian
steadfastness in the negotiations and not merely
as a protest against Sharon's visit to Haram al-
Sharif."

(spoke in English)

Despite this and other overwhelming evidence,
the Palestinian leadership has been remarkably
successful in obscuring this fact. They have incited
their street to violence and holy war, while at the same
time placing full blame for the crisis on Israel's
shoulders. This practice continued even as negotiations
took place in Paris, Sharm el-Sheikh and Gaza on ways
to end the confrontation and return to negotiations.
Officials of the Palestinian Authority were quoted as
calling for escalation at the same time as they accused
Israel of horrific acts of war. They ordered their
illegally armed militias to fire on Israeli soldiers and
civilians in the same breath as they demanded that
Israel renounce its right to self-defence. And now,
while illegal Palestinian paramilitary groups continue
their assaults on Israel, their leaders come to ask the
world for protection. This is a manipulation of reality
and a perversion of the truth.

It must be further noted that the current crisis is
also due to the failure of the Palestinian leadership to
cultivate mutual understanding and tolerance among

the Palestinian people. Rather than educate for peace,
they have consistently and systematically fostered a
culture of hatred and rejection, manifested in official
Palestinian textbooks which deny the legitimacy of
Israel. Such a failure cannot be rectified by a resolution
of the Security Council, nor by any action of the
international community. This state of affairs can be
changed only by the Palestinians themselves. The
peace process will succeed only if mutual recognition
and non-violence is enshrined, not only on paper, but
in the hearts and minds of peoples.

This is precisely what Chairman Arafat pledged
to accomplish in September 1993 when he committed,
in a watershed letter to the late Prime Minister Yitzhak
Rabin, to renouncing the use of violence and terrorism
and to settling all outstanding claims through
negotiations. This commitment was fundamental, and
for Israelis it represented much more than mere
verbiage. After years of PLO-sponsored terrorism,
Chairman Arafat's letter reflected the recognition that,
after decades of confrontation, the destiny of the region
would now be determined at the negotiating table and
not by violence and terrorism. Moreover, Chairman
Arafat spoke on behalf of all the Palestinian people and
was consequently recognized by Israel as their leader.
He cannot now go back on his word and continue to
receive international support as if he had not.

Today, however, both the Government and people
of Israel are obliged to confront a stark reality, one
which suggests that the Palestinian leadership remains
ambiguous in its fulfilment of the basic commitment
that formed the bedrock for seven years of
peacemaking. Evidence of this departure was apparent
weeks ago. The release of scores of Hamas and Islamic
Jihad terrorists from Palestinian jails, an act which has
now led to a number of terrorist bombings in Israeli
cities, offers compelling proof, as do the activities of
the Tanzim, the illegal paramilitary arm of Chairman
Arafat's Fatah faction who have repeatedly directed
live gunfire and roadside ambushes at Israeli soldiers
and citizens. Even as the Palestinians ask the Council
today for protection from the consequences of their
own actions, they are making clear that they feel no
obligation to fully relinquish the path of intifada,
which is not an unarmed popular uprising, but rather a
drawn-out expedition of guerrilla warfare.

And yet, with the exception of some rare - and
therefore remarkable - voices in the Security Council,
the United Nations has made no official mention of the

S/PVAZAS

 

incitement to violence in the official media, of the
green light given to terrorists by the Palestinian
Authority, of the desecration of Jewish holy sites and
of a host of other Palestinian violations. Instead, we are
sitting here today debating the merits of sending an
international force to protect the Palestinians from their
own choice to engage in violence.

Today's draft resolution represents a blatant
attempt to abuse the goodwill of the international
community and to obscure the strategic choice made by
the Palestinians. The Security Council must not be a
party to it. The United Nations cannot be called upon
to put out fires on behalf of the same party that has
kindled them and fanned the flames. What kind of
precedent would this set? What kind of message will it
send to the Palestinians and others?

Our position on the question of an international
presence has been made clear. We are not opposed to
some form of international presence provided it is
established within the context of a comprehensive
bilateral agreement. This has always been the accepted
sequence. An international presence is not something
we intrinsically reject, but it must be used to cement an
agreement, not as an alternative to one.

The Council must be cognizant of the fact that
sending a United Nations force, as demanded, has the
potential to actually escalate the violence and further
destabilize the region, for it would send a message to
the Palestinians that there is no need to negotiate or
coordinate with Israel and no need to seek
compromise. Indeed, I can think of no greater incentive
than this to continue the caustic struggle. Thus, peace
and security would not be enhanced by an international
force; they would be undermined. If the international
community wishes to see a return to dialogue and
negotiation and the ultimate realization of the
legitimate aspirations and needs of both parties through
a peaceful process, it must insist that the Palestinian
leadership fulfil its obligations. This Council must not
take action that would be interpreted as endorsing
violence and unilateral imposition.

Furthermore, international intervention appears
wholly unnecessary. Chairman Arafat has the ability to
protect the lives of his people, and the steps necessary
to do so are clear. He must relinquish the path of
confrontation, disarm his illegal militias and control
Hamas and Islamic Jihad terrorists, all of which he has
already committed himself to do. Furthermore, he must

assume his responsibility as the leader of the
Palestinian people, committed by his own free choice
to seek an honourable peace, to uphold the foundation
of the peace process and to foster a culture of peace
between our two peoples. I assure the members of this
Council that were the Palestinian Authority to take
these steps, the violence, death and injuries would
cease and we could once again focus on negotiating a
lasting peace settlement.
Yet the Palestinian Authority prefers the safety of
ambiguity, a fact that has even been recognized in
some Arab circles. Egyptian commentator Mahmoud
Al-Manem Morad, writing in al-Akhbar on 1
December, was moved to ask,

"How is it that the Palestinians are seeking the
deployment of an observer force which will act as
a buffer between themselves and the Israelis, if,
in the same breath, they also seek to continue the
intifada, which will require close contact between
the Palestinians and Israelis?"

Let me repeat: the current intifada is not an
unarmed popular uprising, but a guerrilla campaign,
which the Palestinians have little interest in having
brought to a close. We maintain that just as the current
violence began with a calculated and deliberate order
from the highest echelons of the Palestinian leadership,
so must it end. The Palestinians are not in need of
protection from Israel, but rather from the misguided
policies of their own leaders.

What is needed from the Security Council is not
intervention, but support for the parties and the efforts
to achieve peace that will get under way this week in
Washington. Protection forces, United Nations
observers - all these only distract us from the real
issues at hand. The Palestinian Authority's perpetual
ambiguity with regard to ending the violence is
indicative of a lack of fortitude and political will on
their part to make the historic compromises that are
needed. An international force will not increase the
Palestinian determination to make peace; rather, it will
decrease their willingness to do so.

The Council's overriding objective must be to
encourage both sides to embrace the reasonable peace.
I would urge the Council to consider whether sending
an international force to the region will advance this
goal. The draft resolution before us today is a recipe
for long-term instability in the region, and I therefore

S/PV.4248

 

strongly urge the members of the Council not to
support it.

