I am delighted to address the Council today from Kabul. It is truly an honour to serve as the Special Representative for the Secretary-General for Afghanistan and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan. I assumed my duties at an important - some even say historic - moment in Afghanistan. During my first months on the job, I engaged with a range of interlocutors from across the political spectrum and from civil society. They all delivered one clear message: Afghanistan now has the unique opportunity to turn the corner to a brighter, more stable future after four decades of war. Many stand ready to support them. And yet, as we all know, this moment of emerging hope comes at a time of an unprecedented global pandemic that threatens to unravel many of the hard-won socioeconomic gains. Afghanistan has made immense progress in recent years. I am deeply impressed by the strength and courage of the country's youth. I met many inspiring young people during my three years as an ambassador for Canada, and I am delighted to reconnect with many of them in their new positions as Government and civil society leaders. We are privileged to be hearing from two of them today - Ambassador Raz, who has already made her mark in New York, and Ms. Akbar, Chairperson of the Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission, with whom I had the honour recently to lead a panel on women's involvement in the peace efforts. Both Ambassador Raz and Chairperson Akbar are part of this new generation committed to creating a peaceful and self-reliant country, respectful of human rights for all. Inspired by what I see, I am further committed to using my voice and platform to champion them, to promote human rights and women's rights and to put those rights at the core of our work in Afghanistan. Another important gain made in recent years that is particularly tangible is Afghanistan's free and vibrant media sector. Afghanistan is considered one of the most dangerous countries for journalists. Yet they persist in their essential work of holding those with authority accountable. They too are inspiring. Afghanistan has also made significant strides in improving the living conditions of many of its citizens over the past two decades. Maternal mortality was reduced by 66 per cent over a 15-year period, and child mortality decreased by half. The expansion in coverage of public-health facilities nearly doubled during that same period. There has been progress. These facts are incontrovertible. However, I am also fully cognizant that this progress was hard-won and remains fragile. Too many Afghans still face daily struggles for survival. And when it comes to civilian casualties, Afghanistan remains one of the deadliest conflicts in the world. The United States-Taliban agreement and subsequent reductions of violence have given only brief respites from the all-too-familiar carnage. Particularly egregious were the recent deliberate attacks against health-care facilities, at a time when all people and all resources need to be focused on combating the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. The recent 12 May attack against a maternity ward in western Kabul was particularly outrageous and established a new low. That was truly a moment when new life was taken from the womb. The perpetrators must be found and held accountable. I am also deeply concerned about the ongoing threat to civilians posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan Province. That was again demonstrated by the recent suicide attack in Nangarhar province at a funeral ceremony, which resulted in at least 29 civilians killed and many more injured. Afghanistan also remains the deadliest conflict in the world for children. Last year alone, 874 children lost their lives as a result of the conflict, and many more were injured. It grieves me to say that the number of children out of school has not dropped. Instead, it rose over the past eight years. If there ever was a call to prayer for peace, surely it would echo the voices of those children. Like so many countries, Afghanistan continues to be plagued by corruption, which corrodes the confidence of the population and the donor community and fuels the ongoing conflict. In spite of progress made in previous years in anti-corruption reforms, that progress slowed in the past year, with key institutional reforms being neglected, including the establishment of an all-too-important independent anti- corruption commission. The apparent impunity of well-connected political figures remains a major issue. Additional progress in the fight against corruption is therefore crucial as the 2020 pledging conference on Afghanistan approaches. More than ever, these compounding challenges facing the country, including the COVID-19 health and humanitarian crises, require determined and united leadership. In that context, I welcome the political agreement reached between President Ghani and Mr. Abdullah, which shows their determination and resolve to place the nation first. In that spirit of cooperation, I expect to hear in the next few days the announcement of a representative Cabinet and the formation of inclusive peace structures. Despite those manifold challenges, this is the time for continued and concerted support for Afghanistan. As we pass the midpoint of Afghanistan's transformation decade, we enter what could be the most transformative phase as the two parties to the peace talks move towards a new and lasting political settlement that must build on the gains of the past and set the foundation for a more prosperous future. I am cautiously optimistic that the talks between the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan and the Taliban negotiation teams will indeed start in the next few weeks in Doha, during the month of July. As the two sides embark on what will likely be a long and complex series of talks, I have encouraged them to show the necessary flexibility and foresight, the commitment to peace and, most important, enough compassion for their people to bring those negotiations to a successful conclusion. The formal announcement of a three-day ceasefire for Eid Al-Fitr by the Taliban and the Government led to a welcome and much-needed reduction of violence, which, as the Council knows, is essential to ensuring an environment conducive to peace talks and to paving the way for an eventual permanent ceasefire. But the recent spiralling levels of violence threaten that process. So, at this point, it is incumbent on all countries that support peace to use their influence and call for a reduction in violence. On a more positive note, I want to highlight the commitment shown by both sides in the recent challenging issue of prisoner releases. This is an important confidence-building measure that has created momentum towards negotiations. As I speak, we are in the final stages, and it is noteworthy that both sides have agreed that talks could start within a week of the completion of the prisoner releases. However, that must go hand in hand with a reduction in violence. I would like to recognize the Governments of the United States, Qatar and a number of other regional partners for their efforts in bringing the parties to this point. We all look forward to the formal commencement of negotiations. The United Nations stands ready to support these direct talks, as necessary, and I have been in discussion with both sides to identify and address their needs going forward. We are now working very closely with a number of countries to build a support network for the talks and for the parties, as needed. As we know, the best chance for a durable settlement rests on broad consensus reflecting the aspirations and concerns of all citizens. We understand that both sides have now reached out to various constituencies to seek their views on peace. It is indeed crucial to develop inclusive structures for peace talks that allow the meaningful participation of women, youth, minorities and victims of war. It is important that the rights of victims be addressed during negotiations and that reconciliation strategies be considered. Allow me to highlight another encouraging indicator for peace. I am seeing and hearing strong resolve from countries of the region to support Afghanistan in its quest towards a peaceful settlement. The region's active engagement with, and support of, the peace process will be essential. Both the Afghan people and the region as a whole have much to gain from peace and stability. I have already held a series of engagements with partners from the region and beyond, and I am confident that together we will foster a constructive atmosphere for the advancement of the peace process. Support from the region is also available to advance strong economic and trade cooperation and connectivity as Afghanistan moves into a new period of stabilization and towards greater self-reliance. While peace materializes on the horizon, COVID-19 is casting a huge shadow over Afghan daily life. Under the leadership of the Afghan Government, the United Nations is supporting a coordinated response to fight this epidemic. That includes the establishment of a network of laboratories across the country and the provision of personal protective equipment to the Ministry of Public Health for health-care providers. Sadly, as in most crises, women and girls are disproportionately impacted. Lockdowns further limit their mobility and increase the risk of domestic violence. The United Nations and its partners continue to provide services to prevent sexual and gender-based violence and support reproductive health care. In the light of the scale of the crisis and the crippling economic consequences, the humanitarian response plan has been updated to incorporate the COVID-19 requirements for 2020, reflecting the increased number of people in need. In total, humanitarian partners require $1.1 billion to provide immediate humanitarian assistance. I appreciate the contributions already received and count on the continued generosity of the international community to enable us to pursue this essential response with the Afghan Government. The socioeconomic impact of weeks of lockdown, reduced economic activity and loss of remittances will be deep and long-lasting. Afghanistan faces the daunting challenge of seeking continued international financial support at a time of unprecedented financial uncertainty, including in many of the traditional donor capitals. Therefore, we are working in close partnership with the Governments of Afghanistan and Finland to prepare for the upcoming pledging conference and to build support for ensuring sustainable resources for Afghanistan's future. That conference and the peace talks should be mutually reinforcing. I call for the robust engagement of all stakeholders in preparing for the conference so that we can help Afghanistan bring the gains of the past into the future on this new peace landscape. However, the global pandemic also poses unique challenges for our own operational posture and has limited our ability to fully deliver on our mandate. We have therefore adopted a range of measures to safeguard the health and well- being of our staff while sustaining the delivery of critical programmes and activities throughout the country. That of course includes redoubling peace negotiations efforts, intensifying efforts to support the Afghan Government in its COVID-19 response and continuing our leading human rights activities. Nevertheless, national lockdowns and disruptions to international travel have affected many of our colleagues. I am very grateful to the Governments that facilitated the rotational movement of critical staff and recently supported us with medical evacuations. Put simply, they helped us save lives. In conclusion, I reiterate that COVID-19 is not just a health crisis, it is a multidimensional crisis impacting an already fragile country. By working together, we can overcome COVID-19 and support Afghanistan at the beginning of its nascent peace process so that its people can finally achieve the lasting peace they deserve. The United Nations will continue to stand in partnership with the Afghan people in this time of unprecedented challenge and fragile hope. I am honoured to be part of the ongoing support efforts in the crucial months ahead. The Afghan people will look to the Council for guidance, support and unity as they chart their way forward on their long road to peace.
