Mr. Aslov (Tajikistan) (spoke in Russian): I have
the great honour to make this statement on behalf of
the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC)

group.
11-21096

At the outset, I wish to thank you, Madame, for
having convened this meeting to consider the situation
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question. I
should also like to convey my gratitude to the Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, Mr. Lynn
Pascoe, for his very detailed briefing.

Israel, the occupying Power, has methodically
stepped up its violations in the occupied Palestinian
territories by confiscating lands, demolishing houses,
building illegal settlements, constructing the separation
wall, erecting numerous checkpoints, detaining
thousands of Palestinians and imposing an unjust
blockade on the Gaza. All those illegal acts are being
undertaken despite unprecedented international
unanimity in calling on Israel to stop such unlawful
and unilateral activities, which flagrantly violate The
Hague and Geneva Conventions, and the resolutions of
the Security Council and UNESCO on East Jerusalem,
and defy the united international opinion.

East Jerusalem remains an integral part of the
Palestinian territory occupied by Israel since 1967. Its
illegal annexation by Israel has been rejected and
remains unrecognized by the international community.
However, Israel, the occupying Power, pursues a
systematic process of altering the historical Arab-
Islamic identity of the holy city, Judaizing and
tampering with its history, and changing its
demographic composition. It continues to build the
separation wall, confiscate lands, demolish houses,
construct new settlement neighbourhoods, and
excavate beneath the blessed Al-Aqsa Mosque. All
these activities seek to completely change the facts on
the ground, and ultimately to isolate occupied East
Jerusalem from its Palestinian surroundings.

Settlement construction, if allowed to continue,
will make Jerusalem the capital of hatred, fanaticism
and violence instead of the capital of tolerance and
coexistence. The choice before Israel, the occupying
Power, is clear. If peace and international justice are to
prevail, the demolition and colonial settlement policies
must stop. In the meanwhile, we reaffirm through this
international platform that such illegal Israeli practices
will surely undermine diplomatic efforts to restore
constructive negotiations, and ultimately squander the
historic opportunity to make peace and coexistence a
reality. At this critical juncture, the international
community must shoulder its responsibilities and put a
decisive end to the Israeli policy of settlement-building
on Palestinian land, including East Jerusalem. Israel
11-21096
must comply with the will of the international
community, abide by the resolutions of international
legitimacy and respect the provisions of international
law. For all these reasons, Israel must stop building and
expanding illegal settlements in order to enhance the
prospects for a viable two-State solution.

The OIC remains deeply concerned by Israel's
ongoing air and land violations of Lebanon's
sovereignty in breach of resolution 1701 (2006), and
calls on it to withdraw fully from the remaining
Lebanese occupied territories.

The OIC also associates itself with the position of
the international community to the effect that all
measures and actions taken or to be taken by Israel, the
occupying Power, to alter the legal, physical and
demographic status of the occupied Syrian Golan and
its institutional structures, as well as Israel's measures
to impose its jurisdiction and administration there, are
null and void and have no international legal effect. The
OIC demands that Israel abide fully and immediately by
resolution 497 (1981) and withdraw fully from the
occupied Syrian Golan to the lines of 4 June 1967, in
implementation of resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973).

