Mr. Aisi (Papua New Guinea): First, let me
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
wish you and your delegation well in the work ahead of
you. I would also like to take this opportunity to thank

Ambassador De La Sabliere of the French delegation
for their work in the month of June, which was
technically when the mandate of the United Nations
Observer Mission in Bougainville (UNOMB) expired.

I wish to express my gratitude for the issuance of
the presidential statement on Papua New Guinea. I
would also like to thank all the Council members that
have spoken to express kind words to my Government
and the new Autonomous Government, as well as for
the observations that each of them has made, which
have been noted. I would like to thank my two
colleagues from New Zealand and Australia for their
kind words and for the supporting roles they played in
helping us with this matter.

I would also like to thank the Council for this
opportunity to deliver a short address on what is a
historic occasion for Papua New Guinea. Today is a
day for which people throughout Papua New Guinea,
including our sisters and brothers in Bougainville,
together with our friends in the international
community, have been working, hoping and praying
for: the day when the United Nations Observer Mission
in Bougainville, Papua New Guinea, completes its
assignment. Almost seven years after the United
Nations established the United Nations Political
Office/Observer Mission in Bougainville, that day has
at last come. This is an occasion for modest celebration
by everyone involved: the people of Bougainville, who
have experienced conflict and now peace, their fellow
citizens around Papua New Guinea and the friends of
the peace process here at the United Nations and in
many Member States.

However, practical peacebuilding in Bougainville
is obviously not yet complete. In certain respects, it
never is, either there or anywhere else. Peace and good
governance require ongoing attention and effort if they
are to be sustained and made part of our legacy to
succeeding generations. But so far, at least, the peace
process in Papua New Guinea's newly autonomous
Bougainville region is a success. As I have already
suggested, it will require continuing commitment to
keep it that way.

The United Nations can be truly proud of the role
it has played on the ground; so can the Member States
that contributed truce and peace monitors at an earlier
stage, namely, Australia, Fiji, New Zealand and
Vanuatu. So, too, can our friends in the international
community who continue to provide foreign aid,
namely, Australia and New Zealand again, the
European Union, Japan, the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP), UNICEF and other
United Nations programmes and specialized agencies.

The Bougainville peace process has been a
people's process at every stage, from the truce reached
almost eight years ago, through the coming into force
of the permanent and irrevocable ceasefire, to the
negotiation of the Bougainville Peace Agreement and
its signing in August 2001, the drafting of the
Bougainville Constitution and its adoption just before
Christmas last year, weapons disposal and, now, the
election of the Autonomous Bougainville Government.
That is in part why it has taken somewhat longer than
many of us originally expected. But it is also a source
of its strength. So, too, is the depth of the commitment
that successive national Governments of Papua New
Guinea have shown to the principle of working to
secure lasting peace by peaceful means, and doing so
on a bipartisan national basis. The two have been well
matched: the people at the grassroots level and the
national leadership. Having experienced the losses,
suffering and pain of violent conflict, they have
cooperated for the sake of peace.

The goal and the means have been inseparable.
Both have been based on the shared commitment to
peace and the achievement of lasting peace by peaceful
means. That has not just been a matter of words. The
commitment has been deep in the hearts of people on
all sides. While there have been occasional setbacks
and delays, there has been no turning back. The
people's involvement explains both the strength of the
process and the time it has taken.

In that regard, Papua New Guinea, on behalf of
all parties involved in the peace process, offers sincere
thanks for the understanding and patience of our
friends in the international community and for the
willingness of the Security Council and the Secretary-
General to agree to repeated extensions of the
Mission's mandate. The outcome of our combined
efforts is what we are discussing today, that is, the
successful conclusion of UNOMB's mandate.

The people of Bougainville and Papua New
Guinea as a whole have been fortunate in the
professional and personal qualities of UNOMB's
successive Directors. They include the man who set up
the Mission, Mr. Valery Marusin, who works in the
Secretariat, here in New York. He has been a
continuing source of sound and much-appreciated
advice through the reports he has helped prepare for
the Security Council and in the help he has provided to
the parties in Papua New Guinea. His successor was
Ambassador Noel Sinclair, who served as Director for
more than five years. He, in turn, was followed by Mr.
Tor Stenbock, who will remain on the ground until the
middle of August winding up the Mission.

Ambassador Sinclair chaired many important
meetings between the parties, including some of the
most sensitive political negotiations, and facilitated the
process through which agreement was reached.
Following in his footsteps, Mr. Stenbock has overseen
the conclusion of the agreed weapons disposal plan, the
adoption of the Bougainville Constitution within the
framework of the Papua New Guinea Constitution and
the election of the Autonomous Bougainville
Government.

All three of those United Nations officials
participated in other important developments along the
way. Each was supported by truly excellent and
committed staff, both personnel who came from other
countries and those locally engaged. On behalf of all
parties, Papua New Guinea offers sincere thanks to all
those people. We are indeed fortunate to have had them
living, working and setting such inspiring examples
among us. We wish them all Godspeed as they move
on.

On the evening before the Autonomous
Bougainville Government was sworn into office, the
last Director of UNOMB, Mr. Stenbock, called a
meeting of the body through which the parties had
consulted and cooperated in managing the peace
process, the Peace Process Consultative Committee
(PPCC). UNOMB had previously certified that the
agreed weapons disposal plan had been carried out and
that the election should proceed.

No one believes that Bougainville is now
weapons-free, though many Bougainvilleans and other
Papua New Guineans want it to be. What we can say is
that the way that UNOMB went about forming its
judgements was sensitive to mutual confidence,
people's sense of security and community judgement.
Like other aspects of the Bougainville peace process,
weapons disposal was in many respects a bottom-up
process. The methods UNOMB employed when
Ambassador Sinclair verified and certified stage II -
and Mr. Stenbock did much the same at stage III -

paid close and proper attention to the public's
concerns.

Having fulfilled the purposes for which it had
been set up, the PPCC then agreed to dissolve. On the
next day, the Autonomous Bougainville Government
became the legitimately elected representative of the
people of Bougainville. The joint supervisory body to
be set up under the laws implementing the
Bougainville Peace Agreement will be the key
mechanism for consultations, ongoing cooperation and
the resolution of any disputes between the national
Government and the Autonomous Bougainville
Government.

On 15 June, the day following the last meeting of
the PPCC - in front of an audience that included the
Prime Minister, The Right Honourable Sir Michael
Somare, and other national and Bougainville leaders -
the newly elected members of the executive and
legislative branches of the Autonomous Bougainville
Government took an oath before the Chief Justice of
Papua New Guinea in which they swore to uphold the
Papua New Guinea Constitution. This was a truly
impressive occasion; and all the more so when one
recalls that some of the oath-takers had previously
described themselves publicly as rebels.

An international election observer team, ably
coordinated and supported by the United Nations, had
observed and reported on the election. The team's
report identified a number of administrative
shortcomings and made some helpful recommendations
for improvement. Its overall judgement was that the
defects did not adversely affect the overall integrity of
the election. Dissatisfied candidates have the right to
go to the court of disputed returns to seek appropriate
remedies. Some may still do so. That is their
democratic right.

It is nonetheless pleasing to note the judgement
of the international observer team that "the election
was competently and transparently conducted in all key
respects". The report also states that the observers were
"immensely impressed with the commitment and
patience of the people of Bougainville throughout the
entire process". That testifies to the people's desire for
democratic government. It provides strong reason for
confidence about the prospects for future good
governance in Bougainville. That judgement is
strengthened by the orderly and respectful way in
which unsuccessful candidates accepted the results.

It is very much to the credit of Bougainville
officials, as well as the Papua New Guinea electoral
commission, who gave them such strong and positive
support, that the international election observer team
went on to commend the dedication of all of the
officials involved. The positive attitudes displayed in
the community, together with the cooperation of
officials, sends a very strong signal of hope as other
aspects of the agreed arrangements for Bougainville
autonomy are implemented.

On behalf of all of the people of Papua New
Guinea, the national Government would like to
congratulate the first President of the Autonomous
Bougainville Government, Mr. Joseph Kabui. We also
congratulate the Vice-President, the Speaker and the
Deputy Speaker of the Bougainville House of
Representatives, the newly-appointed ministers, and all
other elected members. We wish them all well in
meeting their respective responsibilities. We are
especially pleased to note that two key positions - a
senior minister and the Deputy Speaker - are held by
women. The very positive role women played in
starting, progressing and supporting the peace process
on the ground makes their appointments especially
welcome. The election of a number of former
combatants as constituency members is a further,
positive sign that peace and normalcy are no longer
just dreams.

UNOMB's assignment has ended. Peace and
future peacebuilding in Bougainville must now be
sustained by the people of Bougainville and Papua
New Guinea as a whole. The national Government will
continue to honour the commitments that successive
Governments-of-the-day made in signing the
agreements paving the road to peace. It will continue to
do so on a bipartisan, national basis.

However, many challenges still remain. Those
include developing an economy capable of sustaining
autonomy; promoting the kinds of development which
provide opportunities for individuals and communities
to help themselves; encouraging and facilitating
ongoing reconciliation and mutual respect in the
community; and ensuring good governance so that the
first two objectives and others can be achieved.

Here, Papua New Guinea believes, the United
Nations can continue to play a very important and
positive part. Papua New Guinea welcomes the
contributions that UNDP, UNICEF and other United
Nations programmes and specialized agencies make on
the ground. We appreciate the contributions UNDP's
Bougainville planning and community support project
is expected to make to building capacity and
strengthening good governance in support of the
Autonomous Bougainville Government. In doing so,
we are pleased to note the continuing presence of
United Nations personnel on the ground, not as
participants in a peace process but as partners in
building capacity for a better future. Their presence
helps to remove any doubt or uncertainty about
whether the international community is still concerned
and will continue to be involved after UNOMB has
completed its mandate. It shows very clearly that the
United Nations continues to care. The United Nations
is still on the job.

It is for that reason that Papua New Guinea would
like to suggest that the appropriate bodies consider the
option of retaining UNOMB's existing assets in
Bougainville and handing them on to UNDP and other
arms of the United Nations that will continue to
operate in Bougainville. A continuing United Nations
presence in Arawa, in particular, would help provide
assurance in the area where the Bougainville crisis
began, close to the area which Francis Ona and his
supporters continue to regard as a no-go zone exclusive
to themselves and people to whom they allow entry or
transit.
Mention of Francis Ona and his supporters in the
no-go zone around Panguna highlights one of the areas
in which the Bougainville peace process is not yet
complete, even though UNOMB has come to an end.
But as I have already observed, peacebuilding never
ends. It is a continuing challenge. It is always possible
to do better and more, even in the best-run, most
democratic and affluent societies.

In the case of the Bougainville peace process,
everyone involved has learned a great deal. Its
character as a people's process has meant that it has not
always moved at full speed, but progress has been real.
While there have been challenges, there has been no
turning back. Practical peacebuilding must keep
moving ahead.

There are, clearly, a important lessons to draw
from the experience. In that regard, Papua New Guinea
believes that there should be considerable advantage in
having a joint lessons learned exercise in which Papua
New Guineans and United Nations experts can reflect
on experience and identify what has been learned. The
results, together with ongoing experience, are likely
both to give and to gain benefit for the United Nations
peacebuilding commission included among the
proposals for United Nations reform.

Let me place on record, on behalf of all parties,
Papua New Guinea's sincere appreciation for the
contribution that UNPOB and UNOMB have made to
peace and the common good of Bougainville and the
rest of Papua New Guinea. We are grateful for the
continuing understanding and support we have
received from Secretary-General Kofi Annan. We
thank the States members of the Security Council for
agreeing to UNOMB's establishment and the
extensions required to achieve the outcome we are
marking today.

Papua New Guinea sincerely appreciates the
support which the international community has given
to making and building peace at home. It is vital that
we all keep working together to achieve global peace.

In conclusion, I would like to take this
opportunity to make mention of Mr. Danilo Turk's
contribution to the peace process. He has been both a
guide and, on many occasions, a good adviser to
myself, to my Foreign Minister, who has visited here,
and to the Government. I thank him very much from
the bottom of my heart for all his efforts.

