Mr. Popolizio Bardales (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We appreciate the convening of this meeting and the
informative briefing by Assistant Secretary-General
Mohamed Khaled Khiari.

We would like to begin by expressing our strongest
condemnation of the recent ballistic missile launches by
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, which not
only are provocative and a serious threat to international
peace and security but also highlight the clear contempt
of North Korea's Government for international law,
the nuclear non-proliferation regime and the relevant
resolutions of the Council.

We are concerned that such actions, which affirm
North Korea's intention to continue developing and
improving the scope and sophistication ofthe capacities
of these programmes, will be accompanied by new
threats in exchange for significant concessions to be met
before the end of this year. All that illustrates a scenario
that is not very promising for the negotiating process,
whose ultimate objective is the denuclearization of the
Korean peninsula.
In that regard, we reaffirm the importance
of keeping the channels for frank dialogue open,
beginning with the resumption of talks with the United
States, with a view to reaching a political settlement.
To that end, it is essential to maintain the unity of the
Council around that objective.

We reiterate that the North Korean nuclear and
ballistic missile programmes, including related
activities, must be abandoned in a complete, verifiable
and irreversible manner. Until that happens, the
sanctions imposed by the Council must remain in force
and be universally implemented, which requires the
proactive efforts of Member States.

In that context, we are concerned about the lack of
monitoring regarding compliance with those sanctions,
especially those related to transfers ofrefined petroleum
products to the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.
It is alarming that such transfers have increased in
scope, scale and sophistication.

We urge all States to exercise greater vigilance
against the illicit transfers expressly prohibited under
paragraph 11 of resolution 2375 (2017). We believe that
the existence of this sanctions regime, which takes into
account the humanitarian situation in the country, is
useful in fostering a positive climate for negotiations
that will make it possible to denuclearize the peninsula
and, at the same time, deal with one of the most serious
threats to international peace and security today.

