Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I want to thank
Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo and
Assistant Secretary-General Ursula Mueller for their
comprehensive briefings.

Poland strongly supports the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine within
its internationally recognized borders. We underline
the need for the full implementation of the Minsk
agreements by all sides. It is the only way to achieve a
lasting solution to the conflict in and around Ukraine.
This conflict is not an ethnic, internal conflict, as
Russia tries to portray it. It is a State-to-State conflict
initiated by Russia and systematically fuelled by Russia
with the purpose of destabilizing Ukraine.

We asked for this meeting today to condemn the
announcement of the so-called elections to be held in
the so-called Luhansk People's Republic and Donetsk
People's Republic on 11 November. That announcement
is contrary to the letter and spirit of the Minsk
agreements; therefore, we call on the Russian Federation
to make full use of its influence over the separatists to
avoid any steps that would obstruct the advancement of
the implementation of the Minsk agreements. It is also
a setback to the efforts made in the Normandy format
and by the Trilateral Contact Group. It is yet another
demonstration of disregard for international norms and
of efforts to undermine the achievement of peace in
eastern Ukraine.

Russian aggression against Ukraine remains a
source of security threats in the whole region. Reports of
the Special Monitoring Mission of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) confirm
that Russia is consistently strengthening its military
presence in Donbas. Convoys of trucks are crossing the
Russian-Ukrainian border day and night - as well as
doing so where there are no border crossing facilities
and always without any OSCE or Ukrainian inspection.
The Special Monitoring Mission has observed such
convoys on seven occasions since August alone. With
little to no access in some areas, Special Monitoring
Mission capabilities are crippled. On a regular basis,
so-called separatists are identified as responsible for
the cases of intimidation of observers and firing or
jamming observation drones belonging to the Special
Monitoring Mission.

It is worrisome that similar activities concerning the
development of military capabilities are taking place in
Crimea and the Sea of Azov. For several months, Russia
has delayed hundreds of commercial vessels attempting
to reach Ukrainian ports on the Sea of Azov via the
Kerch Strait for extended periods and at great economic
cost to Ukraine. Further militarization and increased
tensions bring about even more instability to an already
troubled region.

The humanitarian situation in eastern Ukraine has
further deteriorated since June. Fifty-one per cent of
the population living in territories up to five kilometres
from the contact line did not receive any support in the
past 12 months, while over 60 per cent ofthe population
has limited access to health care. The information
presented by Ms. Mueller showed that we cannot turn
a blind eye to the humanitarian situation. A persisting
lack of respect for the ceasefire by the illegal, Russia-
supported military formations and the indiscriminate
shelling of residential areas put at risk the lives
of the conflict-affected population. International
humanitarian law is not respected. Since the beginning
of the conflict, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights has recorded more
than 10,000 people killed and over 24,000 injured. At
least 2,500 of those killed were civilians.

With winter approaching, hundreds of thousands
of people in eastern Ukraine will require additional
assistance. Let me emphasize that Poland strives to
deliver assistance to those in need in eastern Ukraine.
In addition to supporting Ukraine at the political level,
since 2014 Poland has been providing the necessary
humanitarian aid to internally displaced persons from
areas affected by armed conflict in eastern Ukraine,
as well as the most vulnerable local population.
Poland has always provided humanitarian aid via
bilateral and multilateral channels. Poland contributed
financially this year to the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) in Kyiv; we appeal to
Security Council members to kindly consider backing
the Office as well. Furthermore, I want to thank
Ms. Mueller and OCHA for the hard work, dedication
and determination shown in dealing with this crisis.

On a positive note, we must underline the decision
of the Supreme Council of Ukraine to extend the special
status of Donetsk and Luhansk until the end of 2019,
which confirms Kyiv's determination to implement
the Minsk agreements, especially in the difficult
pre-election period.

