The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.
I, too, would like to thank the Prosecutor for
briefing the Council in her eighteenth report on the
situation in Libya. The United Kingdom strongly
supports the work of the International Criminal Court
(ICC). Its role in holding accountable those responsible
for the most serious crimes in Libya is of paramount
importance, and this is especially so given recent
flagrant breaches of international humanitarian law
and human rights violations and abuses, including the
targeting of civilian infrastructure such as the Tajoura
detention centre in July, as she set out.

The conflict is having an unacceptable impact on
civilians, including migrants and refugees. The United
Kingdom is clear that civilians should be protected
and that those responsible for violations should be held
accountable. The ICC is crucial to this.

International criminal justice is a collective effort.
States should ensure cooperation and fulfil their
obligations. We support the Prosecutor's call for all
relevant States, including State parties and non-State
parties, to cooperate with the ICC in the arrest and
surrender of warranted individuals. We share concerns
over reports of Mr. Al-Werfalli's promotion within the
Libyan National Army and the ICC's call on General
Haftar to facilitate his immediate surrender.

It is clear that the ongoing conflict is having an
unacceptable impact on the humanitarian and human
rights situation in Libya. We call on all Member States
to continue to engage with United Nations-led efforts
to secure greater security and stability. We all know
that there is no military solution to Libya's problems.
All parties to the conflict should commit to an
immediate ceasefire and respect their obligations under
international humanitarian law.

Theindiscriminate shelling ofcivilianinfrastructure
such as Mitiga airport threatens Libyan lives and
livelihoods. This is unacceptable. The United Kingdom
remains particularly concerned over the disappearance
of House of Representatives member Siham Sergewa
in July, and we reiterate our condolences following the
car-bomb attack in Benghazi, which killed five people,
including three United Nations staff members.

Support for international criminal justice is a
fundamental part of our foreign policy, and the British
Government strongly supports the ICC's role in
pursuing accountability in Libya. The United Kingdom
has always been and remains a strong supporter of the
mission of the ICC to hold accountable those accused
of the most serious crimes, to uphold the rule of law
and to achieve justice for victims. We will continue
to support the Prosecutor and her team as they pursue
their investigations.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to Ms. Bensouda to respond to the
questions posed or comments made.

