Mr. Kyslitsya (Ukraine): At the outset, I would
like to underscore that this open debate represents a
common contribution to the efforts of the international
community in addressing terrorism and Violent
extremism, not only in the region of the Middle East
and North Africa but also in a global context. Ukraine
fully supports the Security Council's position that all
forms of terrorism constitutes one of the most serious
threats to international peace and security, and that
any acts of terrorism are criminal and unjustifiable
regardless of their motivations.

Ukraine supports the central role of the United
Nations in the global effort to suppress international
terrorism and promote international cooperation in
that field. We reiterate our strong support for the set
of measures in resolutions 2170 (2014) and 2178 (2014)
aimed at resolving the acute problems associated with
foreign terrorist fighters. We share the concern that
foreign terrorist fighters can increase a conflict's
intensity and duration. Dealing with the threat they pose
requires that the factors underlying the phenomenon
be comprehensively addressed. Taking into account
the presence of foreign militants and terrorists in the
Donbas region of Ukraine, some provisions of those
resolutions are also applicable to the situation in
Ukraine.

We remain deeply concerned about the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and other associated
terrorist entities and about the negative impact of their
violent extremist ideology and destabilizing actions
in the Middle East and North Africa, including their
devastating humanitarian impact on the civilian
population, which has led to the displacement of
millions. We strongly condemn the crimes and acts
of mass violence that ISIL has committed against
civilians, particularly in Syria and Iraq, including their
most vulnerable minorities. Ukraine shares the view
that the activity and violent ideology of terrorist groups
such as ISIL and Jabhat Al-Nusra constitute a threat
to the entire international community. We support all
possible steps on the part of the international coalition,
including appropriate military operations against ISIL
forces, aimed at banishing the terrorist threat from the
region. We also believe that the fight against ISIL and
other terrorist groups must be accompanied by a positive
political transformation in Syria and democratization
of its State institutions.

At the same time, combating the activities of
individual terrorists and terrorist groups is insufficient if
the problem of sponsor States is not properly addressed.
That is true in the cases of both the Middle East and the
Donbas region of Ukraine. Considering certain current
developments in Syria, particularly Russia's military
build-up and use of force there, we share the opinion
that so far its policies seem to be about advancing its
own narrowly defined interests, which do not coincide
with interests of the Syrian people. In that regard, we
are deeply concerned about the reports from Syria
today that the air strikes carried out by the Russian air
force have resulted in the death of dozens of civilians.

We also find it very disturbing that attempts are
being made to tilt the discussion on the Syrian crisis in
the direction of how best to accommodate the interests
of the Russian Federation in Syria, rather than how
to address the root causes of the current crisis in the
Middle East, while ignoring the plight and genuine
interests of the Syrian people. If we allow this approach
we risk exacerbating the situation in Syria, which
will continue to drive Syrians out of their homes and
thus worsen the migration crisis. In the light of this,
we welcome the assurances made by the leaders of the
anti-ISIL coalition to the effect that further interaction
with the Russian Federation in the fight against ISIL
will not come at the expense of the integrity of their
position vis-a-vis the Russian Federation on issues of
principle in other parts of the world where Russia has
been directly implicated in conflict situations.

Anti-terrorism activities should play a central
role in United Nations efforts to address transnational
threats to security, which have grown dramatically
and are not confined within national boundaries. In
that regard, we welcomed yesterday's holding, at the
initiative of the United States, ofa summit ofleaders on
countering ISIL and violent extremism. We consider it
an important step towards achieving unity in addressing
the global threats posed by terrorist organizations and
their activity.

