Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): Ithank the
Kazakh presidency for organizing this important and
equally timely meeting on confidence and transparency
measures on weapons of mass destruction. It was a
particular honour to have President Nazarbayev and
President Duda present among us this morning, and I
am very happy to see you, Mr. Minister here today once
again. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his very enlightening briefing.
Almost a century ago, the atrocities resulting from
the use of chemical weapons during the First World War
led us to jointly initiate and develop, piece by piece, the
current non-proliferation regime on weapons of mass
destruction. That regime is today the backbone of the
international security architecture. As the past year has
tragically reminded us, it is nevertheless under attack
and has been possibly put in jeopardy. The proliferation
of biological, chemical and nuclear weapons and
their means of delivery remains a dangerous reality.
In Asia and the Middle East, the most robust and
fundamental non-proliferation and disarmament norms
are systematically, and even flagrantly, violated. Let
us make no mistake: the stakes are extremely high.
Beyond the immediate implications concerning peace
and security, what is at stake is long-term strategic
stability, which implicates the security of all our States.
That is why combating weapons of mass destruction is,
and must remain, at the heart of the Security Council's
priorities, and why France intends to remain committed
to such a critical issue.

With the barbaric use of toxic chemical agents
in Syria, Iraq and Asia, we are witnessing the deadly
reappearance of weapons that sow fear and death among
civilians. The use of chemical weapons by the Syrian
regime against its own people is but one tragic example
ofthat. On behalf of France, I recall that trivializing that
situation, owing to our failure to build an international
consensus to find a solution for it, steadily increases
the risk of chemical terrorism, which is something we
all fear. It exacerbates regional instability and weakens
the international security architecture, for which the
Council is both the guardian and ultimate guarantor.

The same observation applies to North Korea's
actions. The North Korean regime is determined to
acquire an operational nuclear arsenal, in systematic
and blatant violation of its obligations. The threat
has reached a critical level and concerns us all. It is
therefore necessary today, through the pressure being
applied, to find a political solution so as to achieve the
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula. The unity
and resolute commitment of the Security Council are a
prerequisite condition for success.

In such an uncertain and complex environment,
trust and transparency at the regional and multilateral
levels - among the priorities behind our meetings - are
more than ever core values that we must safeguard
and nurture. That is especially true with regard to the
non-proliferation regime. As the Secretary-General
recalled, it is based on binding commitments, followed
by a rigorous verification of their implementation.
That is in particular the role of such international
bodies as the International Atomic Energy Agency and
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW), whose work France actively supports.

I also reiterate our resolute commitment to
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons - the fiftieth anniversary of which we will
celebrate this year - as well as our firm opposition to
any international initiative that might undermine it. I
would also like to especially express our full support
for the entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-
Test-Ban Treaty as soon as possible. We call upon all
countries that have not yet acceded to the Treaty to do
so without delay - I refer in particular to countries
whose accession is required.

France also supports the implementation by all
of the commitments made under resolution 1540
(2004), adopted by the Council to prevent non-State
actors from obtaining weapons of mass destruction.
That is a topical issue because we are more than
ever concerned about possible transfers to non-State
entities, particularly in the area of missiles. In that
respect, it is crucial that States that have not yet done so
adopt export-control legislation and the corresponding
administrative arrangements.

Lastly, as members are aware, France is very
involved in the Proliferation Security Initiative. France
intends to continue actively supporting non-proliferation
efforts and, as I have said, remain proactive regarding
the Initiative. France is convinced that with the
determination of the international community, based
on pragmatic and realistic multilateralism, it is possible
to find solutions to the proliferation crises. Allow me,
in that regard, to mention the Iranian case.

My country actively contributed to the development
of the robust, solid and verifiable agreement that is
now the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action. As we
have already said, we want rigorous implementation
of that agreement and of resolution 2231 (2015).
Taken together, those texts constitute the cornerstone
of stability and regional and international security.
Nevertheless, the agreement does not address all of our
concerns, in particular with respect to Iran's ballistic
activities. That is why we hope that frank dialogue will
take place on the matter.

Similarly, the reinstatement of a total ban on the
use of chemical weapons is urgently needed. Impunity
cannot, and will not, be an option. That was the merit of
the Joint Investigative Mechanism - the dissolution of
which is particularly regrettable; however, we must not
stand by idly. Criminals identified as having resorted to
such weapons, whether State or non-State actors, should
be punished, and those who might consider it deterred.

That is why France has decided to convene in Paris
on 23 January countries that share that same concern,
in order to effectively work together against the
unacceptable impunity for the use of chemical weapons.
A new intergovernmental partnership will be set up on
that occasion, the purpose of which will be to assist
and support existing mechanisms in their investigative
work as well as international organizations, primarily
the OPCW, which is in charge of that issue.

With the risk of erosion in the non-proliferation
regime, it is our security as a whole, as well as the
very existence of the rule of law as the foundation
of multilateralism, that are in peril. In the light
of the magnitude of the stakes, it is our collective
responsibility to safeguard and strengthen the gains
that together we have made, by building confidence
and transparency among all parties respecting their
non-proliferation commitments. France remains fully
committed to that end.

