Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Secretary-General and the two other speakers for
their briefings. I also thank the British presidency for
having convened this debate.

France supports the momentum the Secretary-
General has invested in diplomacy for peace. The
United Nations must invest more upstream of conflict,
in prevention, and downstream, to build lasting peace.
Strengthening United Nations capacities in mediation,
early warning and support for reconciliation, including
through the growing power of the Peacebuilding Fund,
is essential. The 2020 peacebuilding architecture review
should provide an opportunity to go even further.

Justice and the fight against impunity are essential
preconditions for fair and lasting reconciliation. There
can be no peace withoutjustice. It is essential thatjustice
be done in the aftermath ofconflict, particularly in cases
of serious violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights law. The aim is to ensure recognition
for victims and break the infernal cycle of vengeance.
That is why France is deeply convinced that the
International Criminal Court plays an essential role in
the fight against impunity, with respect for the principle
of complementarity.

France also welcomes the efforts made in Iraq
by the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote
Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da'esh/
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant to collect
evidence of the crimes committed by Da'esh. We
will also continue to provide our full political and
financial support to the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011.

To prevent the recurrence of atrocities,
reconciliation processes must place special emphasis
on memory and on victims. We welcome the activities
of transitional justice mechanisms, such as the Truth
and Reconciliation Commission in South Africa, and of
international criminal tribunals, which have undeniably
contributed to reconciliation and peace in the regions
concerned. Their legacy and, more broadly, their work
on memory and the historical documentation of the
facts, must now be preserved.

Teaching young people must take over to prevent
any resurgence of divisions that fuel violence. This is
the responsibility not only of Governments and local
actors but also of the Security Council. In this respect,
it is disturbing to note the lingering denial in certain
areas of the genocide of Tutsi in Rwanda and the
glorification of war criminals in the former Yugoslavia.
This is another reason that transitional justice and the
fight against impunity in general must systematically
address the dimension of memory.

Protecting the rights of the survivors, including
through the establishment ofcompensation mechanisms,
is of crucial importance. France fully supports the
International Criminal Court Trust Fund for Victims.
Where jurisdictional structures are lacking or too weak,
it is essential that medical, psychological and social
support be provided to facilitate the reintegration of
survivors. This is the objective set by the International
Fund for Survivors of Conf lict-Related Sexual Violence,
founded by Nobel Peace laureates Nadia Murad and
Denis Mukwege.

In this context, peacebuilding must integrate the
objective of reconciliation earlier on. We must promote
the most inclusive reconciliation processes possible.
They must involve women, youth, civil society actors
and community and religious leaders. I would like to
focus on the role of women, which is a priority for
France and for the Security Council, with the women
and peace and security agenda. Peace processes that
involve women are more effective and longer lasting.
We welcome the efforts of the Peacebuilding Fund, one
third of whose projects integrate such considerations.

There is also a need to investigate events that
could fuel the cycle of hate as swiftly as possible. In
the Sahel, for example, terrorists are high-jacking
inter-community conflicts. We welcome in that regard
the efforts of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali to investigate
human rights violations and develop reconciliation
initiatives. The visits to Mali by the Special Adviser on
the Prevention of Genocide and by the United Nations
Independent Expert on the situation of human rights in
Mali were also very helpful. While such efforts should
continue, it is also crucial to support national strategies
for conflict prevention and reconciliation, because it
is primarily up to local authorities to, in a neutral and
impartial manner, ensure their communities coexist.

I would like to underscore the outstanding work
carried out in the Central African Republic by the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic to promote the
signing of local peace and reconciliation agreements,
which paved the way for the signing, on 6 February,
ofa comprehensive peace agreement. Local monitoring
committees under the agreement have since been
playing an essential role in ensure genuine ownership
of the peace process.

Reconciliation is essential for building lasting
peace. It must therefore be systemically included among
the objectives set by the Security Council.

