Mr. Burian (Slovakia): We would like to thank
Mr. Pronk for his update today on the progress that has
been made in implementing the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA) in the Sudan and on the situation in
Darfur. My delegation commends the efforts of
Mr. Pronk, as well as those of all United Nations staff
in the Sudan, who are working tirelessly to help the
people of the Sudan to attain peace and to build a
better future.

We also acknowledge the key role played by the
United Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) in
support of the CPA, and we welcome the progress
made in implementing the Agreement so far. At the
same time, we share Mr. Pronk's observation about the
fragility of peace in the south of the Sudan and the
necessity of keeping the implementation of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement on course. We are
concerned about the widening confidence gap resulting
from the lack of progress in the implementation of
several aspects of the CPA, including power- and
wealth-sharing commitments under the Agreement.

Another worrying aspect is the continuing
deadlock concerning the status of the Abyei area. In
this regard, we call on all stakeholders to make
progress, because this issue continues to undermine the
CPA and is threatening the security of the whole
region. We agree with Mr. Pronk that the issue can be
considered a test case for the implementation of the
entire CPA, and we call on the Government of National
Unity to resolve the issue of the demarcation between
the north and the south as soon as possible, so as not to
jeopardize the chance of peace between the north and
the south of the Sudan.

Another important priority for the United Nations
in the south should be - and here we agree with
Mr. Pronk - support for security-sector reform. We
commend the role of UNMIS in this regard.

We support the Juba peace talks between Uganda
and the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA), and the
mediation role being played by the government of
Southern Sudan. The signing on 26 August of the
agreement on the cessation of hostilities was a positive
development, and we hope that that trend will
continue.

As Mr. Egeland told us on Friday (see S/PV.5525), Juba represents the best chance for peace
in the region that we have had so far. We share the
View that there can be no impunity for the crimes
committed by the LRA. At the same time, however, it
is crucially important that the peace process now
continue and that it be shown that peace and justice can
work together.

We welcome the improvement in the relations
between the Sudan and Eritrea. In that regard, we
would like to support the assistance provided by
UNMIS in the talks between the Government of the
Sudan and the Eastern Front. UNMIS should also be
encouraged to support the efforts aimed at
implementing the Darfur Peace Agreement as

envisaged in resolution 1706 (2006). We regret that the
position of the Sudanese Government has so far been
negative. We fully agree with the observation made in
the present report of the Secretary-General
(S/2006/728) that, ultimately, the leaders in Khartoum
bear full responsibility for the road that they ultimately
choose.

Aware of the serious deterioration of the situation
in Darfur, we believe that every effort should be
undertaken to save the Darfur Peace Agreement and
secure its full implementation. It cannot, however, be
used as a pretext for attacking those who have not
signed it. In our view, the only way to create
favourable conditions for the peace process in Darfur is
through a speedy transition to a robust United Nations-
led operation able to cope with the complex situation
on the ground. In that regard, we believe that all the
provisions of resolution 1706 (2006) should be fully
and expeditiously implemented.

We hope that the Sudanese Government will
understand that active United Nations involvement in
protecting civilians and facilitating the implementation
of the Darfur Peace Agreement is in the best interests
of all Sudanese people. We agree with Mr. Pronk that
the long-term United Nations engagement in southern
Sudan is the best proof that the Organization has no
hidden agenda in the Sudan and that its only aim is to
help the Sudanese people to establish a lasting and
sustainable peace throughout the country.

