Mr. Wittig (Germany): Germany fully aligns
itself with the statement just made by the European
Union.
Let me thank Under-Secretary-General Valerie
Amos for her statement on behalf of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs today. I also
thank Ms. Pillay, Mr. Le Roy and Director General
Daccord for their contributions. The voices of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, the Under-Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations and the Director
General of the International Committee of the Red
Cross are particularly relevant in this debate.

Civilians continue to bear the brunt of violence
and abuse in armed conflicts. Women and children are
particularly vulnerable and often are directly targeted.
The mass rapes in Walikale in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo in July of this year - only days
after the last open debate on the protection of civilians
in the Security Council - serve as a stark reminder
that we must do more to ensure the safety and physical
integrity of civilian populations and to enhance full
respect by all parties to conflict for applicable
international law.

Over the last years, the Security Council has
developed a comprehensive normative framework on
protection issues. The Council has repeatedly made it
clear that the protection of civilians must be a priority
for peacekeeping operations. There is, however, an
implementation gap, which the Council and United
Nations missions must address in order to make a
tangible difference for the civilian population in zones
of conflict.

Protecting civilians from the direct threat of
physical violence in zones of conflict is not an easy
task, as we all know. Resource constraints, difficult
terrain and a sometimes tenuous consent of the host
country, but also a lack of conceptual clarity and
insufficient training and preparedness are challenges to
the effective protection of civilians by United Nations
missions.

The United Nations peacekeeping reform process
has acknowledged many of the shortcomings and has
taken first steps to address them. In that regard, we
welcome the progress made so far in developing an
operational concept for the protection of civilians in
United Nations peacekeeping operations, as requested
by Security Council resolution 1894 (2009) of last
November.
Military as well as civilian components of the
United Nations missions in the field must have clear
guidelines on their respective roles in the protection of

civilians from physical violence and must work
together in achieving that. It is also imperative that
United Nations missions interact more with the
vulnerable communities that they are tasked to protect,
in order to better understand their specific protection
needs.

We welcome the most recent report of the
Secretary-General on the protection of civilians
(S/2010/579) and the conclusions and proposed
practical steps contained therein. We agree on the need
to develop quality benchmarks for the implementation
of protection mandates by peacekeeping missions and
on the need to assess and implement best practice.

We welcome the development of training
modules on protection issues for all peacekeeping
personnel and, in particular, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) cooperation with
United Nations Action against Sexual Violence in
Conflict to develop relevant training materials.
Germany is pleased to be associated with DPKO's
important work on developing a specific United
Nations police standardized training curriculum on
investigating and preventing sexual and gender-based
violence.

We also recognize the important role the
Council's informal Expert Group on the Protection of
Civilians can play in incorporating protection issues in
the Council's work, especially prior to the renewal of
peacekeeping mandates. In that regard, we particularly
welcome the updated aide-memoire endorsed today.
Germany looks forward to participating actively in the
work of the informal Expert Group during its tenure on
the Security Council.

The Security Council has also done important
work to enhance the protection agenda on specific
thematic issues like children and women in armed
conflict. Let me in that context briefly highlight the
action plans pursuant to Security Council resolution
1612 (2005), in which the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
is engaging non-State parties to conflict. In our view,
this is yet another practical way to enhance compliance
by those groups with applicable international law.
Here, as in other United Nations activities in conflict
zones, United Nations access to non-State parties to
conflict is key, and we would encourage Member
States to grant such access.
To conclude, let me briefly touch upon the need
to fight impunity. This past summer, the Security
Council adopted a presidential statement on children
and armed conflict (S/PRST/2010/ 10), which called for
increased exchange of information on persistent
perpetrators between the Security Council Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict and relevant
sanctions committees of the Security Council. We
believe that such a regular exchange of information
could be a step towards ensuring compliance with
applicable international law and ensuring
accountability for violations thereof.

