We thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), Ms. Jeanine Hennis- Plasschaert, for her briefing. South Africa supports and continues to have confidence in her efforts. South Africa supports UNAMI's mandate to promote the strengthening of the Government of Iraq and its electoral processes. We look forward to the adoption of the election law by the House of Representatives ahead of the much-anticipated elections on 6 June 2021. We support the drive for an inclusive Government that will bring together all diverse aspects of Iraqi society into its governance structures. National reconciliation and unity remain vital in avoiding future challenges stemming from shifting Government policies and actions. Domestic unity, cohesion and determination are urgently needed to build resilience against narrow partisan interests, foreign interference and criminal elements actively seeking to impede Iraq's stability. South Africa is pleased to witness a significant breakthrough following the formation of the new Government headed by Prime Minister Mustafa Al-Kadhimi, which pays special attention to improving public services and meeting the promises made to the people of Iraq. South Africa continues to call for increased and improved cooperation between the national Government of Iraq and the Kurdistan Regional Government, including the finalization of resource- and revenue-sharing agreements. South Africa supports UNAMI and the Government of Iraq in its post-conflict reconstruction and development efforts, which provide much-needed humanitarian assistance throughout the country, particularly during the coronavirus disease pandemic. The spread of the pandemic in Iraq has strained an already fragile health- care system. Peace and security remain fundamental for Iraq to develop its infrastructure, grow its economy and provide basic services to all its citizens. In that regard, South Africa supports the consolidation of the Iraqi army's control over the entire territory and welcomes continued support for the efforts of the Government to eradicate the threat posed by Da'esh. South Africa remains concerned that an increase in assaults signals a worrisome trend that Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) is steadily re-emerging, which is a cause for both regional and global concern. We are pleased to learn that the Iraqi security authorities have launched a campaign to control unlicensed weapons in Baghdad and across the country's provinces. Iraqis should not have to live in an atmosphere of terror and intimidation. South Africa is pleased to note that a number of leaders of the ISIL terrorist entity have been arrested. We are also pleased by the commendable efforts of the Government of Iraq to prevent missile attacks on diplomatic missions and the subsequent arrests of suspects, thereby holding them accountable by way of fair legal procedures. It is paramount to uphold standards of justice, accountability, integrity and transparency. We are encouraged by the collaborative effort of both the Governments of Kuwait and Iraq to locate missing Kuwaiti and third-country nationals, as well as missing Kuwaiti property, including the national archives. We urge both countries to work together with the relevant United Nations institutions to resolve outstanding issues. We commend UNAMI for facilitating the transfer of the human remains exhumed from the Shaykhiyah site in the Iraqi Samawah desert to Kuwait by making available its air assets. In conclusion, Iraq simply cannot and should not be an arena for conflict or a base point for any other country's strategy towards any of its neighbouring countries, as Iraq aims to be an active player on the path to peacebuilding, achieving stability and improving security opportunities. South Africa reiterates its support for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Iraq in line with the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and continues to support UNAMI in the implementation of its mandate. We also continue to urge the United Nations and the Government of Iraq to consider utilizing the Peacebuilding Commission in order to make greater strides in rebuilding the country.
