Mr. Hermida Castillo (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish): It is with deep sadness and grief that the
people of Nicaragua have learned the news of the
tragedy being experienced once again by our brothers,
the Palestinian people.

Six hundred and sixty people have been killed
and more than 3,000 injured as a result of the latest
Israeli aggression against the occupied Palestinian
territories. For more than 12 days now, the heroic
Palestinian people have been the victims of
bombardments by air, sea and land that constitute a
massacre of the Palestinian civilian population.

Yet again, history is repeating itself; regrettably,
that appears to be happening with respect to the
question of Palestine, whose population is suffering
under persecution and systematic genocide. The wall
that separates that population from its neighbours
isolates them, forces them to live in misery and denies
them the right to a homeland of their own. Regrettably,
it is the descendants of those who had been declared
stateless, who were the victims of Nazi persecution and
genocide and who were forced to live in ghettoes who
are now victimizing the Palestinian people.

But while the Jewish Holocaust ended with the
end of the Second World War and while the Jewish
people were given a State and territory, the
Government of Israel's excessive campaign of
destruction has continued for more than 60 years. This
has denied the Palestinian people - the age-old
inhabitants of historic Palestine - the right to an
independent homeland. Thus far, the two-State solution
remains a solution on paper only.

The situation in Gaza is tragic. The attacks that
took place yesterday - the day of the Three Kings, a
very important day for children - on three schools
protected by the United Nations flag, claiming more
than 43 lives and injuring more than 100 people, was a
further Israeli scorn for human rights, for the right to
life, for international law, for the Fourth Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War and for the United Nations. It
is a clear example of the tragedy that the people of
Palestine are enduring.

Many humanitarian organizations have
condemned the humanitarian crisis throughout the 362
square kilometres of the Palestinian territory of Gaza,
whose 1.5 million inhabitants have been living in
misery owing to the blockade imposed by Israel. The
Israeli military attacks have caused additional
shortages of basic food, medical supplies, drinking
water and fuel, as well as electricity cuts, because
assistance cannot be delivered.

This is a horrible tragedy. People continue to
arrive at hospitals; the number of injured continues to
rise. The director of Gaza operations for the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, John Ging, has called the
situation incredible.

For its part, my Government regrets the fact that
the Security Council has not yet been able to reach any
outcome while we see the number of victims of the
barbaric Israeli attacks continue to rise. In that
connection, we support the statement issued by the
Coordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned Movement,
which expresses deep disappointment at the inability of
the Security Council to uphold its responsibilities in
maintaining international peace and security, and notes
that, despite more than 12 days of sustained military
attacks that have gravely affected the civilian
population and heightened instability and tensions in
the region, the Council has regrettably been unable to
take any concrete measure to end the aggression.

The Security Council has the legal and moral
obligation to take all measures necessary to bring an
immediate end to the aggression against the Palestinian
people. Nicaragua rejects that aggression and
condemns in the strongest terms the extermination
practiced by Israel, the occupying Power, in the
occupied Palestinian territories. The current hostilities
are further destabilizing the situation in the occupied
territories and throughout the Middle East and are
making it ever more difficult to achieve a lasting
solution to the Palestinian problem.

The Security Council must compel Israel to put
an immediate end to its military operations and to open
all border crossings in order to guarantee unhindered
access to the area for humanitarian assistance.

Any decision to be adopted must not only lead to
a lasting solution, but must also guarantee that
hostilities will not resume. Any decision must respect
all relevant international resolutions. There can be no
military solution to the Palestinian problem. We
support a peaceful negotiated resolution of the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict and the right of the
Palestinian people to sovereignty and self-
determination in an independent Palestinian State, on
the basis of the 1967 borders and with Jerusalem as its

capital. Only in that way cam we have lasting peace in
the Middle East.

