Mr. Adechi (Benin) (spoke in French): The
illegal circulation of small arms across national
borders, their abundant availability in certain regions
of the world and their improper use are at the root of
the prolongation of many civil wars and internal armed
conflicts and thus thwart efforts to promote economic
and social development.

The situation is particularly worrisome in Africa
because the illegal circulation of arms has facilitated
and encouraged recourse to force to settle internal
political crises, to the detriment of dialogue and
negotiation. As well, once conflicts have erupted, the
illegal trafficking of light weapons helps exacerbate
them. In that context, other particularly worrisome
phenomena have arisen: child soldiers, the illegal
exploitation of the natural resources of crisis-stricken
countries and the emergence of a self-sustaining war
economy that makes it difficult to restore peace.

The illicit trafficking of small arms and light
weapons constitutes a grave challenge for crisis-
stricken countries and the regions to which they
belong. Porous borders and weak security and
monitoring structures bring the risk of widespread
destabilization in certain subregions of Africa. That
phenomenon is particularly evident in West Africa.

The impact on the protection of human rights and
respect for international humanitarian law is
particularly devastating for civilian populations,
notably the most vulnerable groups: women, children
and the elderly. Internal conflicts increasingly involve
non-State armed groups; this complicates the issue of
humanitarian action and the protection of human rights.
One can thus identify a long list of the harmful
consequences of the illicit trafficking of small arms and
light weapons. They provide the reasons justifying the
mobilization of the international community and the
United Nations and the particular attention that the
Security Council devotes to this problem.

I take this opportunity to thank the Secretary-
General for his report (S/2003/12l7), which takes stock
of the initiatives undertaken. I would like to express to
the Secretary-General my delegation's great
appreciation for the progress made in the
implementation of the recommendations contained in
his previous report (S/2002/1053).

It is encouraging to note that the results of the
work of the United Nations Group of Governmental
Experts have led the General Assembly to create a
working group tasked with negotiating an international
instrument to identify and trace, in a timely and
reliable manner, illicit small arms and light weapons.
This should strengthen the capacity of States to
cooperate in identifying and monitoring small arms in a
reliable manner. We hope that this work will make
progress; for our part, we intend to contribute actively
to that work.

The phenomenon of the illegal trafficking of
small arms persists because the monitoring
mechanisms are easily eluded and because the
exchange of information is inadequate. In that regard,
we hope that the results of the feasibility study on
Interpol's Weapons and Explosives Tracking System
will soon be made known. My delegation believes that
the issue of trafficking and that of the illicit brokering
in small arms are components of a single problem.
Closer cooperation among States and the creation of
national registers are therefore essential for the
rigorous regulation of this activity.

It is opportune to recall the 31 October 2002
presidential statement of the Security Council
(S/PRST/2002/30), which, among other things,
underlines the need to study the feasibility of
developing an end-user certificate system. The
Secretariat could be involved in the framework of
support for the efforts of the working group established
by the General Assembly.

The Security Council, for its part, could further
consider the means to ensure better compliance with
embargoes and sanctions. The Council could further
consider innovative ways to ensure greater compliance
with embargoes on small arms and sanctions that could
be imposed, including the possibility of putting an end
to the supply of ammunition because, without
ammunition, all weapons are harmless.
United Nations support for regional moratoriums,
such as that agreed by the countries of the Economic
Community of West African States, can help overcome
the proliferation of small arms. Here, my delegation
would like to underline the importance of the support
the United Nations provides for the Programme for
Coordination and Assistance for Security and
Development in West Africa.

It is crucial to monitor stocks of small arms and
their transfer to non-State actors. In that regard, the
Security Council must be aware of all the consequences
of the triangular relationship among the exploitation of
natural resources, the financing of conflicts and the
circulation of small arms, and, as a result, should put
an end to this trafficking, which fuels wars.

My delegation also wishes to recall the important
March 2003 workshop on the proliferation of small
arms and light weapons and mercenary activities in
West Africa, which made clear the relationships among
mercenary activities, the illegal trafficking of small
arms and the exploitation of resources in order to
finance belligerents.

We welcome the fact that consideration of the
regional dimension of African conflicts, particularly in
West Africa, has become a widely shared concern. That
consideration of the regional dimension of conflicts
should enable the strengthening of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes in the
framework of the peacekeeping operation mandates.
Security Council debates on children and armed
conflict and on post-conflict situations should enable
us further to examine these questions. At this stage, we
will limit ourselves to underlining the need for
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes to consider child soldiers in an appropriate
manner, taking their specific needs into account.

