Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): At the outset, I wish to thank the Russian
Federation for having called for this meeting.

I also thank Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs, for his helpful
briefing on the latest developments in the humanitarian
situation in Syria, which has reached a critical threshold.

Cote d'Ivoire remains deeply concerned by the
ongoing deterioration of the humanitarian situation,
largely due to the resurgence of fighting on the ground,
particularly in eastern Ghouta where since Monday, I
regret to say, 40 civilians have been killed and more
than 150 wounded, and many hospitals and schools
have been destroyed. In the face of this extreme
escalation of hostilities, my delegation would like,
following the call issued yesterday in this Chamber by
Secretary-General Antonio Guterres (see S/PV.8l85),
to appeal to the sense of responsibility of the parties
involved to end the tragedy of eastern Ghouta. It urges
them to exercise restraint with a view to an immediate
cessation ofhostilities in order to enable the resumption
of the delivery of humanitarian aid, including
medical evacuations, to alleviate the suffering of the
Syrian population.

Cote d'Ivoire reiterates its conviction and principled
position that the response to the crisis in Syria cannot be
military. On the contrary, it should be pursued through
an inclusive dialogue and political process, as provided
for in the road map set out by resolution 2254 (2015).

Finally, in the light of the tragic humanitarian
situation in eastern Ghouta - which Mr. Lowcock so
somberly described earlier - Cote d'Ivoire supports the
draft resolution proposed by the delegations of Kuwait
and Sweden, calling for a cessation of hostilities for a
period of 30 days with a view to allowing immediate
humanitarian access to the besieged populations of
the region. The Council must set aside all political
calculations and other distractions and undertake the
commendable task of rescuing the inhabitants of eastern
Ghouta and other regions of Syria, who also happen to
be Syrians, from the hell in which they are living.

