Mr. Juppe (France) (spoke in French): Just
before the high-level meeting of the General Assembly
on HIV and AIDS opens tomorrow, I would like to
thank President Bongo Ondimba for the initiative to
hold a debate on this topic, which is too often
overlooked or neglected.
In 30 years, AIDS has killed some 30 million
people and orphaned more than 16 million children.
The Second World War is the only conflict to have
claimed more victims and caused greater suffering. The

international community is fully mobilized to fight this
scourge. Eleven years ago, in resolution 1308 (2000),
the Security Council recognized the pandemic as a
threat to international peace and security for the first
time. Since then, every time we have addressed the
subject of AIDS, we have stressed the terrible
consequences of the illness, which are not only social
and human, but also economic. We have shed light on
the obstacles it poses to countries attempting to recover
from conflict, especially because it primarily affects
women and girls, who play a fundamental role in
rebuilding any society.

Given this threat, several international
instruments have been established, in particular in the
framework of the United Nations system. These
include the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV
and AIDS (UNAIDS), whose Executive Director,
Michel Sidibe, I welcome here today; the Global Fund
to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria; and the
International Drug Purchase Facility (UNITAID),
which is based on a French initiative and receives
innovative financing. I would like to commend the
work carried out by these different bodies on a daily
basis.

This joint commitment has not been in vain. The
numbers of deaths and new infections have been cut by
20 per cent in 10 years. Moreover, the increase in
funding for programmes to fight HIV and AIDS and for
the development of generic medications have allowed 6
million people in low- and middle-income countries to
begin treatment. Finally, mother-to-child transmission
prevention activities have opened the way for a
generation to be born free of HIV. These positive
results should encourage us to redouble our efforts.

Thirty-four million people are living with the
disease today; seven million are infected every day.
Every year, with almost 300,000 babies being born
with the virus and with two people infected for every
one that is placed under treatment, the epidemic
continues to be one length ahead of us. It is still the
most disadvantaged countries that pay the heaviest
price - I am thinking in particular of the African
continent, which represents 36 per cent of the people
who are infected and 72 per cent of deaths associated
with AIDS.
We must therefore do more. That is the meaning
of the resolution we have adopted today (resolution 1983 (2011)). It is the meaning of the campaign "Be

11-3654]
Born without HIV" that was launched in Paris in May
2010 by Global Fund Ambassador Mrs. Carla Bruni
Sarkozy. It is in this spirit that France, the second
largest global contributor, increased by 20 per cent its
contributions to the Global Fund for 2011-2013, which
is a commitment of almost €1 billion. Over the same
period, we will devote almost €300 million to
UNITAID. That is also the reason that, during the last
summit in Deauville, the Group of Eight reiterated its
commitment to support the Global Fund and reaffirmed
its determination to improve maternal health to fight
against mother-to-child virus transmission.

In this context, the Security Council has a
particular responsibility - first of all, to act on the
factors of the spread of the disease, in particular, sex
abuse. Since the adoption of resolution 1308 (2000),
the Security Council has been fighting against all
forms of sexual violence against women and children,
which involves a zero-tolerance policy, and has made
every effort so that impeccable discipline is maintained
within the ranks of the Blue Helmets and the United
Nations civilian staff in peacekeeping missions.

There is also the responsibility to take into
account the challenges of HIV/AIDS during post-
conflict and reconstruction phases, including with
respect to the management of the displacement of
populations.

Finally, there is the responsibility to encourage
and assist in the development of national strategies to
fight AIDS on the basis of the values and commitments
propagated by the United Nations - respect for human
rights, the decriminalization of homosexuality,
attention to vulnerable populations and fighting against
stigmatization and discrimination against persons
living with HIV.

In spite of all of our efforts, the AIDS pandemic
is a growing human and social cost, particularly for the
poorest and weakest countries. Therefore, today more
than ever, AIDS is a threat to international peace and
security. Let us spare no efforts. Like the Secretary-
General, France shares the view of a world without
new infections, without discrimination and without
deaths associated with AIDS. That is an enormous
challenge, but it is a challenge in the service of peace.
It is a challenge for all ofus.

