I am delivering this statement on behalf of Ms. Asma Mohamed Abdalla, Foreign Minister of the Republic of the Sudan. On behalf of the Republic of the Sudan, I congratulate Germany on assuming the Security Council presidency for the month of July and for convening this timely debate on the situation in Libya. I would like to take this opportunity to welcome His Excellency Mr. Heiko Maas, German Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs. The Sudanese people recognize and appreciate His Excellency's visit to Khartoum as one of the first foreign visits to the Sudan after the success of its peaceful revolution. May I also take this opportunity to convey once again my Government's thanks to Germany for successfully organizing the Sudan Partnership Conference in late June. I would also like to thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres for the United Nations role at that conference and for his briefing today. The Sudan attaches great importance to the political and security situation in Libya. It is not only that the two countries share borders with each other, but also because what happens in Libya can affect, positively or negatively, the national security and political stability ofthe Sudan. Therefore, we have been closely following the developments in the country, as well as the initiatives to narrow the differences among the various actors in Libya. We thus once again express our support for those initiatives. In that regard, it is our conviction that all Libya's neighbouring States should be engaged in any international or regional arrangements seeking to stop the fighting in Libya and save our brothers there from the scourge of war, destruction and unnecessary external interference. The neighbouring States have not only a vital interest in a peaceful Libya that lives at peace with itself and its neighbours, but also a fundamental role to play in bringing that peace to the country. The Sudan remains firm in its position that no military solution will ever put an end to the conflict in Libya. The situation in Libya is of a political nature and can be solved only through negotiation and dialogue between the parties to address their political differences through peaceful means. Let me take this opportunity to point out that, while we are aware of some reports about the involvement of Sudanese individuals and non-State actors in the conflict in Libya, the Sudanese Government categorically denies any participation of Sudanese troops in support of the belligerent parties in Libya. On the contrary, the Sudan has repeatedly offered to form a joint military force between the Sudan and Libya to secure the borders from any illegal crossings, whether in the form of individual fighters, human traffickers or organized criminal groups. Just last week, the Sudanese Armed Forces detained 122 Sudanese nationals who were trying to illegally cross the borders to Libya, presumably to fight there or cross the Mediterranean to Europe. To conclude, the Sudan remains supportive of the Government of National Accord in Libya. We also reiterate our support for Libya's sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity. We look forward to any engagement that realizes the Libyan people's aspiration to security, reconciliation and sustainable peace.
