Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): We
are meeting today to listen once again to an account
detailing the suffering of our brother people of Syria
under the blows of protracted proxy conflict, against a
backdrop of successive failures - not just a failure to
reach a final settlement of the crisis, but a failure even to
mitigate it. Despite the deep political divisions between
the parties with influence in the conflict - which have
had an impact on the Security Council performance on
the issue, rendering it incapable ofproducing a result in
three previous attempts that sought only to salvage what
was salvageable - we have a duty to our brothers and
sisters in Syria. Egypt has therefore been working with
our fellow penholders, Spain and New Zealand, to reach
a minimum consensus on measures that can be taken on
the Syria dossier, particularly regarding Aleppo, with
a view to alleviating humanitarian suffering. In that
regard, we have developed a comprehensive approach
in the form of a draft resolution that covers most of the
urgent issues as much as possible.

The draft resolution includes principal points, the
most important of which is halting attacks by all parties
in Aleppo for at least 10 successive days in order to
allow immediate and urgent humanitarian access to the
inhabitants of the city through full coordination with
the United Nations and its partners. It also includes
elements related to the necessity of implementing the
cessation of hostilities across Syria in accordance
with resolution 2268 (2016). It also includes support
for instruments to help monitor that implementation.
The draft resolution clearly calls for cooperation and
coordination to annihilate the pockets of terrorism in
Syria and the terrorist groups that control major parts
of the Syrian territory. It also clearly calls upon all
parties to heed the will of the international community
by putting an end to all cooperation and association
with all terrorist groups, particularly Jabhat Al-Nusra
Front and Jabhat Fatah Al-Sham. That would be at the
political or operational level. The draft resolution also
reaffirms the pivotal role of the International Syria
Support Group (ISSG) and its two co-Chairs so that
the ISSG could work to implement the elements I just
mentioned. It calls for the start of serious negotiations
between the Syrian parties on a transitional period in
accordance with the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex) and resolution 2254 (2016) as soon as possible.
We, along with our partner penholders, took the utmost
care in making the drafting of the draft resolution clear
and unambiguous. It includes a reporting mechanism
of the Secretary-General on its implementation. It is
time for all parties to shoulder their responsibility with
respect to the Syrian people.

Despite the clear linkage between the events in
Syria, the concept of Arab national security and the
national security of Egypt, and in the light of the
historic relations that link the Egyptian and Syrian
peoples - Egypt and Syria actually used to be one
State - Egypt has kept a clean record with respect
to its position on the Syrian crisis over the past years.
Since the beginning of the crisis, we have neither
supported any specific party to the conflict nor engaged
in any attempts to exploit the Syrian tragedy. That is
in spite of certain political interests. I would like to
reaffirm that Egypt will continue down that path. We
will not contribute - whether through words, action
or inaction - to the destruction of a brotherly Arab
country, regardless of any justification or reason. We
will continue to implement a policy towards Syria
that does not take anything into consideration apart
from Syrian interests and their hopes of a democratic,
unified, sovereign and safe State that is free of terrorism
and extremism. We will not submit to compromise
or political interests. Those are actually the reasons
for the daily unprecedented tragedies that have led
to the displacement and loss of lives of millions of
innocent Syrians.

In conclusion, I would like to call upon

everyone - members of the Council, members of
the ISSG and other relevant parties that may hold
influence - to set their own interests and political

grievances aside. We should all genuinely work to
resolve this crisis, which has had disastrous effects at
the humanitarian, political and security levels.

