Mr. Heusgen (Germany): It is an honour to have here the Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). I think it is very rare that the Security Council meets a person who is at the same time a basketball player, an artist, a Prime Minister and the OSCE Chairperson-in-Office. I welcome him to the Council. I followed very carefully what he said about the OSCE. He concluded by underlining the principles of the OSCE, which remain as valid today as when the organization was founded. Germany is a founding member of the OSCE and has been very supportive of what it believes to be a key organization. We also subscribe to what the Chairperson-in-Office said about the OSCE and the United Nations being natural partners. Germany therefore very much promotes the partnership between the two organizations, which, after all, share fundamental principles and - as the OSCE Chairperson-in-Office stated - defend multilateralism, which is under threat. Germany engages financially and provides personnel to the OSCE, which we chaired in 2016. Germany also fully supports the programmes and thematic issues highlighted by the Chairperson-in- Office, including defending fundamental human rights, preventing violence against women, promoting good governance, as well combating anti-Semitism, organized crime, counter-terrorism and the spread of small arms. I would highlight all of those points and, in particular, one issue that is very close to our heart - that is, both the role of women in promoting the participation of women in Government and peace talks and protecting them, especially from sexual violence. I would like to focus on the first part of the presentation of the Chairperson-in-Office. The work of the OSCE is making a difference on the ground. We very much appreciate the fact that he focused on the protracted crises in the territory of the OSCE. He mentioned the Caucasus and reminded us of Moldova and Transnistria, where Russian troops remain, in violation of the 1999 Istanbul OSCE summit commitments. We can only promote and support the OSCE's efforts. Over the past six years, the OSCE has invested more in Ukraine than in any other country. Germany truly appreciates the fact that the Chairperson-in-Office's first visit, very early on, was to Ukraine, where he visited Stanytsia Luhanska, whose bridge has on many occasions been the subject of discussions here. I recall our appeals to both sides to reconstruct the bridge to alleviate the plight of the people. It is wonderful that this is happening, and I thank the Chairperson-in- Office for the message he sent by going there. Germany remains committed to the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine. It is now six years since Russia invaded and annexed parts of Ukraine, the Crimea, and it still occupies part of Ukraine, in flagrant breach of international law. Together with France, Germany continues in the Normandy Format to ensure that the situation improves, and some progress was made at the Normandy Four summit on 9 December in Paris. We appeal to all sides to continue to implement the results of the summit. In that connection, I would like to congratulate President Zelenskyy on what he has done since assuming office with regard to the bridge and the implementation of the Steinmeier formula, as well as other gestures he has made. I also appeal to Russia to adhere to the Minsk agreements. As the OSCE Chairperson-in-Office mentioned earlier, the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine (SMM) is the OSCE's flagship operation. I would like to take this opportunity to once again congratulate the observers, who are working under difficult circumstances. They are continuously harassed and intimidated and their work is obstructed. We condemn the continued threats and restrictions of movement against the SMM. Those actions occur predominantly in the areas not controlled by the Government, that is, the areas invaded by Russia. We call on both sides to ensure unhindered access for the SMM, which continues to deserve our full support in carrying out its important mandate. I recall the briefing (see S/PV.8516) in April 2019 by the outgoing Chief Monitor of the OSCE SMM, Ambassador Apakan, who also confirmed the difficult circumstances under which they are operating and the fact that they were harassed primarily in the occupied territories. In that context, I deplore the difficult situation that OSCE finds itself in and note that SMM instruments were also attacked. An SMM unmanned aerial vehicle - a drone - was observing Russian convoys crossing the border and was shot down.
