Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
would like to congratulate the United States on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
this month and to assure it of our support. We also
congratulate the United Kingdom on its successful
presidency in November and appreciate all of the work
it accomplished. We thank Special Representative
Hennis-Plasschaert and Mr. Robert Mardini, Permanent
Observer of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, for their briefings. We also listened attentively
to the statement by Archbishop Bashar Matti Warda
of Erbil.

The current situation in Iraq has drawn international
attention. Maintaining stability and restoring order
there are top priorities. The Iraqi Government has taken
a number of measures to respond to the demands of
the Iraqi people, with positive results. We believe that
Iraq has the ability and wisdom to find an appropriate
solution to the current crisis and defuse the situation as
soon as possible. During its visit to the country in June,
the Security Council reiterated its firm support for
Iraq's efforts to achieve economic recovery, peace and
stability, national reconciliation and reconstruction.
The Council should continue to demonstrate support
for Iraq in a spirit of mutual respect and cooperation
on an equal footing, with a view to benefiting all
concerned and achieving a win-win outcome. Iraq has
been developing friendly relations with neighbouring
countries and working to reduce regional tensions, and
China appreciates those efforts. At the same time, Iraq
is still at a critical stage in consolidating the outcomes
of its counter-terrorism efforts, achieving peace
and stability and advancing national reconstruction.
All parties should fully respect Iraq's sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity and
continue to support its efforts.

First, we should firmly support the inclusive
political dialogue and national reconciliation process in
Iraq. In recent years, with the support of the international
community, Iraq has worked hard to ensure national
security and stability, establish the Kurdistan Regional
Government, promote communication and dialogue
and steadily advance national reconciliation and
reconstruction. In the current circumstances it is more
important than ever for the international community to
maintain its support for Iraq's efforts to achieve inclusive
reconciliation and harmonious coexistence and support
all the parties in Iraq in engaging in peaceful and
meaningful dialogue, with the fundamental interests
and needs of the Iraqi people in mind. China welcomes
the improved relations between the central Government
of Iraq and the Kurdistan Regional Government, and
looks forward to seeing them reach an agreement on oil-
revenue distribution and security arrangements as soon
as possible. We welcome the constructive role of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI)
in that regard.

Secondly, we should continue to support Iraq
in consolidating the results of its counter-terrorism
efforts and safeguarding national security. Iraq has
made huge sacrifices in the international fight against
terrorism, which nonetheless remains a threat to its
security and stability. Considering Iraq's national
situation and the progress ofits national reconstruction,
steady efforts should be made to resolve the issue of
internally displaced persons in Iraq and to provide it
with robust support in addressing the issue of foreign
terrorist fighters and their families. The international
community should fully respect Iraq's sovereignty
and jurisdiction and support it in bringing terrorists to
justice in accordance with its relevant domestic laws.
The United Nations Investigative Team to Promote
Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da'esh/
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant should engage in
close consultations with the Government and carry out
its work in accordance with its mandate.

Thirdly, we should actively promote Iraq's
economic recovery and expedite its reconstruction.
The Iraqi Government has adopted an integrated
approach in order to actively attract foreign investment,
improve the business environment and promote youth
employment - examples of some of the many goals
it has set in response to public demands concerning
development and people's livelihoods - and these
efforts deserve international recognition. In strict
accordance with its mandate, UNAMI should support the
Iraqi Government in its efforts to promote stability and
development and respect Iraq's leadership in handling
its internal affairs. The international community
should fulfil its commitments effectively, continue to
provide support and aid to Iraq and assist it in finding a
development pathway suited to its national conditions.

China firmly supports Iraq in its efforts to safeguard
national sovereignty and territorial integrity, as well as
its nationally owned endeavour to handle its internal
affairs and challenges, and opposes any external
interference in its internal affairs. China is ready to
work with the international community in support of
Iraq's efforts to maintain peace and stability and combat
terrorism. We will continue our active participation in
the reconstruction of Iraq's energy infrastructure and
other sectors, and will assist in Iraq's economic and
social development to the best of our abilities in order
to help it achieve stability and development.

