Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to
thank you for convening this debate on the political
situation in Haiti. We also appreciate the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2016/225), which was introduced
by his Special Representative and Head of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH),
Ms.Sandra Honore'. I congratulate her and the men and
women of the Mission for their ardous work to ensure
the stability and development of the Haitian people.

We endorse the statement to be delivered by the
representative of Peru on behalf of the Group of Friends
of Haiti, of which we are a member.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela continues
to support the people and Government of Haiti in
strengthening their democratic institutions. Recent
Violence, which has led to institutional and electoral
uncertainty, was overcome by the firm political will
of all elements of Haitian society, who in a show of
democratic commitment signed the political agreement
for institutional continuity on 5 February. The road map
that has been established according to constitutional
principles has launched what we hope will be a brief
institutional transition, with the appointment of a
President and Prime Minister, in order to complete
the presidential election process in that sisterly
Caribbean nation.

We appreciate the fact that, in this effort to
preserve institutional continuity and advance the
electoral process in Haiti, at the request of the Haitian
Government, the good offices of the United Nations, the
Organization of American States, and the Community
of Latin American and Caribbean States have been
deployed. The international community should fully
support the decision of the Haitian people to find a
political solution to the current crisis, in strict adherence
to the principles of the sovereignty, independence and
self-determination of that country.

It is also necessary to urge all political and social
actors to continue to participate in inclusive and
constructive dialogue, in the interests of political
stability and institutional strengthening in Haiti. The
political tensions of recent months reflect one of the
chronic problems facing that sisterly nation, derived
from the country's still fragile institutional framework,
the product of a history plagued by foreign intervention,
coups and brutal dictatorships that have kept the
Haitian people in conditions of extreme poverty and
political and social exclusion, and that have perpetuated
destabilization and political instability, all of which
has had disastrous consequences for the stability and
sovereign economic development of that nation.

This situation ofpolitical and social instability was
aggravated by the terrible earthquake that struck Haiti,
killing more than 300,000 people and destroying all the
country's infrastructure and services. In the current
scenario, the grave human impact of the emergence
and spread of cholera since 2010 cannot be ignored.
More than five years after its appearance, hundreds
of cases continue to be recorded each week. In 2015,
322 people died and about 36,000 cases were reported.
So far this year, 54 people have died and 5,452 cases
have been reported. We encourage the international
community to devote more resources to support the
measures put forward in the framework of the national
plan for the elimination of cholera in Haiti from 2013
to 2022, which help affected families to overcome that
public health problem and prevent the disease from
becoming endemic.

Similarly, in the humanitarian field, we are
concerned about the situation of food insecurity
resulting from the drought of recent years, which was
caused by climatic imbalances in the Caribbean region.
More than 1.5 million Haitians are affected by the
consequent decline in crop yields from March to June,
which could exacerbate the humanitarian situation and
stability of the country.

Venezuela recognizes the work that has been
carried out by MINUSTAH in assisting Haitian
authorities during the country's stabilization and
development process. In that regard, we attach
particular importance to the continued improvement
of the capacities and professionalism of the Haitian
National Police, in accordance with the 2012-2016
strategic plan. The National Police has been highly
successful in containing, deterring and controlling
public demonstrations following the recent political
uncertainty. We believe that, in the light of the current
security challenges in Haiti, including those related to
the ongoing electoral process, any decision regarding
the future of MINUSTAH should be based on the
security and stability of the country within the process
of building institutional capacity and in coordination
with the authorities of the new Haitian Government.
We appreciate the recommendation of the
Secretary-General in his report (S/2016/225) to carry
out the strategic assessment referred to in resolution
2243 (2015), after the completion ofthe electoral process
and the establishment of a newly elected Government,
in order to assess the future presence and role of the
United Nations in Haiti, provided that this process and
new elections do not exceed the established deadline of
120 days.

Venezuela is committed to the democratic
development and political and social stability of a
free and sovereign Haiti. In that regard we consider
it necessary to highlight - beyond the episodes of
Violence - the many positive developments taking place
in Haiti, such as the South-South cooperation that has
been implemented in that brotherly Caribbean country.
Examples of good practices with regard to cooperation
in Haiti are many. They have significant social,
economic and nutritional impacts and are intended
to help strengthen the State, with the participation
of the Haitian people. In that context, of particular
relevance are the social programmes implemented with
the cooperation of Venezuela, the Bolivarian Alliance
for the Peoples of Our America and PetroCaribe.
They have contributed to the construction of housing,
infrastructure and services and have supplied fuel,
all of which are decisive factors for the stability and
development possibilities of the country.

In conclusion, we wish to emphasize that Haiti is
more than a neighbour for the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela. We are united by historical ties of solidarity
that go back to the struggle for independence in the
nineteenth century, when President Alexandre Petion
decisively supported the Liberator, Simon Bolivar,
which we will never forget. We are deeply committed
to the present and future of Haiti's people. Anything
we are able to do will be insufficient if there is no
progress in the building of institutional capacity and
in the creation of economic conditions that would make
it possible to overcome the poverty afflicting country.
In that regard, support and international assistance to
achieve these goals are necessary today more than ever.
We cannot abandon the Haitian people.

