Mr. Ragaglini (Italy): Italy aligns itself with the
statement to be delivered later on behalf of the
European Union. I should like to make a few remarks
in my national capacity.

First of all, however, I would like to remember
Richard Holbrooke. I had a chance to know him at the
time when his diplomatic skills and determination were
devoted to the Balkans. His passionate contribution to
the cause of a free and democratic Afghanistan is an
important legacy for all of us.

Italy welcomes the report (S/2010/630) prepared
by the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) on the situation in that country.
We reiterate our strong support for UNAMA's work to
assure coherence in the international effort and to help
Afghanistan in its transition towards full ownership.
That process, designed by Afghan authorities and
endorsed at the NATO Summit in Lisbon, shall be
steady, gradual and condition-based. The Summit
decided that the transition would start in 2011, with
2014 set as a realistic target for a credible transfer of
responsibility in the areas of security, governance and
development. At the same time, we all are committed
to assisting Afghanistan as an equal partner beyond
2014, within a joint and coherent framework in which
UNAMA maintains a pivotal role.

The Afghan Government and the international
community now need to make a concerted and
sustained effort to address obstacles to the achievement
of a sustainable and irreversible transition. All the
components of that process are interdependent and
mutually reinforcing. In other words, progress in
security, governance and development should go hand-
in-hand with a constructive dialogue among all of the
political and ethnic parties of Afghan society.

Political reconciliation must be an Afghan-led
process that complies with national laws and
fundamental rights and is supported by regional
partners. Inclusiveness and participation should be the
High Peace Council's guiding principles. Consensus on
full respect for core national values will lay a strong
foundation for Afghan institutions.

A successful reintegration process will contribute
to reconciliation by building mutual confidence and
curbing the influence of insurgency. That is why we
welcome the Afghan peace and reintegration
programme approved at the Kabul Conference as the
expression of a balanced and Afghan-owned process.
However, the programme should remain within the
agreed red lines and be closely tied to the security
agenda. To be sustainable, it should follow a
community-centred approach and be gradually fine-
tuned to meet local needs and realities. Improving
living conditions, creating job opportunities and
harmonizing traditional decision-making and dispute-
settlement mechanisms with a modern decentralized
administration are fundamental to a positive outcome
in the reintegration efforts.

From that perspective, our endeavour is aimed
primarily at ensuring that the Kabul process does not
lose momentum. Notable progress has been made in
conceiving a procedural and monitoring framework.
Now we have to encourage the Afghan Government to
translate national priority programmes into concrete
action, so that tangible results will be directly
perceived by Afghan communities throughout the
country.

At the core of the implementation phase is the
idea of Afghan potential for sustainable development,
in terms of human and natural resources, and of the
widest possible participation of civil society. Each
phase should be geared towards the primary target of
establishing a functional economy and an accountable
and efficient Government.

While security is gradually improving, thanks to
better training and mentoring of the Afghan Security
Forces, Italy's action is shifting towards
civilianization, with a focus on capacity- and
institution-building and encouraging dialogue between
Afghan citizens and their representatives. We are
committed to fostering a balanced relationship among
different levels of Government through enhanced
coordination, increased administrative capacities and a
predictable flow of resources from the centre to the

periphery.

Justice and the rule of law deserve more attention
and international support. We remain committed to a
sound reform of the Afghan public administration and
justice systems, to which we would provide our
expertise while supporting the European Union's
growing efforts.

Scarred by decades of warfare, Afghanistan has
the opportunity to break the vicious cycle of poverty
and dependence. That is why we are committed to
helping to create an enabling climate for investment by
improving financial services and local
entrepreneurship. Our aim is to trigger a self-sustaining
process that is rooted in the people and the resources
available to them. Such a process will provide
otherwise unattainable technical assistance, investment
opportunities and modern processing systems while
keeping the main focus and responsibility on the
Afghan people.
In conclusion, it is urgent for us to start working
with the Afghan Government, the newly-elected Wolesi
Jirga and civil society, with the crucial support of
UNAMA. A long-term electoral reform must be
initiated that builds on lessons learned from the 2009
and 2010 elections. Comprehensive reform is
indispensable to a balanced relationship between the
Government and its people, within the framework of
the Afghan Constitution.

