Mr. Mulet: The report before the Council
(S/2012/72) details the situation in Kosovo and related
activities of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) from 16 October 2011 to
15 January 2012.

While the situation on the ground has calmed
down since the Security Council's last meeting on
UNMIK (see S/PV.6670), it remains fragile. In
presenting this first UNMIK report of 2012, I would
2

like to take the opportunity to look ahead to a year in
which renewed attention from the Security Council is
merited - even as other pressing matters demand its
scrutiny and concern. I believe that such attention will
be essential if we are not to squander real opportunities
to resolve long-standing differences and consolidate
long-term peace and stability in the region.

First, let me touch on the situation in the northern
part of Kosovo, which is well documented in the report
before the Council. The clashes in an ethnically mixed
neighbourhood in northern Mitrovica on 9 November
2011, and the clashes on 23 and 28 November 2011
between Serb demonstrators and Kosovo Force
(KFOR) soldiers, marked a very tense start to the
current reporting period. However, as the dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina was resuming in
Brussels following a three-month hiatus, all sides
renewed their efforts to stabilize the situation on the
ground and focused their attention on achieving results
through good faith engagement.

On 29 November 2011, Serbian President Boris
Tadie publicly called for the dismantling of all Kosovo
Serb roadblocks in the north. Although some municipal
leaders in the north have continued to disregard that
message, notably those belonging to Serbian opposition
parties, discussions on the ground - variously
involving UNMIK, the European Union (EU) Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) and KFOR - have
resulted in a relative stabilization of the situation.

As a result of those coordinated efforts to calm
tensions in the north, KFOR's ability to conduct
essential operations there has substantially improved
compared with the previous reporting period. The
northern Kosovo Serbs, while continuing to protest
EULEX transport by helicopter of Kosovo officials to
the northern crossing points, have nonetheless recently
begun to allow EULEX greater freedom of movement,
including as part of KFOR convoys along the major
routes in the north.

Alongside these modest improvements, however,
other significant political challenges continue to
emerge. At present, local leaders in the north are
proceeding with plans to conduct a referendum next
week on the acceptance by the local Kosovo Serbs of
the Kosovo institutions. This is despite clear opposition
to this initiative from Belgrade, as well as from some
of the Kosovo Serb leaders residing in the south. This
is another case where close cooperation between all
12-22578
stakeholders on the ground will be crucial to ensuring
that potential tensions are kept under control and
common messages are conveyed.

The Head of UNMIK, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Farid Zarif, recently conveyed to
local leaders in the north that they must seek
legitimacy through elections that are in conformity
with applicable laws. Although UNMIK is no longer in
a position to administer such elections in Kosovo, it
will be ready to facilitate them, along with
international partners, so long as a fitting modality can
be found and agreed upon. Assisting in the matter of
ensuring legitimate municipal representation in the
north must be a joint and immediate priority of the
international community, in the earliest practicable
time frame.

This reporting period also saw considerable
progress in the EU-facilitated dialogue between
Pristina and Belgrade, both through new agreements
reached and through the implementation of previous
agreements. The dialogue restarted in November under
challenging circumstances, but positive results were
achieved during sessions in November and early
December, demonstrating that practical agreements,
designed to alleviate daily problems, are achievable. In
particular, the agreement on the integrated management
of crossing points, while awaiting the finalization of
detailed implementation modalities, represents an
important breakthrough and an encouraging signal of
goodwill from each party.

It is noteworthy that, during the period when
Pristina and Belgrade maintained an intensive
engagement in this process, tensions on the ground
decreased considerably and the potential for stability
increased. It is therefore crucial that the sides maintain
their commitment to engaging in a constructive
dialogue, and that we continue to help to ensure that
peaceful conditions are maintained on the ground in
order to avoid unnecessary interruptions. The Council's
active assistance in encouraging both parties to move
more resolutely towards viable solutions on the issues
that divide them is therefore extremely important.

Special Representative Zarif, in his briefing to
this Council in November 2011, called upon the parties
to show "goodwill, pragmatism, boldness, courage...
and full statesman-like responsibility" (S/PV6670, p. 5). I would like to renew this call and note that,
recently, there have been some tentative yet
12-22578
encouraging signs of readiness by the political
leadership, both in Belgrade and in Pristina, to elevate
the quality of their public discourse and use more
conciliatory language. I hope that this represents the
beginning of a trend that will grow during the year, in
spite of the political obstacles faced by each side. Key
international stakeholders can and should play a
decisive role in ensuring that these positive gestures
are translated into concrete actions.

The attention of the Council is presently drawn to
other urgent crises. However, I would be remiss should
I not take the opportunity today to say that the state of
affairs in Kosovo still carries a number of risks that
could become more entrenched with each passing year.
Optimistic assumptions that a durable solution will
simply evolve, even without a clear vision from a more
united engagement of the international community, are
belied by dynamics on the ground. This is particularly
true, but not limited to the developments we witnessed
in northern Kosovo during the last quarter of 2011.

We are certain that these dynamics can be
harnessed, but also equally certain that that will be
possible only if renewed energy and focus are applied
by all those with the means and interest to do so. As
the European Union steps forward in a leadership role,
achieving political progress equally demands better
cohesion of the efforts of all engaged international
actors.

Therefore, today I would like to urge all
stakeholders to take stock of their current engagements
in Kosovo. The financial cost of maintaining the
international presences in Kosovo is high. It includes,
in broad terms, some $47 million annually for UNMIK;
around €l40 million for EULEX; €23 million for the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe;
as well as combined annual operational costs to NATO
and to KFOR troop-contributing countries that bring
the total close to half a billion dollars.

We should each be asking whether these
considerable expenditures are being applied as
rationally and efficiently as they could be and, even
more importantly, whether they are contributing in a
coordinated fashion towards a solution under which
such expenditures can safely be reduced in the
foreseeable future. In the course of 2012, it is critical
that we do not miss the opportunity of jointly
addressing fundamental issues of efficiency, as well as
of common political purpose and vision. This new year
3
could be the time to reexamine our assumptions and to
seek fresh approaches.

Finally, I would like to thank the members of the
Council for their support to UNMIK and for their
efforts to tackle the problems outlined in the present
report. We hope that they will maintain that support,
especially by helping to promote the greater
international unity of purpose and efficiency of effort
needed for progress to be made during 2012.

