Mr. Dauth (Australia): I appreciate the fact that
these days we try to limit courtesies, as a way of
making the Security Council more efficient. But it
would be wrong of me on this first occasion that I am
speaking before the Council since your arrival, Sir, not
to warmly welcome you to New York and to
congratulate you on a highly efficient and effective
presidency this month. It is very good to be here today.

Australia very much welcomes the Secretary-
General's excellent report (S/2004/669) on the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET)
and also this morning's very comprehensive and
helpful briefing from my friend Hedi Annabi. As the
report shows, UNMISET continues to make significant
progress in acquitting itself of its mandate, facilitating
Timor-Leste's transition to self-sufficiency. But there
still are many challenges ahead, including the
development of Timor-Leste's police and justice
sectors.

Although the decision will not be before the
Council until November, our firm View is that
UNMISET should continue in its current form through
May 2005. We are not in favour of an early withdrawal
or downsizing of the mission's police or military
elements.

We share the Secretary-General's assessment that
Timor-Leste's law-enforcement agencies, including the
Rapid Intervention Unit, require further training and
development to strengthen their technical skills and
professional values. It has been much discussed this
morning, but the events of 19 and 20 July at the
veterans demonstration highlighted a need for ongoing
capacity-building in Timor-Leste's national police
service. I particularly appreciate the comments of our
colleague Ambassador Guterres about measures which
his Government is taking in that respect. I think this
also highlights the value of having an emergency
backup international police response unit in place until
20 May 2005. The unit, in our View, must remain at its
present strength. It is important that UNMISET
continue to provide the time which Timor-Leste needs
to strengthen its key institutions and to consolidate the
gains made to date. It is also important that that time be
efficiently and productively used.

I am pleased to tell the Council that the joint
Australia-United Kingdom police development
programme - which was mobilized in July,
committing $A32 million over four and a half years -
is making good progress; I am also pleased that others
have made reference to that. The programme has been
well received by the Government of Timor-Leste. We
will continue to stand alongside our neighbour to help
bring opportunities and stability to the people of
Timor-Leste, not least through our commitment of 100
military and 17 police personnel to the current United
Nations Mission and through our significant
development assistance, police and defence
programmes.

There has been much discussion this morning
about the maritime boundary negotiations between
Australia and Timor-Leste. I should say very clearly
that no country is more aware than mine of the
significance of those negotiations. Our Foreign
Minister, Mr. Downer, met with Ambassador Guterres's
Foreign Minister, Mr. Ramos-Horta, as recently as 11
August to discuss that issue. I am pleased to report to
the Council that those discussions made very
significant progress and that Australia and East Timor
are now much closer to an agreement on a framework
for a settlement on permanent maritime boundaries.
Both our countries are pursuing a creative approach
that preserves the fundamental interests of both
Australia and Timor-Leste. For our part, Australia
believes in the strength of its legal position, and
sovereignty is also a key issue. We look forward to
working with Timor-Leste to resolve outstanding issues
as soon as possible. In that context, I should report that
the second round of negotiations is likely to be held
next month, in September.

As members are aware, Australia has been a
significant contributor to the international effort in
support of our newest nation. As a neighbour and as a
friend, we can be relied upon to continue that effort.

