Mr. Listre (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
congratulate you, Sir, on having assumed the office of
President. I am delighted that the Council will be
guided by someone with such experience, firmness,
determination and sense of duty at a time when it is
dealing with so delicate a situation as is before us this
afternoon. Allow me also to thank the Ambassador of
Mali for his effective leadership of the Council last
month, also a very important period, with the holding
of the Millennium Summit.

The Argentine Republic observes with great
concern and deep regret the clashes that have caused
upheavals in Israel and in the Palestinian territories in
recent days. My country condemns the violence and
regrets the fact that innocent lives have been taken, and
it extends its most heartfelt condolences to the families
of the victims. Argentina rejects the excessive use of
force and urges the parties involved to act with the
maximum caution, and in particular to refrain from
causing or tolerating acts of provocation, which could
exacerbate the delicate situation and jeopardize the
peace process.

My delegation reaffirms the need to pursue the
peace process, the only way to resolve the Middle East
conflict, and urges the parties to return to the
negotiating table in order to reach a definitive solution
to the conflict, taking into account Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1974).

This is an opportune time to reaffirm my
country's position regarding the Middle East conflict.
The Argentine Republic has traditionally recognized
Israel's right to live in peace with its neighbours within
secure and internationally recognized borders.
Similarly, we recognize the right of the Palestinian
people to self-determination, including the
establishment of an independent sovereign State, which
we hope can live in peace and harmony with Israel and
its other neighbours.

Argentina welcomes the initiative of the United
States Government in convening a meeting of the
leaders of Israel and Palestine in Paris tomorrow, 4
October. We congratulate the United States
Government on this timely action and the French
Government on hosting the meeting. We also support
the initiative of the Egyptian Government in holding a
meeting between Prime Minister Barak and President
Arafat in Cairo on 5 October. We hope that these
initiatives will help the parties control the situation and
put an end to the violence.

