Mr. Seck (spoke in French): On behalf of all the
members of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, a body that
my country, Senegal, has had the privilege of chairing
since its inception, I would like to congratulate you,
Madam President, on New Zealand's outstanding
conduct of its presidency of the Security Council this
month 4 sincere and well-deserved congratulations,
since your presidency has been packed with significant
events and results, including, 1 am pleased to say,
the Council's adoption on Monday of resolution 2231
(2015), endorsing the P5+1's agreement on the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action on Iran's nuclear
capacity, as well as the important open debate, wisely
planned for 30 July and marking the end of your
presidency, on the major security challenges faced by
small island developing States. I hope those positive
developments will be reflected in the situation in the
Middle East in general and in particular the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict, which is inarguably that situation's
Gordian knot.
We cannot repeat it too often: the unresolved Israeli-
Palestinian conflict has been, and still remains, the chief
source of the instability and insecurity afflicting the
Middle East and far beyond. Many of the extremist and
violent groups currently proliferating in the region use
the fact of the injustice done to the Palestinian people
as a pretext in their attempts to legitimize their harmful
activities. It has been 47 years since the occupation of
the Palestinian territories began, 40 since the General
Assembly established the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People and
20 since the Oslo process stalled. It is high time that the
Security Council, the supreme organ responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security, found
a way to impose a final settlement of the Israeli-Arab
conflict through a solution based on two States, the
State ofIsrael and the State of Palestine, living side by
side along the 1967 borders.

It is up to the Security Council to end this
anachronism, which, in addition to being an injustice
and an impediment to the respect or international
law, is contrary to the ideals and aims of the United
Nations, whose seventieth anniversary the international
community is preparing to celebrate in a few weeks,
when it will adopt a sustainable and inclusive
development programme that leaves no nation or
individual behind.

The long cycle of direct negotiations between
Palestinians and Israelis is now at an impasse,
punctuated by violence, the rampant grabbing of
Palestinian land, the continued imposition of settlements
and the blockade imposed on Gaza 4 all of which
culminated last summer in the deadliest war that Gaza
has ever known..The diplomatic efforts to establish a
vital timeline for ending the occupation of Palestinian
and other Arab territories did not come to fruition
last December in the Council. Should the Council not,
therefore, take inspiration from the multilateral process
leading to the adoption, last Monday, of resolution 2231
(2015) on the Iranian nuclear issue? Should it not take
inspiration from that process and launch a vigorous
diplomatic initiative for the definitive settlement of
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, based on the two-
state solution 4 with the State of Israel and the State
of Palestine, living side by side in peace and security
within the pre-1967 borders?

Such a collective process could involve the action of
an expanded Quartet, with the participation of regional
Powers, supported by the Arab Peace Initiative, and an
international conference, which was proposed in the
past by the Russian Federation. It could also involve the
approach that France proposed in the Security Council,
an approach that seeks a comprehensive settlement of
the conflict within a reasonable time frame.

For its part, the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People continues
to discharge its mandate conscientiously, pleading,
when necessary, for the Palestinian people's right to
self-determination, as well as for the appropriateness
of a Palestinian State, in the spirit, if not the letter,
of the founding resolution 181 (1967). In so doing,
the Committee works together with all individuals
or entities 4 whether Palestinian or Israeli 4 and
all others that might be able to make some type of
contribution to the advent of a just, peaceful and lasting
solution to the conflict.

This year, for example, the Committee organized
an international meeting on the humanitarian situation
in Gaza from 31 March to 1 April in Vienna, an
international consultation on legal aspects of the
question of Palestine in The Hague from 20 to 22 May,
and an international meeting more recently in Moscow
from 1 to 2 July to support the Israeli-Palestinian
peace process entitled, "The two-State solution: a key
prerequisite for achieving peace and stability in Middle
East". Among its future activities, the Committee
will, in cooperation with the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation, conduct a similar activity in Brussels at
the beginning of September 2015 on the topic entitled
"Israeli settlements in the occupied territories, obstacles
to peace. What solutions for tomorrow?"

For all practical purposes, I would remind you that
all of the Committee's activities and its reports and
recommendations are available and can be consulted on
the Committee's website.

