Indonesia commends the Niger for convening this important meeting. We also thank all the briefers for their insightful briefings, Ms. Bintou Keita and Her Excellency Ms. Mushikiwabo, and also welcome our old friend and colleague Minister Zohrab Mnatsakanyan, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Armenia. Indonesia commends the International Organization of la Francophonie (OIF) on its close cooperation with the United Nations, as well as its active engagement in conflict prevention and peacebuilding, as reflected in the Bamako Declaration. As the biggest troop and police-contributing country in the Security Council, Indonesia is currently deploying more than 2,500 peacekeepers, or 93 per cent of its peacekeepers, in numerous francophone countries. In this regard, we would like to highlight three important points. First, with regard to broadening cooperation with the United Nations and other regional organizations in conflict prevention, Indonesia welcomes the OIF's call for more frequent dialogues and consultations between the OIF and the United Nations in the field of conflict prevention. The OIF represents a unique collective identity bound by linguistic similarity, which transcends multiple regions around the globe. This is also reflected in the OIF's diverse experience in conflict prevention. This is a great asset for all United Nations members in our collective effort to promote international peace and security. Indonesia calls for the OIF to also broaden its cooperation with other regional cooperation bodies, such as the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), through dialogue and exchange of best practices in conflict prevention, peacebuilding and the maintenance of peace. Being a member of the ASEAN community, Indonesia firmly believes that dialogue is an essential part of conflict prevention, as well as peacekeeping. This brings to my second point, which is the understanding of local culture. Community engagement is an inseparable part of peacekeeping operations. It is imperative for all peacekeepers to fully understand the local culture to build dialogue and confidence among local communities and effectively fulfil their mandates. Indonesia firmly believes in the central role played by cultural and linguistic understanding in community engagement. We have stressed this repeatedly in the design of effective peacebuilding and peacekeeping missions. To that end, Indonesia remains committed to ensuring that all of its peacekeepers are equipped with basic training in local languages and customs of the areas where they are deployed. Thirdly, with regard to enhancing capacity-building for peacekeepers, as noted previously, the Security Council currently deploys peacekeeping operations and special political missions in several francophone countries. Inevitably, the scope of work necessitated in these missions calls for adequate French-speaking skills in the peacekeepers. We commend the OIF's commitment to strengthening its cooperation with the United Nations to increase the number of personnel with a satisfactory level of the French language in peacekeeping operations in francophone countries. We would like to note that such an initiative is especially important for peacekeepers from non-French speaking countries, and we call for more capacity-building programmes for those troop- and police-contributing countries. At present, we are the number one troop-contributing country in the Council, serving in eight missions, including five in francophone countries. Our troops have been successful in undertaking their duties because they learned from best experiences of other troop- and police- contributing countries, including francophone countries. A joint training exercise in peacekeeping training centres would certainly enhance coordination on the ground, and co-deployment would enhance peacekeeping. In conclusion, we would like to once again emphasize the importance of cooperation between the OIF and the United Nations to improve peacekeeping missions' capacity in the fulfilment of their mandates. Indonesia remains committed to promoting the synergy between the OIF and the United Nations in our common endeavour to maintain international peace and security.
