Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I would
like to thank Ambassador Osorio and the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) for their
continued work in support of the Security Council's
resolutions on Iran. In particular, I would like to thank
Ambassador Osorio for the open meeting he convened
on 9 July. That is exactly the kind of outreach activity
that the Committee should engage in.

I note that, while the Committee has not met during
this reporting period, there has been a high volume of
correspondence for the Committee to consider. It is
important work, but we do hope that the Committee
will meet early in the next reporting period to consider
how it might take forward the recommendations in the
Panel of Expert's last report, including the suggested
designations.

The United Kingdom, along with the international
community at large, remains deeply concerned about
Iran's nuclear programme. It is clear from the report
of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) of
30 August that the programme continues to develop in
a direction that offers no assurance of Iran's peaceful
intentions. We therefore welcome the IAEA Board of
Governor's resolution adopted on 13 September. The
overwhelming support for the resolution demonstrates
the depth of international concern over Iran's nuclear
activity. It sends a clear message to Iran that it must
urgently address the international community's serious
concerns.

Unfortunately, Iran's behaviour does the opposite.
It is worth highlighting the following from the IAEA
report. Iran continues to enrich uranium in violation
of the resolutions of the IAEA Board of Governors and
resolutions of the Security Council. There has been
a significant expansion of enrichment capacity at the
Fordow facility over recent months. Iranian authorities
have engaged in a clean-up of their Parchin facility,
which, the Agency reports, will significantly hamper
the Agency's verification efforts. None of those are
actions of a Government that takes its international
obligations seriously or that intends to cooperate with
the IAEA.

What they highlight is the worrying lack ofprogress
in dialogue between the IAEA and Iran on addressing
concerns about the possible military dimensions
of Iran's nuclear programme. We are clear that the
responsibility for that lack of progress lies firmly at
Iran's door. At every step, Iran has been uncooperative
and obstructive.

Despite such obstruction, the United Kingdom
remains fully committed to finding a peaceful and
negotiated solution to the issue. The E3+3 Governments
have met with Iran at the political and expert levels
on four occasions since April. Discussions have been
lengthy, tough and intensive, but conducted in an open
and businesslike manner. The E3+3 have presented a
credible package to Iran, focusing, as a first phase, on
the international community's key concerns regarding
the 20 per cent enrichment and the activities at the
Fordow site. Those are reasonable steps to request of
Iran if it is serious about restoring confidence in the
exclusively peaceful nature of its nuclear programme.

Significant differences between the two positions
remain, but the E3+3 continue to pursue negotiations
with Iran in good faith. Iran must negotiate seriously
and take urgent and concrete steps to allay the fears
of the international community. Until it does so, it
should be in no doubt that the international community
will continue to apply further pressure. If they do the
right thing, Iran's leaders can bring all sanctions to an
end and, in doing so, help Iran realize the benefits of
a civil nuclear programme. They have a clear choice:
to address international concerns through negotiation
and action or to face further economic hardship and
isolation.

We also remain deeply concerned about Iran's
stated support for the Al-Assad regime in Syria and
the evidence uncovered by the Panel of Experts to the
Committee in its June report on the supply of weaponry
(see S/2012/395, annex). It is unacceptable and must
stop. It is in stark contrast to the will of the Syrian
people and a reminder of Iran's hypocrisy in claiming
to support freedom in the Arab world.

We are also alarmed by Iran's links to terrorism and
its apparent increasing willingness to support terrorism
around the world. We are committed to the toughest
possible international response to Iran's support for
terrorism and its refusal to operate within the bounds
of international law.

The Iranian regime is at a crossroads. It can
continue to ignore the international community's
concerns over its nuclear programme or it can negotiate
a settlement that will help to realize the benefits of a
civil nuclear programme. It can support the oppressive
regime in Syria in suppressing freedom or it can play a
constructive role in its region. It can be an exporter of
terrorism or a responsible member of the international
community. However, it must make such choices soon.

