Mr. Dah (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
My delegation thanks the Russian Federation for
taking the initiative to organize this briefing on the
humanitarian situation in Raqqa and Rukban. We
also thank Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs, for his enlightening
briefing on the humanitarian situation in Syria, and in
particular on those two localities in the framework of
the implementation of resolution 2401 (2018).

Despite the recent relative lull, my delegation
remains concerned about the precariousness of the
humanitarian situation on the ground. Indeed, over two
months after its unanimous adoption, my delegation
notes with regret that resolution 2401 (2018) has
not been implemented. It should be recalled that the
resolution requires a long-term humanitarian pause
to allow for the safe and unhindered delivery of
humanitarian assistance and related services, as well as
the medical evacuation of the seriously ill and wounded,
in accordance with applicable international law.

My delegation reiterates its call for the full
implementation of resolution 2401 (2018) throughout
the country - from eastern Ghouta to Douma and
Afrin, where humanitarian needs arejust as urgent a as
well as in Raqqa and in the Rukban internally displaced
persons (IDPs) camp, which is in the grip of a
humanitarian disaster.

While terrorist groups have been defeated and
driven out of the city of Raqqa, the return of people
to their areas of origin remains problematic owing to
the lack of infrastructure, including health and social
infrastructure, as well as the lack of many services,
such as water supplies and electricity. Furthermore,
the presence of unexploded ordinance poses a serious
danger for the population. According to the World
Health Organization and UNICEF, between 20 October
2017 and 23 February 2018, at least 658 people were
reportedly wounded and over 130 others killed by
mines, booby-traps and unexploded ordnance in the
city, where there were an average of six blast incidents
per day. Limited access to care also aggravates the
danger for people wounded by those explosions. In
that respect, my delegation calls for the mobilization of
the international community to provide the necessary
assistance for the recovery of the wounded and to
support demining activities and raise awareness of the
dangers posed by improvised explosive devices.
With regard to the Rukban IDP camp, my
delegation remains concerned about the extremely
precarious living conditions of the local population,
which are mainly related to the lack of access to the
camp, which is regularly subject to sandstorms and
rising water salinity. In addition, the location of that
remote camp, with no road access, makes it difficult to
provide medicine, food and drinking water to residents.
My delegation urges the parties to the conflict to
authorize humanitarian agencies to conduct missions to
those areas to assess the needs of the populations and
provide them with adequate humanitarian assistance, in
accordance with resolution 2401 (2018).

Cote d'Ivoire believes that the international
community's action, with a view to providing an
adequate humanitarian response to the needs of the
Syrian people, must be part of our overall collective
efforts to seek a political solution to the crisis in Syria.
We therefore reiterate our principled position in favour
of a negotiated settlement of the Syrian conflict in the
framework of an inclusive political dialogue among
the different actors on the basis of the Geneva process,
pursuant to resolution 2254 (2015).

