Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I thank Under-
Secretary-General Nakamitsu and her team, as well
as Mr. Joseph Ballard. It is always good to have
the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) represented here in the Chamber, as
cooperation between our institutions is vital.

While this agenda item is a regular feature of the
Security Council's programme of work, there is in fact
nothing regular about it. The spectre of biological,
chemical or nuclear materials falling into terrorist
hands is the nightmare scenario for many of us in the
Chamber.

The use of such materials by terrorists is, sadly,
not hypothetical matter. Thanks to the hard work of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-
United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism in Syria,
we know what happens when terrorists' hateful intent
is paired with these equally hateful weapons. We saw
the results in the sulfur mustard attack that Da'esh
carried out in Aleppo's Mari district in August 2015,
leaving residents blistered and burning. Other cases are
also under investigation. Clearly, preventing weapons
of mass destruction (WMDs) from falling into terrorist
hands is a vital linchpin for preserving international
peace and security.

That is why it is so crucial that, following the
comprehensive review and adoption of resolution 2325
(2016), the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) focus on reaching the ultimate goal of full,
worldwide implementation - turning resolution 1540
(2004) into reality. As the 1540 Committee does that, it
must take account of new and emerging challenges from
the evolving terrorist threat and advances in science and
technology. The Committee must also look to improve
technical assistance, including by strengthening the
1540 Committee's process for matching Member States'
requests for support with offers for assistance. We must
do all we can to encourage Member States to submit
their reports on their implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) at the national level. That applies in particular
to the few remaining States that are yet to submit a
national report.

Much remains to be done, but the Committee
should not do it alone. Indeed, the challenges we face
are far too great to simply rely on the 15 Governments
gathered around this table. We must strengthen regional
and international cooperation and outreach to civil
society and industry to support implementation efforts.
Every country and every sector has a role to play, and
we should embrace their help.

While we must take every step to ensure that these

terrible weapons never fall into the hands of terrorists,
we must also never overlook the horrific and, sadly,
growing allegations ofthe use ofthese weapons by State
actors. The United Kingdom unreservedly condemns
the use of any chemical weapon in any circumstance.
In particular, we are horrified about reports that Kim
Jong-nam was apparently killed with VX in Malaysia
earlier this year. Confirmation that a nerve agent once
banned by the Chemical Weapons Convention was
used at the instigation of a State would be yet another
troubling rejection of international norms.

The United Kingdom has also concluded that the
Al-Assad regime has continued to use chemical weapons
against its own people - in breach of international
law and the rules of war. We look forward to receiving
further reporting from the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission
in the Syrian Arab Republic. Once we have the results
of those investigations, the international community
must send a united response.

Let me conclude by calling on the 1540 Committee to
redouble its efforts. The United Kingdom is committed
to playing its part in ensuring that the Committee
succeeds in its vital task ahead. The cost of failure, of
allowing further weapons of mass destruction to fall
into the hands of those who wish to wreak havoc, is
simply too high to bear.

