The President (spoke in Russian): I thank the
representative of Namibia for his kind words addressed to
my delegation.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of the Russian Federation.

We should like to express our sincere gratitude to all
members of the Security Council for supporting the
Russian initiative to hold today's meeting, as well as for
the words of sympathy and solidarity we have heard in
this room in connection with the recent terrorist acts in
Russia. The Russian leadership and the Russian people
value this support very highly.

Russia has taken the initiative to convene today's
meeting of the Security Council guided by an awareness
of the global threat inherent in terrorism. The inhuman
terrorist acts that claim as victims hundreds of innocent
people in various countries of the world, the taking of
hostages and attacks against United Nations personnel and
the emergence of cross-border channels for the training
and financing of terrorist acts convince us of the need to
strengthen an uncompromising struggle against this evil.

Our principled approaches to counteracting terrorism
in any of its forms and manifestations have been stated on
numerous occasions by the Russian leadership and were
confirmed by the statement made during the fifty-fourth
session of the General Assembly by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Russia, Mr. Igor Ivanov. We are
convinced that combating terrorism effectively can only
be done jointly and on the solid foundation of
international law.

The United Nations deserves historical recognition
for its condemnation of terrorism and for establishing
global interaction to eradicate it. Work is continuing

 

under the aegis of the United Nations to build up joint
anti-terrorist potential, including the establishment of a
universal treaty system for this purpose. Among the most
recent achievements of the United Nations is the adoption
in 1997 of the International Convention for the Suppression
of Terrorist Bombings. Work is being concluded to agree
upon a convention to combat acts of nuclear terrorism and
to counteract the financing of terrorist activities.

In conditions when terrorism is becoming a serious
challenge to international peace and security, the Security
Council is called on to be actively involved in the anti-
terrorist efforts of the international community, not by
replacing the General Assembly and other United Nations
organs but by interacting with them on the basis of its
competencies under the Charter.

The draft resolution to be adopted today by the
Council is a kind of anti-terrorist manifesto defining high-
priority areas for such interaction. Among them is the
universalization of multilateral conventions to combat
terrorism, the coordination of the actions of States and
multilateral and regional organizations, mutual assistance to
protect citizens, to prevent and halt terrorist acts and to
investigate them and bring to justice their perpetrators and
those guilty of the preparations and financing for such acts.
It is inadmissible to provide terrorists with asylum - the
ground should be burning under their feet wherever they

go.

The draft resolution declares the firm intention of the
Security Council to create durable safeguards against the
threats to peace and security emanating from terrorism. In
his annual reports to the General Assembly on measures
to combat terrorism, the Secretary-General will be
devoting particular attention to such threats and the
Security Council, in accordance with its mandate, is
undertaking a commitment to take the necessary measures
on that basis to counteract terrorist challenges.

The adoption of this draft resolution will make a
tangible contribution to the establishment of a united front
to fight international terrorism under the aegis of the
United Nations.

I now resume my function as President of the
Council.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution (S/ 1999/ 1071)
before it. Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Argentina, Bahrain, Brazil, Canada, China, France,
Gabon, Gambia, Malaysia, Namibia, Netherlands,
Russian Federation, Slovenia, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America

The President (spoke in Russian): There were 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 1269 (1999).

There are no further speakers inscribed on my list.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present stage

of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.20 pm.

