Ms. Bensouda: It is with a deep sense offrustration,
even despair, that my Office presents its seventeenth
briefing to the Council on the situation in Darfur, the
Sudan, since the Council referred this situation to my
Office in 2005, in accordance with resolution 1593
(2005). Regrettably, each briefing has been followed
by inaction and paralysis within the Council while the
plight of victims of crimes committed in Darfur has
gone from bad to worse.

My Office's deep sense of disappointment should
come as no surprise to the Council, given the serious
concerns shared within the United Nations about the
situation in Darfur. In particular, my Office shares the
concerns of the head of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, Valerie Amos, that 300,000
people were displaced in the first five months of 2013
alone - more than were displaced in the past two years.
Her warning that the international community cannot
let Darfur slip off the radar must be seriously heeded.

As set out in resolution 2091 (2013), adopted
14 February 2013, the ongoing aerial bombardments
in Darfur, which can be attributed to only one party
in the conflict; the use of sexual violence as a weapon
of war; the deliberate imposition of restrictions on the
delivery of humanitarian aid even in the face of an
urgent humanitarian crisis; and the ongoing impunity
for those crimes are major problems for Darfur and for
all of us who care about what happens to the Darfuri
Victims who suffer the brunt of those crimes.

My Office shares the concern of the Council that
business relations with the Sudan, if not monitored
carefully, could have the effect of facilitating,
funding and supporting crimes against civilians. The
normalization of relations with the Sudan should not
come at such a high price to victims.

I have noted in particular the Council's concern
about the actions of some individuals affiliated with
the Government of the Sudan and armed groups, who
continue to commit violence against civilians, impede
the peace process and disregard the demands of the
Council. I believe that the link between those different
actions is critical. I would submit that those individuals
who commit crimes are inherently uninterested in the
peace process or the demands of this Council. They do
not put the true interests of the Sudan first, and as long
as they enjoy impunity for the crimes they commit,
they will continue to represent a threat to international
peace and security. It is for this reason that the Council
referred the situation in Darfur to the International
Criminal Court (ICC) in order to address individual
criminal responsibility for the most serious crimes of
concern to the international community, with a view to
ending impunity.

We have done our part, and it is up to the Council to
live up to the legitimate expectations ofDarfur's victims
that individuals alleged to be responsible for their daily
sufferings shall be brought to justice. Those individuals
are just a few among a population of millions who
continue to endure untold daily suffering at the hands
of those few. We cannot ignore the disproportionate
effects of their actions, which is why my Office is
providing a briefing again today.

I echo the concerns of the African Union Peace
and Security Council, which were publicized in March
2013, that the Government of the Sudan must end
impunity in Darfur by bringing all criminals to justice,
must arrest and try those suspected of crimes against
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur, and must facilitate the work of humanitarian
organizations and the delivery of aid by cancelling visa
restrictions for staff, which has been described as a
federal Government responsibility.

I encourage both the United Nations and the African
Union to work together with my Office to monitor actual
progress in this regard. We have repeated this call too
many times without effect. We cannot simply repeat
history in having these discussions. My Office has
taken note of some reports of the prosecution of rebels
under the Government of the Sudan's Anti-Terrorism
Act, but of no real prosecutions of systematic crimes
committed by Government forces. This cannot be
allowed to continue.
In my previous report, I expressed my commitment
to working with regional organizations endeavouring
to contribute to a comprehensive solution. The
recommendations of the African Union High-level
Panel on Darfur on justice, if implemented, would go
a long way towards addressing the challenge of the
deliberate imposition and tolerance of impunity not
only in Darfur, but in the Sudan as a whole. I encourage
the African Union to take up this invitation for dialogue
on the justice recommendations of the High-level Panel
with enthusiasm and conviction.

I also note reports of the ongoing involvement of
ICC indictee Ali Muhammad Ali Abd-Al Rahman,
also known as Ali Kushayb, with the Sudanese Central
Reserve Police in clashes in Central Darfur in April
2013. According to recent reports, witnesses have
placed Kushayb at the centre of an attack on 8 April
on the town of Abu Jeradil, 30 kilometres south of
Urn Dukhun, riding in a Government vehicle, together
with units from the Central Reserve Police, border
intelligence and other Government-affiliated militia.
Reportedly, large numbers of heavily armed men, most
wearing khaki uniforms, arrived in two phases, first on
foot and then in vehicles. They shot indiscriminately,
burned homes and shops, stole livestock and looted
goods. More than 100 civilians were killed, with
scores more injured, and more than 30,000 people,
mostly women and children, were displaced into Chad.
Although most of the refugees are of Salamat ethnicity,
members of non-Arab ethnic groups such as Masalit,
Kajaksa, Fur, Dajo and Tama also fled the fighting. As
one witness said,

"They did not see any difference between
communities, they just wanted people to leave.
They stole our cows and burned our crops and took
our clothes from our house and burned the house
down. We saw them."

Observers have suggested that the Government of
the Sudan wanted to appease members of the Misseriya
and Ta'isha tribes who participated in the Janjaweed
militia by helping them to seize the land of Salamat
people, considered by some to be Chadian nationals,
and forcibly displacing them in the process. My Office
has noted many other such incidents in the past. This is
part of an ongoing pattern.

My Office has also pointed with concern to the
ongoing involvement of the ICC indictees Ahmad
Harun and Abdel Raheem Hussein in alleged crimes
elsewhere in the Sudan. Those crimes are of concern
to the international community and require urgent and
concerted action. Again, this is a question of potential
individual criminal responsibility, not of group or
organizational responsibility. The repeated travels of
President Al-Bashir, particularly to Chad, are also a
matter of concern that should receive the attention of
the Council. It is of great concern that the Council has
failed to act on any of the seven formal communications
from the Judges of the International Criminal Court on
these matters.

I note the visit to Khartoum from 20 to 23 May
of the Head of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, Valerie Amos, which included
a meeting with ICC indictees Omar Al-Bashir, Abdel
Raheem Hussein and Ahmad Harun. My Office
appreciates the prior notification of the meeting that
it received from the United Nations and its assessment
that the meeting was considered strictly necessary
for carrying out essential United Nations-mandated
duties. I strongly encourage the United Nations to
conduct an ongoing critical analysis of such contacts
in order to assess whether they have indeed contributed
to the successful conduct of such duties. We must
ask ourselves whether what the United Nations gains
from them is worth their cost. We must be careful not
to embolden fugitives from justice into thinking that
they will be rewarded for manipulating their way into
positions of indispensability even as they continue to
commit crimes.

I encourage the Security Council to find creative
ways to engage with all the relevant organizations
dealing with the Darfur situation, including the ICC,
to assess progress on shared goals, and particularly,
where the ICC is concerned, on the goal of bringing
to justice those alleged to have committed the
most serious crimes of concern to the international
community. Since the Guatemala initiative in October
and the informal interactive dialogue last month, the
relationship between the ICC and the Council has begun
to strengthen in a positive way, and one that is much
appreciated. More needs to be done, however, to unlock
the potential of our two institutions to prevent and
resolve conflicts and to stop the suffering of millions
of victims of crimes committed during such conflicts.
We stand ready to continue doing our part, but the time
is long past due for the Council to act with courage and
conviction by adopting appropriate measures within its
mandate to ensure that Sudanese fugitives are brought
to justice sooner rather than later.

