Mr. Mayr-Harting (European Union): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union
(EU) and its member States. The candidate countries
Turkey, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Montenegro and Serbia; the countries of the Stabilisation
and Association Process and potential candidates
Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina; as well as
Ukraine, Armenia and Georgia, align themselves with
this statement.

At the outset, let me thank you, Mr. President, for
the priority Nigeria attaches to this subject and for
your having come to make your important statement
and presiding over this very important meeting. It is
a pleasure and a privilege for us to participate in this
debate on security sector reform, and we also thank
Nigeria for providing a very useful concept note
(S/2014/238, annex) to that end.

We have taken note of the Secretary-General's
briefing and the recommendations put forward in his
report (S/2013/480). The European Union welcomes
the Secretary-General's report, which makes a strong
case for a strengthened United Nations role in support
of nationally owned security sector reform efforts. We
look forward to the adoption of the draft resolution this
afternoon.

The European Union has long-standing experience
of supporting security sector reform (SSR) programmes
in response to the needs of conflict and post-conflict
countries, of those in a transition stage or of developing
countries at large. In doing so, we have at our disposal a
wide range of instruments: diplomacy, crisis response,
development and security policies. Allow me to make a
brief review our engagement on security sector reform
activities.
Most of the EU civilian and military crisis-
management missions and operations deployed
worldwide have an SSR component. The European
Union trains, monitors and advises police, justice and
military institutions and their personnel in countries
such as Bosnia and Herzegovina, Afghanistan, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mali and Somalia.
From a development cooperation angle, over the period
2001-2009 the EU disbursed approximately €1 billion,
targeting justice and security sector reform worldwide.
That number multiplies if we consider the overall
interventions through the crisis response and Common
Security and Defence Policy missions mentioned
earlier.

In addition, the Instrument contributing to
Stability and Peace, and more specifically its crisis-
response measures, have become a key instrument in
operating in the security-development nexus and to
enable a more timely response by the European Union.
Under the Instrument, the European Union is providing
SSR-related support, inter alia, in the Central African
Republic, Chad, Guinea-Conakry, Libya, the Niger,
Mali and Myanmar, to name just a few countries.

The European Union's main approach to security
sector reform is to assist partner Governments in their
efforts to provide effective, legitimate and accountable
security and justice services to their citizens in a
manner that is consistent with democratic norms,
principles of the rule of law, good governance and its
respect for human rights. The EU shares the View that
SSR should be part of a comprehensive approach. Such
an approach should not only cover the wide-ranging
conflict prevention, peacebuilding, peacekeeping and
State-building agendas, but also take a whole-of-society
approach, recognizing interconnections with economic
revenue management, youth employment, access and
quality of public services, and effective oversight and
governance.

Furthermore, the 2007 Council conclusions
on security and development underlined the great
importance of building SSR capacity in regional
organizations as a means to promote ownership. Our
support for building African Union capacities in security
sector reform is a case in point. Our regional focus is,
moreover, strengthened through the development of
targeted regional strategies, for example in the Sahel
or the Horn of Africa, where the European Union tries
to support the tackling of security-related challenges
in a comprehensive manner, committing all relevant
instruments at its disposal.

The European Union has worked in the area of
security sector reform for nearly 10 years. Among
the lessons we have learned are the need for a more
strategic, comprehensive and coordinated approach, a
better knowledge of the local context, clear objectives,
concrete and measurable benchmarks for assessing
progress and a better balance between ensuring service
delivery outcomes and building state capacity. Security
sector reform is politically and institutionally a complex
process that may take a generation or more to fully take
root. In that regard, we would like to underline the need
for preserving the results achieved through appropriate
follow up and for ensuring a smooth transition. Thereby,
we try to ensure that our short-term engagement as
part of the Common Security and Defence Policy is
accompanied by long-term measures.

We therefore support the Secretary-General in his
approach to underline the need for a better balance
between service delivery - ensuring people's security
and safety - and long-term institution and capacity
building. Engagement with local non-state actors,
the need for dialogue among national authorities,
communities and civil society on security-related
challenges, as well as effective monitoring by democratic
oversight institutions, are also important elements that
the report of the Secretary-General also highlights.
Special attention should be paid to the participation
of women and marginalized groups, including persons
with disabilities, minorities and migrants, in planning,
leading and implementing security sector reforms.

The value of local ownership and the need for
coordinated support of different actors and instruments
is key. We fully agree with all of those who have already
made that point in the course of today's debate.W e also
support the activities of the United Nations Group of
Friends of SSR, which serves as a very valuable vehicle
to facilitate inclusive dialogue, to foster further progress
in developing the United Nations comprehensive
approach to SSR within the United Nations system
and to build synergies among the United nations, the
European Union and other international organizations,
regional actors and stakeholders, including in particular
the African Union.

Aside from the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations and the Peacebuilding Commission, SSR
should also be regularly placed on the agenda of the
Council and be given appropriate consideration in the
mandates of peacekeeping operations. We thank you
personally, Mr. President, as well as Nigeria, for your
leadership in doing so. The issue is highly relevant to
the business of this body, especially when it comes
to a successful transition and exit for peacekeeping
operations and to building and sustaining peace.

