Mr. Boyd: I have the honour to brief the Council
on behalf of Under-Secretary-General Susana
Malcorra, who is regrettably unable to participate, due
to illness. Please accept her sincerest apologies.

Resolution 1863 (2009), adopted in January,
endorsed the Secretary-General's proposed strategy for
Somalia, including the provision of a United Nations
support package for the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) and the strengthening of
Somalia's security sector. The need for the
continuation of this approach and the provision of
logistics support was further reinforced by this Council
in its resolution 1872 (2009). This support continues to

be provided in an integrated manner, which combines
voluntary contributions to United Nations trust funds,
ongoing direct bilateral support to AMISOM. and the
Government of Somalia, and the implementation of the
United Nations support package to AMISOM. that is
funded through assessed contributions.

Building on the success of the Somalia donors
conference held in Brussels in April, steps are being
taken to finalize all of the confirmed pledges, which in
total amount to approximately $200 million. As
previously reported, a critical gap remains between the
confirmed pledges and the actual donor disbursements.
Therefore, a follow-up meeting to the donors
conference will be organized for tomorrow, 9 October,
to finalize contributions against the pledges made in
Brussels in April.

Regarding the Trust Fund for AMISOM, we are
pleased to advise that contributions now stand at
almost $25 million, up from the $15 million dollars
reported to the Council in July. This represents 80 per
cent of total pledges, and discussions are under way to
finalize the remainder of the pending contributions.

Furthermore, the African Union and AMISOM
have in recent days finalized the strategic governance
mechanism that is necessary to ensure the adequate
management and assignment of the available funds to
designated priorities. Consequently, we anticipate that
expenditure from the Trust Fund will commence
shortly. AMISOM. has determined that the initial
priorities will focus on reimbursement for contingent-
owned equipment that is of a non-lethal nature,
implementation of a public information and radio
broadcasting capability in Mogadishu, and the payment
of medical services costs that were incurred prior to the
delivery of the United Nations logistics support
package. We wish to thank the donors for their
valuable contributions and also to state that we would
greatly welcome any additional pledges that would
ensure the sustainability of this support.

The current military strength of AMISOM. in
Mogadishu stands at about 5,200 troops, or 65 per cent
of the full mandated force of 8,000 soldiers. Burundi
and Uganda have each deployed three battalions, and
both countries have also offered to provide an
additional - or fourth - battalion. These increases,
together with the offer of Djibouti to contribute a
special forces unit of 4,000, will bring AMISOM. very
close to its full mandated strength.
I would like to take this opportunity to brief the
Council on the key achievements and the progress in
the provision of the United Nations support package.

The General Assembly approved funding of
$139 million in June 2009 and the Department of Field
Support, through the United Nations Support Office for
AMISOM. (UNSOA), has now initiated the delivery of
the support package.

In late August, AMISOM. troops in Mogadishu
commenced consuming United Nations-provided fresh
food. The contractor provides the food in Mombasa,
Kenya, and UNSOA then arranges for the regular
shipment of the consignments to Mogadishu, where it
is stored in a centralized refrigerated facility before
being issued to the contingent kitchens on a once- or
twice-daily basis. A fuel contract has been awarded and
the Somalia-based vendor will commence delivery
shortly.

Procurement action for aero-medical evacuation
services is almost complete and the contract will be
awarded by the end of October. United Nations
contracts are already in place with various hospitals in
Nairobi. Construction services contracts for mission
headquarters, a level II medical facility and the
erection of prefabricated structures for offices,
accommodations and ablutions and sanitation systems
should be approved shortly.

Members of the Council will recall that the
interim life-support supplies for AMISOM. were
originally supplied by a Member State and its vendor.
Much of that effort was focused on providing the
services I have just mentioned - food, fuel and
medical services. As the United Nations support
arrangements come into effect, we are progressively
phasing down the support being received from the
Member State and its vendor.

In addition to transferring the life-support
supplies to United Nations arrangements, we have
made some progress in establishing other United
Nations-provided services. A strategic communications
network has been established that now links the
AMISOM. Force Headquarters in Mogadishu with
AMISOM. Mission Headquarters and the United
Nations Support Office for AMISOM. (UNSOA) in
Nairobi. This network provides AMISOM. with a
relatively secure communications link, which for the
first time since the Force was deployed to Mogadishu
is no longer reliant on Somali-based commercial
providers.

Maritime vessels have been contracted to provide
sea freight services between Mombasa and Mogadishu,
with four voyages having been successfully completed
in the last two months. I wish to acknowledge and
extend our appreciation to the international Maritime
Task Force, especially Operation Atalanta, for the escort
and security assistance offered to those activities. Since
mid-August, United Nations-owned equipment worth
$7 million has been consigned to Mogadishu on those
vessels. Those consignments included communications
and radio broadcast equipment, field defence stores,
critical medical equipment and pharmaceuticals,
airport fire-fighting capacities, prefabricated buildings,
generators, armoured vehicles and a range of
engineering equipment intended to assist AMISOM. in
improving its security and living conditions.

Each of these consignments has been conducted
in a scheduled manner so as to ensure that valuable
equipment is not merely stockpiled in Mogadishu but
has a planned and immediate use. In addition, most
consignments are normally preceded by training, in
Entebbe or Mombasa, to prepare AMISOM. troops to
operate and maintain the United Nations-owned
equipment, as well as to instruct the troops on United
Nations accountability and stock-control procedures.
To implement those supply arrangements in a timely
manner, UNSOA has leased a commercial property in
Mombasa to function as a temporary logistics depot,
while work is proceeding to prepare the site that the
Government of Kenya has kindly granted for United
Nations use.

In the immediate aftermath of the 17 September
suicide attacks, UNSOA was well placed to respond
rapidly to the call for assistance. Through the prompt
arrangement of flights, ambulances and hospitalization
it was possible to evacuate most of the critically
injured to higher-level medical facilities in Nairobi
within less than eight hours of the attacks. The
remaining seriously injured and the deceased were
transported promptly the next morning to Nairobi and
their respective home countries. On this tragic subject,
I would like to acknowledge and extend our
appreciation for the assistance that France provided by
assigning an aircraft to assist with the medical
evacuation operation. Allow me also to express my
sincere condolences to the families of the AMISOM
soldiers who lost their lives during these attacks.

Further to the signature of the Memorandum of
Understanding with the African Union on 12 July,
support implementation agreements are being finalized
with AMISOM. to formally specify and define the
support arrangements and mutual responsibilities for
the delivery of the United Nations package.
Arrangements with the United Nations Office in
Nairobi for the provision of office accommodation are
now complete, and UNSOA has recently occupied
offices in a new, prefabricated complex Within the
United Nations compound. By the end of October, the
United Nations Political Office for Somalia (UNPOS)
will co-locate in buildings adjoining UNSOA. Finally,
an agreement with the Transitional Federal
Government of Somalia has also been developed to
allow both UNSOA and UNPOS to conduct their work
in the country, and that document is awaiting final
approval and signature.

Each of the four maritime vessels that have
transported UNSOA consignments to AMISOM. has
been attacked. Three were subjected to mortar attacks
in Mogadishu harbour, and one was the target of an
unsuccessful pirate attack. In addition, on 17 September
and immediately following the two vehicle-borne
suicide attacks, four AMISOM. soldiers from Uganda
lost their lives during a mortar attack on the UNSOA-
established centralized food-handling setup.

The Department of Field Support is fully
committed to supporting AMISOM, but Mogadishu is a
particularly challenging environment, and continued
attacks against AMISOM. facilities and United Nations-
contracted ships will impact and potentially slow our
capacity to deliver the mandated support package. In
recent months, limited numbers of UNSOA
international staff have visited most of the AMISOM
sites for short periods. UNSOA will maximize the use
of AMISOM. military personnel to assist in delivering
essential United Nations support services, until the
security situation allows more effective use of United
Nations contractors and civilian staff.

In conclusion, I would like to salute AMISOM
for the commitment and resilience of its personnel,
particularly the troops from Burundi and Uganda.
Despite constant and extreme threats, they continue to
resolutely perform their mandated tasks. Again, I
express my condolences to the families of the
deceased, and note that the supreme sacrifice made by
those 17 soldiers reminds us of the very real urgency of
providing timely and adequate support to the AMISOM
forces in Mogadishu.

I would also like to report that, in providing the
support to AMISOM. as mandated by this Council,
UNSOA maintains very close working relationships
with the AMISOM. Mission and Force Headquarters.
The tragic attacks of 17 September demonstrated that
UNSOA and AMISOM. are now better coordinated and
are working increasingly well together. I would also
like to express appreciation to the Government of
Kenya for the full support and cooperation it has
extended to UNSOA. In addition to the support
provided by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the
customs authorities and other Government agencies,
the Kenyan Government recently made available
10 acres of land adjacent to Mombasa airport for the
establishment of a logistics support base. Work is
under way to conclude the agreement with the Kenyan
Government and begin work at the new site.

Finally, I would like to express my appreciation
to the Council for its support of UNSOA. Its continued
support and understanding, particularly in view of the
difficult situation in Somalia, is highly appreciated.

