Mr. Mumbengegwi (Zimbabwe): We warmly
welcome you, Mr. Minister, and congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council during
these very important deliberations. Although this is only
Botswana's second month on the Council, your
Ambassador's celebrated successes in peace-keeping,
peacemaking, mediation and reconciliation in Namibia and
South Africa, and his vast experience in the field of
diplomacy, give us all immense confidence that the Council
is destined for a very productive month. In the same vein,
allow me to pay tribute to your predecessor, Ambassador
Emilio Cardenas of Argentina, for his particularly able and
diligent stewardship of the Council during the month of
January.

Allow me also to extend a warm welcome to the
Foreign Ministers of States members of the Organization of
African Unity (OAU) and to the Secretary-General of that
organization. Their presence here clearly demonstrates and
underlines Africa's ardent desire for the speedy resolution
of the conflict in Angola. Their presence, participation and
wise contributions to these deliberations constitute a most
important and significant boost to the peace process.

The Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali,
must be congratulated for his tireless efforts to resolve
conflicts around the world. In that connection, he has
placed before the Council a clear and insightful report on
Angola with precise and constructive recommendations.

There can be no doubt that the signing of the Lusaka
Protocol on 20 November 1994 was a major step towards
the establishment of peace and stability in Angola. In this
respect, the Secretary-General is correct in his assessment
that the Lusaka Protocol was a clear manifestation of the
earnest desire of the people of Angola to resolve their
differences by political means. Let us pay tribute to
President Frederick Chiluba and to the Government and the
people of Zambia for successfully hosting the delicate
negotiations and for facilitating the peace process. At the
centre of this delicate process was the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Alioune
Blondin Beye, who deserves our special appreciation for the
great skill and admirable patience with which he conducted
the slow, arduous and difficult negotiations.

There can be no doubt that the success of the peace
process in Angola ultimately depends on the people of
Angola themselves. The important statement made by the
Foreign Minister of Angola before the Council this
morning bore eloquent testimony to this. However,
assistance from the international community is essential.
The report of the Secretary-General before the Council
states that the cease-fire that came into force in
November 1994 has been holding. The parties to the
conflict have thereby demonstrated their firm commitment
to peace. In so doing, they have satisfied the requirements
set by previous Security Council resolutions. The time has
now come for the Security Council to honour its
commitments and immediately deploy the required force,
in full, to oversee and verify the implementation of the
agreements reached by the parties.

In his report the Secretary-General is very clear as
to what needs to be done. He observes that both the
Government of Angola and UNITA are respecting the
cease-fire, have shown commitment to ensuring the safety
and security of United Nations personnel and have
committed themselves to the Lusaka Protocol and national
reconciliation. In the light of these observations, the
Secretary-General, in paragraph 60 of his report,
recommends that a new United Nations operation in
Angola, the third United Nations Angola Verification
Mission (UNAVEM. III) immediately take over from
UNAVEM. II, that it have the mandate and strength
described in the report and that it be initially established
for a period of 12 months.

The message from the Secretary-General is loud and
clear. The parties have shown their commitment to peace.
It would be a serious mistake to continue to test their
patience any further. The Security Council should
therefore deploy UNAVEM. III without undue delay.

We take heart at indications in the Secretary-
General's report that the request for troops for UNAVEM
III is fully subscribed. This is both an auspicious
development and a clear vote of confidence in the
Angolan peace process. The Security Council should
therefore seize the moment and avoid mistakes of the past
which could well derail the delicate peace process.

