Mr. Duclos (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We are
grateful for the holding of this meeting and for the
important briefings by Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix and
Mr. Sma'il Chergui.

Peru joins other delegations in welcoming the
constitutional declaration signed on 17 August between
the Forces of Freedom and Change the Transitional
Military Council in the Sudan on the establishment ofa
new transitional Government under civilian leadership.
The agreement is an important first step towards
achieving peace and stability throughout the Sudan.
We are confident that the agreements reached will end
the violence that has already resulted in many victims
in Khartoum. We especially appreciate the parties'
commitment to respecting human rights and basic
freedoms in the Sudan.

In particular, we welcome the commitment to enable
the protection of women's rights with the ultimate aim
of ensuring gender equity with regard to the enjoyment
of their civil, political, economic and social rights. We
hope that the establishment of the new transitional
Government will also have a positive impact in Darfur
where cases of human rights violations and incidents of
conflict-related sexual violence continue.

We reiterate the responsibility of the Security
Council to ensure a successful withdrawal of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) - as the Under-Secretary-General
mentioned earlier - that does not create gaps leading
to tensions or new risk factors and does not jeopardize
the gains made in the areas of protection, the rule of
law and human rights. All of that is predicated on the
required State ownership of the process, which will
contribute to ensuring that the agreement reached in
the Sudan is fully implemented within the planned
time frame.

In that regard, we look forward to the assessment
and recommendations of the Secretary-General on
the appropriate course of action to determine the
number of UNAMID troops that will be needed and
the joint political strategy of the African Union and
the United Nations for its withdrawal. We therefore
welcome the announcement of the upcoming visit by
his representatives to the Sudan.

Meeting all those goals will also require the
establishment of national institutions capable of taking
on those processes and preventing and resolving
conflicts, while forming a national consensus on good
governance, focusing on the welfare ofthe people through
humanitarian access and spearheading initiatives to
counter the major causes underpinning conflicts.

Lastly, we acknowledge the successful mediation
efforts of Ethiopia and the African Union to achieve the
agreements that were reached. We must also recognize
the role of the people of the Sudan and the countries
of the region. We encourage the African Union, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the
United Nations and donor countries to provide the
required support to the transitional Government of
the Sudan in this important phase for the future of the
country and to continue in joint efforts to promote the
necessary consolidation and maintenance of peace in
that country.

