Mr. Chem (Cambodia): First of all, allow me, on
behalf of my delegation, to most warmly congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the current month. My delegation
would like to wish you success and to reaffirm to you
our full support and cooperation.

I would also like to thank you for allowing me to
speak on the important agenda item on small arms.
Although the expression "small arms" contains the
word "small", it is a cause of big concern and will
require us to work in concert for a long time to bring
peace and security to individual countries, as well as to
the whole world. For that reason, it is timely that the
issue of small arms is being taken up for open debate
by the Security Council today, in which I am pleased to
share some comments from the perspective of my own
delegation.

My delegation would like to extend our sincere
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his report on
small aims, which puts forward 12 recommendations
whereby he calls on States to work more on the issue
of eliminating small arms. My delegation also highly
appreciates the Secretary-General's observations and
conclusions, on which my country stands ready to join
hands on that issue.

After three decades of war, genocide and conflict,
Cambodia is well placed to reiterate its unequivocal
commitment to the collection and destruction of small
arms and light weapons in order to cement peace,
social security and political stability in the kingdom. It
has developed a number of programmes, ranging from
law enforcement on arms control to the programme
known as "Weapons for Development", which has led
to the destruction of more than 170,000 collected and
surplus weapons since 1998. My delegation wishes to
take this opportunity to express its deep thanks to the
European Union and Japan for their valuable assistance
to the programmes.

Having met with success in small arms control
and weapons collection and destruction, the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), at
the fifth ASEAN Ministerial Meeting on Transnational
Crime in Hanoi in November 2005, endorsed
Cambodia as a lead shepherd country, that is, a country
which coordinates among ASEAN members on
countering arms smuggling. Cambodia, accordingly,
came forward with the proposal to establish a resource
centre as a coordinating body to facilitate and mobilize
efforts and resources to combat the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons in South-East Asia. In that
regard, we would highly appreciate and welcome
support from the international community to realize the
important goal of setting up the Centre, which would
make an important contribution to our common
struggle against transnational crime and terrorism.

On the international front, Cambodia would like
to reiterate its unequivocal commitment to the full
implementation of the 2001 United Nations Programme
of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects by developing national programmes for the
control of small arms, such as the long-standing plan to
curb the illicit small arms trade.

As one of the supporters of the resolutions on
combating and preventing the proliferation of small
arms that were adopted by the General Assembly in
December 2005, my delegation fully supports the
upcoming United Nations conference to review
progress made in the implementation of the Programme
of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects, to be convened in June and July this year.
Despite controversies in the debates of the preparatory
committee, which led the Chairman to produce only a
conference room paper that could not reflect the views
expressed, my delegation has full confidence in the
upcoming review conference and strongly hopes that it
will help us further in the implementation of the
Programme of Action. We must not let that important
opportunity slip away in our common efforts to make
our world more secure with fewer weapons.

