Mr. Voronkov: I would like to begin by thanking
the Russian presidency of the Security Council and the
members of the Council for this opportunity to speak
about the challenges facing Afghanistan when it comes
to preventing and countering terrorism.

Last month, when I briefed the Security Council
on the outcomes of my mission to Iraq, together with
Assistant Secretary-General Ms. Michele Coninsx (see S/PV.8271), I started by expressing our solidarity with
the victims of multiple terrorist attacks in many regions
of the world, including in Afghanistan.

Unfortunately, the deadly violence continues
across Afghanistan. According to the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), there
were 5,675 security incidents between 15 February and
15 May. The use ofimprovised explosive devices caused
1,018 civilian casualties - 311 people were killed and
707 injured. Two heinous and cowardly terrorist attacks
took place in Nangarhar on 16 and 17 June, which left
at least 43 people dead and 45 injured, and there was a
suicide bombing in Kabul on 11 June, which claimed
lives of 17 people and injured at least 40. I would like to
express my sincere condolences to the Government of
Afghanistan. Such attacks target not only Government
officials, Afghan police and security forces, but also
civilians, causing the deaths of innocent people and
instilling fear throughout the country.

Secretary-General Antenio Guterres has made
countering terrorism and preventing violent extremism
the highest priorities on his agenda. In just two days,
we will host in New York the first ever High-Level
Conference of Heads of Counter-Terrorism Agencies of

Member States. We hope the Conference will provide
an opportunity for frank and candid discussions among
counter-terrorism practitioners and boost international
counter-terrorism cooperation. It is very important that
civil society take part in the meeting. The international
community has a solid foundation on which to build.
The international legal framework, including counter-
terrorism conventions and protocols, relevant Security
Council resolutions and the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism strategy, which Member States are
currently reviewing for the sixth time, all provide that
foundation. I hope that final discussions on the review
process will be successful and that we can approve the
outcome document.

Nonetheless, having the framework is not enough.
A stronger focus on implementation is needed.
Afghanistan genuinely needs and continues to request
legal technical assistance and capacity-building
projects to strengthen its national criminal justice
framework to combat terrorism. I am grateful for the
information provided in that regard by the Counter-
Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED). Acting
on behalf of the Counter-Terrorism Committee, the
Executive Directorate visited Afghanistan in early
2017 to monitor its implementation of resolutions 1373
(2001), 1624 (2005) and 2178 (2014) and identify its
related technical assistance needs.

In October 2017, the Counter-Terrorism Committee
approved the mission report, which identifies 24
priority areas where Afghanistan would benefit from
receiving technical assistance, including with regard
to legal matters, international cooperation, countering
the financing of terrorism, law enforcement and border
security and countering radicalization and incitement
to commit terrorist acts. To support Afghanistan's
implementation efforts, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee held an informal meeting on 28 November
2017 to discuss the challenges, focusing in particular on
the 24 priority needs. On behalfofthe Office of Counter-
Terrorism, I participated in the meeting, together with
the Permanent Mission of Afghanistan, a representative
of Afghanistan's National Security Council, UNAMA,
other relevant entities and INTERPOL.

The Office of Counter-Terrorism has been working
in collaboration with the Government of Afghanistan
on how it can best support Afghanistan's needs in the
areas of countering terrorism and preventing violent
extremism, both at national and regional levels, based
on the CTED's priority recommendations. In May, the
Office of Counter-Terrorism and the United Nations
Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central
Asia, located in Ashgabat, launched the third phase of
the Joint Plan of Action for the implementation of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy,
entitled "Towards a Comprehensive Implementation
of United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
in Central Asia". The new initiative sheds light on the
emerging challenges faced by the region, including
the spillover of the conflict from Afghanistan. I am
delighted that Afghanistan has actively collaborated
with the United Nations both on the development and
the implementation of the Plan.

I hope that Afghan counterparts will participate
in the upcoming United Nations training sessions on
border security, countering the use of the Internet for
propaganda and recruitment purposes by terrorists
and tackling drug trafficking as a means to finance
terrorism, organized under the umbrella of the Joint
Plan of Action. It is clear that terrorism has a very real
and direct impact on the enjoyment of human rights.
Counter-terrorism efforts should be based on respect
for human rights and the rule of law. The Office of
Counter-Terrorism stands ready to provide capacity-
building in that regard.

Allow me to express my strong support for all
Afghan victims and survivors of terrorism and praise
the resilience of the Afghan people. The leadership of
Afghanistan helped to establish the International Day of
Remembrance and Tribute to the Victims of Terrorism
on 21 August through General Assembly resolution
72/165. The Office of Counter-Terrorism has recently
launched a Victims of Terrorism programme that will
demonstrate solidarity with victims, raise awareness
on their needs and work towards the fulfilment of their
rights through practical activities, such as building the
capacity of victims to put forward counter-narratives to
those of violent extremists; strengthening mechanisms
to provide practical resources to victims, through the
United Nations Victims of Terrorism Support Portal;
and building the capacity of victims associations and
Member States to better support and assist the victims
of terrorism.

The Office of Counter-Terrorism will continue
working closely with Afghanistan and other Member
States to support the victims of terrorism, including by
producing a documentary on Afghanistan in our Victims
of Terrorism documentary series project, implemented
by the Office, in collaboration with the Department
of Public Information. To further raise awareness on
the issue of victims of terrorism, I would like to invite
representatives to an event on the sidelines of the High-
Level Conference, entitled "Standing in Solidarity for
the Rights of Victims of Terrorism", and organized by
the Office of Counter-Terrorism, which will be held
today in conference room 1 at 6:15 pm.
