Mr. Daka (Zambia): My delegation would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting
on the situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. In the same vein, I would like to commend the
Security Council for undertaking a mission to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The meetings that
members of the mission had with the leadership and
other leading players in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and those held with the leaders of the
neighbouring countries visited have, we hope,
enhanced the Security Council's understanding and
appreciation of the situation on the ground.

The report presented to the Council by
Ambassador Richard Holbrooke of the United States,
who headed the mission, gives us hope and
encouragement. It is clear from the report that all the
signatories of the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement are
prepared to honour their commitments towards the full
implementation of the peace process. We note in this
regard the eagerness of the signatories to implement
the Lusaka process.

The recent signing of the status-of-forces
agreement and the progress made so far in the
implementation of the plan for the disengagement of
forces presents the Security Council with the
opportunity to fully and immediately deploy phase II of
the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC). It is
important that this be done without further delay in
order to avoid creating a vacuum.

With regard to the inter-Congolese dialogue, my
delegation would like to stress the need to urgently
provide the necessary financial and logistical support
to Sir Ketumile Masire, the neutral facilitator, to enable
him to undertake his important task in the peace
process. The holding of the inter-Congolese dialogue is
indispensable to the successful implementation of the
peace process in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

The people of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo have endured a great deal of suffering. The
international community needs to respond urgently to
the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in order to enable the people in that country to lead a
normal life. We strongly believe that the deployment of
phase II of MONUC could be a start in achieving that
objective. The time to act is now.

