Mr. Gillerman (Israel): I would first like to
congratulate you, Sir, on the able, efficient and
considerate manner in which you handled yesterday's
debate and its continuation today.

The draft resolution presented before the Council
today for voting was, in our View, tragically lopsided. I
would therefore like to commend those countries that
did not support it.

I would like to take this opportunity to reiterate a
number of points from Israel's perspective. The draft
resolution did not focus on terrorism killing innocent
men, women and children, killing in the process the
hopes for peace. It did not focus on the clear legal
responsibility of the Palestinian leadership to dismantle
the terrorist infrastructure including confronting groups
such as Hamas, the Palestinian Islamic Jihad, the
Fatah, Tanzim and others, whose acts of murder lie at
the very heart of the problem.

Instead, it focused its criticism on the victims of
terrorism and on the response to terrorists rather than
on terrorism itself. In a perverse manner, the draft
resolution sought to equate the deliberate murder of
innocent civilians with targeted counter-terrorism
operations directed against those illegal combatants
responsible for murder and for continuing to plan
further acts of terror.

The adoption of the draft resolution would have
harmed efforts to bolster the peace process. The draft
resolution would have come to the defence of a man
who has devoted all his energies to scuttling the road
map and who continues to cause untold suffering to
both Israelis and Palestinians through his support and
toleration of terrorism.

To advance the cause of peace, we do not need
more one-sided United Nations resolutions. Lord
knows we do not need to increase the already
unprecedented burden on United Nations time and
resources that is expended every single year by
pandering to the Palestinian representative's endless
partisan initiatives.

What we need is for both sides to commit
themselves to the cause of peace and to resolving this
dispute through dialogue in an atmosphere free from
terrorism, Violence and incitement, which,
unfortunately and tragically, have been the tool of
Mr. Arafat's corrupt leadership for far too long a time.

