Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
First of all, my delegation would like to thank
Mr. Lynn Pascoe and Mr. Edmond Mulet for the
information they have kindly provided us on the
situation in Georgia.

This is the third time that the Security Council
has met in a very short period of time to try and find a
diplomatic solution to this grave dispute, which shows
that we are facing one of the most serious crises of
recent years.

For that reason, quite frankly, Burkina Faso is
very worried at the way events are going. We are
particularly worried and concerned by the continuing
escalation of the violence in South Ossetia, Georgia,
and by the extension of the conflict to other regions of
Georgia, particularly Abkhazia. We especially regret
the ever increasing number of victims, particularly
among the civilian population, and the continuing
worsening of the humanitarian situation. Given the
current state of the conflict and the likely
developments, there is no doubt whatsoever that the
situation has now become extremely dangerous for the
entire region, and if we are not careful, it could get
even worse. Now, under those conditions, it is essential
that other States in the region demonstrate the greatest
restraint in order to avoid the conflict taking on
broader dimensions.

We urge the international community to call upon
all the parties involved to cease hostilities immediately.
At this stage, it is essential that they commit
themselves to a ceasefire without delay, that they
renounce the use of force and respect international
humanitarian law and human rights, and that they agree
to opening a humanitarian corridor to evacuate the
wounded and refugees. We believe the best way to do
that is to engage in negotiations on the basis of the
principles and purposes of the Charter of the United
Nations.

We also call upon the parties to do everything
possible not to jeopardize the presence, the mandate or
the security of the United Nations Observer Mission in
Georgia in Abkhazia. Burkina Faso supports all
ongoing initiatives aimed at putting an end to the
hostilities and bringing the parties to the negotiating
table.

For my delegation, given the seriousness and the
continued worsening of the situation, it is urgent and
essential that the Security Council do everything it can
to convince the parties to cease the fighting, to
renounce the use of force and to resume dialogue at all
costs. Of course, if all of this can be done through a
consensus-based resolution of Security Council, then
Burkina Faso will make its humble contribution.

