The President (spoke in French): After consultations
among members of the Security Council, I have been
authorized to make the following statement on behalf of
the Council:

"The Security Council has carefully
reviewed the progress report of the Secretary-
General (S/2005/86), dated 11 February 2005, on
the implementation of the recommendations of
the Council on cross-border and subregional
problems in West Africa and reaffirms the
statement of its President, S/PRST/2004/7 of
25 March 2004.

"The Council notes with appreciation the
enhanced cooperation among the various United
Nations political and peacekeeping missions in
the subregion and looks forward to receiving the
Secretary-General's forthcoming report on inter-
mission cooperation. The Council also welcomes
the growing and constructive partnership between
the United Nations system, the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS),
individual Member States and key bilateral and
multilateral development partners, as well as civil
society organizations, including women's
organizations, aiming at addressing the many
complex challenges confronting the West African
subregion.

"The Council reiterates its belief that action
on cross-border and subregional issues should
take place as part of a wider strategy of conflict

prevention, crisis management and peacebuilding
in the subregion. The Council thus also
encourages the United Nations Office for West
Africa (UNOWA) to further promote an
integrated and joint subregional approach with
ECOWAS and the African Union, as well as with
other key international partners and civil society
organizations.

"The Council welcomes the encouraging
prospects for the reactivation of the Mano River
Union and the resumption of dialogue among its
member States, notably on ways to deal with
mercenaries. It welcomes also initiatives taken by
ECOWAS to establish a Small Arms Unit and to
adopt a new Small Arms Control Programme
(ECOSAP), and its ongoing efforts to transform
the Moratorium signed in Abuja on 31 October
1998, on the import, export and manufacture of
small arms and light weapons, into a binding
convention.

"The Council welcomes the decision of the
European Commission on 2 December 2004 to
assist ECOWAS in implementing its plans to
combat illicit dissemination of small arms. The
Council reiterates its call on all Member States
and organizations in a position to do so to extend
further assistance to ECOWAS in this field. The
Council calls on arms-producing and exporting
countries and West African States to explore
ways in which they can ensure the
implementation of the Moratorium.

"The Council calls on Member States and
key international partners to explore practical
ways of assisting ECOWAS in enhancing its
capacities in the areas of conflict prevention,
peacemaking and peacekeeping, including
through the provision of technical expertise,
training programmes and logistical and financial
resources. In this connection, the Council
reaffirms the crucial importance of the
reintegration of ex-combatants, taking into
account the special needs of child soldiers and
women, in order to reverse the culture of violence
and create an enabling environment for national
reconciliation in countries emerging from
conflict, and reiterates its call to the international
community to provide adequate funding to this
end.

"The Council underlines that ongoing or
emerging crises in West Africa are a threat to the
subregional stability and in this regard notes with
deep concern the tensions emerging and ongoing in
some countries over the transfer of power, involving
members of security and armed forces, and which
may further obstruct efforts to stabilize the subregion.

"The Council recalls in this regard the African
Union position on unconstitutional changes of
Governments, as stated in the 1999 Algiers
Declaration and the 2000 Lome Declaration.

"The Council welcomes the action taken by
ECOWAS and the African Union to address these
issues.

"The Council expresses its deep concern about
the involvement of individuals including those from
security and armed forces in such illicit activities as
smuggling of arms, drugs and natural resources,
human trafficking, extortion at roadblocks and
money-laundering, in the context of mismanagement
in the administration of justice, and weak government
capacity to fight against criminal activities and
impunity. The Council stresses the need to pay
special attention to those critical issues that have
direct bearing on efforts to enhance peace, stability
and democratic governance in West African
countries.

"The Council emphasizes the need to pursue
security sector reforms aiming at improving civil-
military relations in countries emerging from conflict
situations and creating a culture of peace and stability
and promoting the rule of law. In this regard, the
Council requests UNOWA to further explore with
interested Governments and organizations ways in
which security sector reforms could be formulated
and implemented.

"In this regard, the Council welcomes the
ongoing efforts of ECOWAS, in collaboration with
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, to
improve border control mechanisms in West Africa
by facilitating the flow of information among
national law enforcement authorities, as well as
regional networking and cooperation on the law
enforcement issues.

"The Council reiterates the importance of
curbing the growing risks of instability along some
border areas. The Council, therefore, encourages
UNOWA to facilitate, in close cooperation with the
ECOWAS Executive Secretariat and its member
States concerned, the implementation of the strategies
developed for sensitive border zones in the subregion
and calls on the donors to support these efforts.

"The Council stresses the need to help West
African States to curb illicit cross-border activities
and to strengthen the capacities of the civil society
groups working to promote a cross-border culture of
non-violence and peace.

"The Council further emphasizes the need to
generate economic activities and foster development
as a means of promoting sustainable peace in the
subregion. It urges international donors to assist
ECOWAS States to address that need.

"The Security Council reaffirms the urgency of
finding lasting solutions to the problem of youth
unemployment in order to prevent the recruitment of
such youth by illegal armed groups. In this
connection, the Council requests the Secretary-
General to include in his next progress report
practical recommendations on how best to tackle the
problem of youth unemployment.

"The Council urges the donor countries,
international organizations and civil society to
address the dire humanitarian situation in many parts
of the subregion and to provide adequate resources in
the framework of the consolidated appeals process
2005 for West Africa as part of a regional
humanitarian response strategy to improve the human
security of the people in dire need of protection or
those whose coping capacities are close to
exhaustion.

"The Council expresses its intention to keep
these issues under review and requests the Secretary-
General to report on them regularly through his
reports on the United Nations missions in the
subregion."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2005/9.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my list.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 2.25 p. m.
