Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): Your
presence with us today, Mr. President, is very welcome,
and it reflects the importance of the subject that we are
debating.

I have the honour to speak in this debate on
behalf of the European Union. The acceding countries
Bulgaria and Romania, the candidate country Croatia,
the countries of the Stabilization and Association
Process and potential candidates Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia and Serbia and Montenegro, the European
Free Trade Association countries Iceland and
Liechtenstein, members of the European Economic
Area, as well as Ukraine and the Republic of Moldova,
have all aligned themselves with this statement.

The good news for my colleagues is that I shall
now summarize my prepared text, which will be
circulated separately.

I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to discuss this important subject, and the
Secretary-General and Under-Secretary-General
Guehenno for their very pertinent remarks.

The Security Council is of course only one actor
in the international response to humanitarian crises, so
I would like to begin with some reflections on what
contribution it can make.

First, the Council should have an important
political role in conflict prevention and in dealing with
the early stages of an emerging humanitarian crisis.
The United Nations as a whole, and the Security
Council in particular, should therefore be alert to signs
of an imminent breakdown in international peace and
security, in particular those situations that threaten
widespread humanitarian consequences. The Council
should be prepared from the earliest stage to make a
leading contribution to international efforts to avert a
descent into conflict and humanitarian suffering.

That means being prepared to give attention to
new and neglected crises without waiting for the level
of humanitarian suffering to rise to unacceptable
levels. It means reminding Governments of their
primary responsibility to assure the security, safety and
humanitarian needs of their own people, and reminding
them too that the international community has a
legitimate interest if they are unable or unwilling to do
that. In that regard, the European Union welcomes the
debate on the important concept of the responsibility to
protect.

Prevention is obviously better than having to pick
up the pieces of broken lives and humanitarian
suffering after conflict has broken out. We need to
ensure that the Security Council is properly informed
of possible threats, including through early warnings
by the Secretary-General. One positive development in
that regard has been the introduction of regular
briefings of the Council by Jan Egeland, the
Humanitarian Coordinator. We should continue and
extend that practice, including with the Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights.

The second key role for the Council is its primary
responsibility to take action where international peace
and security have broken down, where we must take
full account of the humanitarian requirements of a
crisis. It is not, of course, the Council's role to
coordinate or direct humanitarian action, but it can do
more to galvanize international humanitarian efforts
and to lend political weight to them.

In considering our political response to a crisis,
we should always give due priority to humanitarian
considerations. The Council and its individual
members should lend weight to efforts to ensure that
political leaders on both sides of a conflict ensure
access by humanitarian agencies to affected
populations.

A major Security Council responsibility will be to
establish multidimensional United Nations peace
support operations that ensure that humanitarian
considerations and activities are fully taken into
account. In accordance with relevant Council
resolutions, we also need to promote the role that
peacekeepers play in protecting civilians, particularly
with regard to vulnerable groups such as internally
displaced persons, women and children.

The Council also has a role in ensuring that
where humanitarian suffering is a result of deliberate
human rights abuses or war crimes, those responsible
are brought to justice. The European Union therefore
strongly supports efforts to end impunity for such
crimes, in particular through the effective functioning
of the International Criminal Court.

But equally important is a third area of the
Council's activity, namely, building the conditions for
lasting peace and stability in order to prevent the
recurrence of conflict and humanitarian suffering.

I would like to summarize three key areas of
peacebuilding, namely, the rule of law, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) and security-
sector reform.

First, strengthening the rule of law and good
governance is essential to building societies that
protect and improve the lives of all their citizens. The
Secretary-General's excellent report on the subject last
August (S/2004/616) and the subsequent Security
Council discussion in October showed consensus on
the need to treat the justice sector as a key element in
building sustainable peace. An independent judiciary,
humane and secure prisons and an effective and
accountable police force are necessities. Without them,
we risk anarchy and impunity; we undermine not only
stability and security, but also democracy, the return of
refugees and economic recovery.

But we have not yet done enough. The United
Nations is still a long way from being able to
effectively promote the rule of law and an end to
impunity in the post-conflict situations in which it is
engaged. For that reason, we welcome the Secretary-
General's decision contained in his report entitled "In
larger freedom" (A/59/2005) to create a Rule of Law
Assistance Unit to deal specifically with post-conflict
situations.

The second important area of peacebuilding that
we need to improve is our approach to disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration - DDR. We need to
draw together past experience, both good and bad, and
ensure that we understand what works and why it
works. We therefore welcome the United Nations inter-
agency process to develop guidelines on DDR. The
challenge will be to implement those guidelines in a
practical way that lifts our collective performance.

The third priority area, which is closely linked to
the other two, is security-sector reform. Democratically
controlled security services can be developed only in
the context of establishing effective governance
structures and the rule of law. DDR programmes can
succeed only as part of a broader reform effort to
deliver security services that guarantee, rather than
threaten, the people they are meant to serve.

In all the three areas that I have described, the
Security Council and the missions that it mandates are
usually only one of a number of international players.
Within the United Nations system, we must make sure
that even as we create new capacities, we do not create
new divisions. We must therefore ensure that we
develop a coherent, overarching vision in the wider
justice and security field, and that that is matched
organizationally both at Headquarters and in the field.

That is why the European Union strongly
supports the proposed establishment of a Peacebuilding
Commission that would oversee the provisions of
coherent security, political, economic and other assistance
to countries emerging from conflict, and advise on and
promote comprehensive strategies for peacebuilding.

In closing, Mr. President, I would like to thank
you once again for organizing a debate on this
important topic. We very much look forward to a future
productive discussion in the Council on these issues,
including as they pertain to specific country
circumstances. And we warmly welcome the proposed
presidential statement.

