Mr. Matussek (Germany): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU). The
candidate countries Turkey, Croatia and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia; the countries of the
Stabilisation and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, and
Serbia; the European Free Trade Association country
Iceland, member of the European Economic Area; as
well as the Republic of Moldova align themselves with
this declaration.

I would like to thank Slovakia, as President of the
Security Council, for organizing this useful debate on
security sector reform.

The European Union holds the View that, without
a functioning security sector, lasting peace and security
for the population cannot be achieved. If successful,

security sector reform can significantly contribute to
establishing the right conditions for sustainable
development. Therefore, it is of great importance to
focus on that issue in countries in transition and in
fragile or post-conflict countries.

The EU engages in more than 70 security sector
reform-related activities worldwide through EU pre-
accession assistance, development cooperation and
conflict-prevention and crisis-management support. In
June 2006, the EU adopted a policy framework for
security sector reform support that brought together
instruments across all EU policy areas and bridged the
fields of security and development. That has enabled
the EU to take a holistic and multi-sectoral approach in
support of security sector reform. To illustrate our
experiences, let me briefly mention some important
European experiences in the field of security sector
reform.

Bosnia and Herzegovina, as a potential candidate
for EU membership, benefits from substantial security
sector reform support in the areas of police, justice and
border management. In addition, in January 2003, we
started the European Union Police Mission in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, which followed on from the United
Nations International Police Task Force. In accordance
with best European and international practice, the
Mission seeks to establish sustainable policing
arrangements under Bosnian ownership. It does so
through monitoring, mentoring and inspection
activities. Following an invitation from the Bosnian
authorities, in November 2005 the EU decided to
establish a refocused police mission. It supports the
police reform process and continues to develop and
consolidate local capacity and regional cooperation in
the fight against major and organized crime.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo the
European Union has been active in security sector
reform since 2002, playing a leading role in defence,
police and justice reform. We believe that the
assistance of the international community in bringing
peace and development to the whole of the country
cannot bear fruit without reform of the security sector.
The EU has therefore confirmed its readiness to
assume a leading coordinating role in international
efforts on security sector reform, together with the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, if requested by the
authorities of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
In June 2005, the EU established an advisory and

assistance mission for security reform, which focuses
on defence reform. The mission provides advice and
assistance to Congolese authorities in charge of
security, while ensuring the promotion of policies that
are compatible with international standards.

Also in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the European Union launched - in close coordination
with the United Nations - a police mission in
Kinshasa. The mission monitors, mentors and advises
the Integrated Police Unit and ensures that the Unit
acts according to international best practice. The Unit's
impartiality is a key element. It has successfully
intervened on various occasions during the election
period, stabilizing the situation on the streets of the
capital. The contribution by the European Union
therefore had an immediate positive effect in the
critical final phase of the transition period leading
towards the establishment of a democratically elected
Government.

Finally, last week the EU Council of Ministers
decided to start planning a mission in Afghanistan in
the field of policing. That mission will complement the
already substantial EU support for the Afghan police
force in the payment of salaries. It will be carried out
in conjunction with an EU reform programme in the
justice sector, which seeks to professionalize the
judicial and public prosecution service. That is an
important step that confirms the EU's strong long-term
commitment to Afghanistan.

Given the experiences the European Union has
gained from the range of security sector reform
programmes and missions in which it has been engaged
so far, we believe that action on security sector reform
needs to be approached in a holistic manner that is
underpinned by comprehensive national security
strategies. It starts with an assessment of the security
needs of a country, and should include plans for the
future architecture of the security system. The reform
process should be designed to strengthen good
governance, democratic norms, the rule of law and
human rights. Democratic institutions that can provide
civilian oversight and accountability and the overall
management of reforms are especially relevant in that
regard.

The European Union promotes coherent
approaches within the United Nations system that are
guided by lessons learned from past experiences and
based on agreed principles within the international

community. In that context, the EU is also making
particular efforts to implement resolution 1325 (2000),
on women, peace and security, as well as resolution
1612 (2005), on children affected by armed conflict.

There is a need for better cooperation among all
partners involved in security sector reform, as well as
better coordination of their efforts. We therefore
welcome and support the draft presidential statement to
be adopted today, which acknowledges the need for a
report by the Secretary-General on approaches to
security sector reform by the United Nations.
Nevertheless, we think that the upcoming tasks should
be fulfilled using existing resources and existing
bodies, one of them being the Peacebuilding
Commission.

Once more, I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing today's debate and
thereby stimulating a broader discussion within the
United Nations system and with external actors on an
issue of such cross-cutting importance. The European
Union is ready to continue to contribute constructively
on this issue. We look forward to a report by the
Secretary-General with recommendations for
coordinated and effective United Nations support for
security sector reform.

