Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation has consistently
supported the efforts of the international community to
resolve the situation in the Sudanese province of
Darfur. The activities of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) have
become an inseparable component of the Darfur peace
process, and their significance cannot be
overestimated. Moreover, UNAMID is a good example
of close, practical cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union in the area of
peacekeeping in Africa. Accordingly, we deemed it
necessary not just to support but to insist on the timely
adoption of the draft resolution extending the mandate
of UNAMID.

However, we have serious concerns about the
possible negative development of events in the Sudan
following the application of the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) to the judges of the
ICC requesting the issuance of a warrant to arrest the
President of the Sudan. We do not rule out the
possibility that hardline rebel groups hampering
progress in the Darfur political process will take
advantage of the situation in order to step up their
campaign against the Government of Sudan in this
region. Concern in that respect has been expressed by
senior Secretariat officials. The United Nations partner
in UNAMID, the African Union, stated that it was
advisable for the Council to exercise its authority under
article 16 of the Rome Statute of ICC to defer the
decision of the Court. A similar position is held by the
Non-Aligned Movement, the Organization of the
Islamic Conference and the League of Arab States.
States members of those authoritative organizations
represent quite simply the views of two thirds of the
international community.

Unfortunately, that concern was not fully
reflected in the resolution as a result of resistance by a
number of Security Council members. The position
taken by those delegations could have unforeseen and
negative consequences in the context of building
relations between the Government of the Sudan and the
international community to conduct a peacekeeping
operation and to resolve the conflict in Darfur. The
responsibility for those consequences fully rests on
their shoulders.

We fully agree with the need for justice to be
done in Darfur, including against persons indicted of
heinous crimes. It must be done, however, without
neglecting other equally important factors that could
have an impact on the stability of an important region
of Africa. We hope that the Security Council will
continue its search for the best balance between peace
and justice in Darfur. That was precisely the appeal
made by the Secretary-General.

