Mr. Nesho (Albania): Mr. President, please allow
me to thank you for the professional way in which you
have conducted the work of the Security Council. We
appreciate the close cooperation and contribution that
you and your delegation have provided to all United
Nations delegations. In addition, I would like to
commend your predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of France, Ambassador Levitte, for his
excellent performance last month and, in particular, for
the swift adoption of two important resolutions, 1368
(2001) and 1373 (2001), on the subject of international
terrorism.

The Albanian delegation wishes to express its
satisfaction with the participation of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Hans
Haekkerup, in today's debate. On this occasion, we
wish to thank him for the excellent work he has
undertaken towards the fulfilment and implementation
of resolution 1244 (1999) and the building of
democratic institutions in Kosovo.

With all of the problems on the ground, the
achievements made so far in Kosovo clearly speak for
the commendable work of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the
Kosovo Force (KFOR). We believe that the general
elections will once again demonstrate the results made
so far and will show the great and far-sighted work of
the Security Council as well, which has not only
managed and conducted the crisis in Kosovo but has
also made possible the creation of a multi-ethnic and
democratic society in an environment where hatred and
war are disguised as permanent ghosts trailing living
beings.

The general elections in Kosovo will ultimately
lead to the establishment of legitimate authorities in
Kosovo, who will have the opportunity to present and
express the free will of the people and to protect the
democratic principles of a multi-ethnic society and the
rights of minorities and so forth. Therefore, this
election requires the full participation of all people of
Kosovo - Albanians, Serbs and others - in order to
build their future. The process will be the first of the
phases necessary to finally remove suspicion and fear,
for the future of Kosovar society and for the
establishment of an environment that will generate
peace and security.

Unfortunately, the huge building process in
Kosovo proposed by the Security Council and being
implemented by UNMIK has not been well understood,
judged on the basis of petty and narrow interests, put in
doubt by the passions of both sides; even some leaders
could be ready to sacrifice this process because of their
power interests and old nationalistic spirit.

We understand Mr. Haekkerup's and UNMIK's
difficult task in accomplishing their objectives and
their necessary compromises in an environment in
which one side has not yet shown that it is able to fully
respect a multi-ethnic society and implement all
obligations deriving from that, while the other side
does not want to face the reality that Serbs are only 5
per cent of the entire Kosovo population and are
therefore a minority, continuing to regard Kosovo as an
old privilege, like a feudal dowry, where passion for
land and territory decides the future of people and
society.

As we understand the situation in Kosovo, the
Albanians of Kosovo fought against genocide and
oppression with the aspiration of joining Western
civilization. The Albanians of Kosovo did not need,
and still do not need, help from terrorism to gain
recognition for those legitimate rights that were
supported by the international community and the
Security Council in resolution 1244 (1999).
We can say that the people of Kosovo, since 11
September 2001, have been among the first to join the
international community in the fight 4 without any
compromise - against international terrorism, while
other leaders in the Balkans, who call them terrorists
and diffuse the idea of terrorism in Kosovo, stand loyal
to their national agendas and all ideas about the future
of the Balkans, and even dare to criticize the previous
United States Administration and the international
community for humanitarian intervention in the
Balkans.

In conclusion, the Albanian Government fully
supports the work of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Haekkerup, and UNMIK.
Albania believes that successfully holding the general
election in Kosovo on 17 November 2001 is a very
important process that should be supported by the
entire international community. The Albanian
Government, as always, will make its contribution to
the successful implementation of resolution 1244
(1999) and the preservation of peace and stability in
the region.

