Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I would first
like to thank you, Madam President, for convening this
important meeting. We also thank Rosemary DiCarlo
for her briefing.

Let me repeat the words of condolence expressed
by our Kuwaiti colleague to you, Madam President, and
to our colleagues from China and the Philippines.

I will focus on three aspects in my statement: first,
the ongoing diplomatic efforts; secondly, the need
for full and effective sanctions implementation; and
thirdly, the work of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1718 (2006) and its Panel of Experts.

Let me also welcome to the Security Council our
colleagues from Japan and the Republic of Korea.

With regard to my first point, the Kingdom of the
Netherlands supports the ongoing diplomatic talks
with the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.
We hope that further steps can be taken during the
upcoming inter-Korean summit as well as during a
possible second summit between the United States and
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. There are
obvious challenges inherent to such complex talks, but
no efforts, in our view, should be spared towards the
complete, verifiable and irreversible denuclearization
of the Korean peninsula.
Secondly, with regard to the need for the full
implementation of the sanctions, the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea should take meaningful
steps to address the concerns of the Council. Those
concerns are spelled out in the pertinent resolutions.
Until those concerns are adequately addressed, the
international community should maintain its pressure
on the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. In our
view, it is therefore too early to talk about sanctions
relief. Furthermore, current developments are a reason
for concern. Let me mention some examples: first,
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea continues
its nuclear and ballistic missile programmes, which
remain a global threat; secondly, the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea continues to actively evade
sanctions in order to advance those programmes; and,
thirdly, several countries are not fully implementing
the sanctions.

Let me give some concrete examples about the latter.

First, there is an increase in illicit ship-to-ship transfers
of petroleum products to the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea; secondly, there is ongoing use of front
companies and Democratic People's Republic of Korea
diplomats to evade financial sanctions; and, thirdly,
there are attempts by the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea to supply arms and military equipment to
actors in the Middle East. Those developments are very
concerning. They should be a matter of grave concern
to the entire international community, and especially
to all members of the Council. We therefore call on
all States Members of the United Nations to fully and
effectively implement United Nations sanctions. In my
capacity as Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006), I will
continue to do my utmost towards that end, together
with my team.

That brings me to my third point, namely, the
important role of the 1718 Committee and its Panel of
Experts in that context. With the most recent Security
Council resolutions, the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea sanctions regime has grown to be the most
comprehensive sanctions regime to date, and it is likely
also the most complicated to date. The 1718 Committee
plays a crucial role in implementing the resolutions
by taking appropriate action in cases of sanctions
violations, by providing guidance and support to the
wider United Nations membership and by minimizing
adverse humanitarian consequences of the sanctions.

The activities of the Panel of Experts, and
particularly its reports, serve as a cornerstone of the
United Nations sanctions regime on the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea. It is crucial that the Panel of
Experts can work fully and independently. All Member
States should fully respect the independence of the
Panel of Experts. The Panel's reports are crucial for the
decision-making of the Committee and the Council, and
its reports are key for engagement with third countries.
The public release of those reports is important in order
to maintain the pressure on the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea. We express our support for the work
of the Panel. With the expansion of the sanctions regime,
the task of the Panel of Experts has become ever-more
challenging. We would like to emphasize how crucial it
is that the Panel can do its job in an effective and secure
manner with full autonomy. The integrity of the Panel
of Experts must be safeguarded.

In conclusion, the Kingdom of the Netherlands
supports the ongoing diplomatic efforts. It is necessary
to maintain pressure on the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea through the full implementation of
sanctions by all Member States. The 1718 Committee
and its Panel of Experts play an important role in
that respect.

Let me emphasize, as others have done, the
importance of the unity of the Council in all of those
efforts. A united Council has a tremendous impact. The
stakes are too high for the Council to be divided on
that matter.

