Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I would like to echo
the Kuwaiti and Equatorial Guinea representatives in
sending our condolences to all those around the world
who have been affected by the recent hurricanes and
flooding. I think the Kuwaiti representative was quite
right in pointing out the link with climate change. It
is one reason that the Security Council needs to stay
abreast of developments on climate change. I thank him
for raising that point.

I have listened very carefully to what colleagues
have said this morning. The unity of the Council has
been critical on this issue, all the more so because on
other issues, including those relating to weapons of
mass destruction (WMDs), Council action has been
blocked because of one Council member. We have a
very significant opportunity to improve the strategic
situation on the Korean peninsula. I think the Swedish
representative referred to it as momentous, and I
think that is exactly the right word to use. What is
happening on the Korean peninsula has the potential to
affect the countries of the two colleagues sitting at the
table, but if we can get it right - if we can succeed at
non-proliferation in the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea - then we can improve the safety and security
of the region and the entire world.

You said, Madam President, that the Council had
adopted historic sanctions, showing historic unity. We
have a real chance for success, and I find it very hard
to comprehend why anyone, why one Council member,
would put that opportunity at risk given what is at stake.
The Chinese Ambassador referred to the 1950s and the
Cold War. We do not debate how the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea came to have nuclear weapons, but
we all agree that it is vital to achieve denuclearization
there. I will come back to that point in a minute, but it is
a very serious issue. It has been hanging over the region
and the world since the 1950s, and the Council has been
united recently in trying to tackle it. We would appeal
to all Council members to not put that unity at risk, but
to continue efforts.

I want to thank the Under-Secretary-General
for her briefing. I think there have been, as she said,
some important political developments. We welcome
the upcoming trip of President Moon Jae-in, and we
hope it will further encourage the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea to take decisive steps towards
denuclearization. I did want to add, in that context, that
there is no equivalence between WMD possession and
threats to use them and the various bilateral cooperative
military exercises that we have seen between the United
States and the Republic of Korea.

I would like to echo other speakers before me in
noting the fact that next week our leaders will be here
for high-level week. These important questions will
be discussed. People will be looking at the Council
even more than usual to see our leaders take their
responsibilities and deliver unity and progress so that
this critical issue of WMD and nuclear proliferation can
be properly addressed.

Turning to sanctions, all evidence related to
sanctions implementation is reviewed with care, and the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea's neighbouring
States have a particular responsibility. Our unanimously
agreed sanctions measures clearly draw a distinction
between legitimate economic activity and sanctionable
offences. I very much welcome the assurances that the
Chinese Ambassador set out today.

We particularly need monitoring of coal and oil
exports to the Democratic People's Republic of Korea,
for the reasons you, Madam President, set out when
speaking in your national capacity. The Democratic
People's Republic of Korea has shown itself able
to seek creative ways to bypass checks and violate
sanctions. We support the United States assessment
that the Security Council-mandated cap on imports of
refined petroleum has likely been breached. We need
to be vigilant about that aspect, which includes ship-
to-ship transfers of refined petroleum to vessels of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea at sea. The cap
demonstrates international commitment to upholding
the rules-based international order. We call on all
States, but particularly, given their special nuclear
responsibilities, the permanent five members of the
Security Council, to ensure that agreed sanctions are
adhered to.

You, Madam President, mentioned the Panel of

Experts, and a number of colleagues have also referred
to it. We think it is important that the report of the Panel
of Experts should be submitted in its usual form. The
Panel has produced an extensive and well-researched
report, showing the extent of sanctions evasion by the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea. The Security
Council has unanimously agreed a comprehensive set
of resolutions on the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea, and publication of these reports is one of the
commitments we have all signed up to. We therefore
look to all colleagues on the Council to enforce those
commitments strictly, and I would like to stress that
reporting by the independent Panel is an essential tool
for carrying out sanctions implementation to the full
and ensuring that evasions are clamped down upon.

On the United Nations Command, I take the points
that have been made about history. As a number of
colleagues have said, it is a legacy from the 19505,
and it is highly unusual. All requests for shipments of
material in the demilitarized zone must be scrutinized
and checked for compliance with sanctions. It is
important that such diligence continue.

There has been really important outreach both
by your Government, Madam President, and by the
Government of the Republic of Korea, but, sadly,
Pyongyang has not yet taken decisive steps towards
complete, verifiable and irreversible denuclearization.
The Council debate next week will be a very important
window of opportunity that should not be wasted. The
United Kingdom is fully committed to supporting and
assisting denuclearization in any way that we can. I
hope that next week we can see very strong and firm
Council unity in support of that goal and in support of
full sanctions implementation.

