Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia): At the outset,
let me say that I am honoured to speak to the Council
today on behalf of the members of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation. I would like to express
my gratitude to Australia's Foreign Minister, The
Honourable Julie Bishop, for leading this important
meeting on international cooperation on combating
terrorism, including addressing the interrelated
threats posed by foreign terrorist fighters and violent
extremism. I should like also to thank the Chair of
the sanctions Committee on Al-Qaida, Ambassador
Gary Quinlan, and the Chair of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, Ambassador Raimonda Murmokaite, for
their comprehensive statements today and for all of
their valuable work. We also welcome the presidential
statement adopted today (S/PRST/20l4/23).

Over the past decade, terrorist movements such as
Al-Qaida have transformed from a single organization
into a network of autonomous but affiliated dispersed
and continually growing groups. These groups have
exploited the lack of stability in different regions
around the world in order to gain ground and replenish
their ranks. Terrorist organizations such as the Islamic
State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS), Al-Qaida and Boko
Haram have targeted anyone and everyone who refuses
to adhere to their violent and unfounded ideology. We
stress that the practices of terrorist groups such as ISIS,
which falsely claim affiliation to Islam and seek to
justify their criminal acts as being carried out for its
cause, have nothing to do with Islam or its principles,
which call for justice, equality, compassion, freedom of
faith and coexistence.

In this context, the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation condemns and rejects all attempts to
associate Islam or any Islamic country, any race,
religion, culture or nationality with terrorism. We
stress the importance of the fact that religious war is
the misguided refuse of extremists who cannot build or
create anything and therefore promote only fanaticism
and hatred. We are happy to see that many countries,
including today in the Council, have recalled this
dissociation between such terrible acts and beliefs of
terror, and Islam.

Terrorist and extremist ideology requires fertile
ground to grow. Hence confronting the symptoms
of terrorism without dealing with their root causes
cannot be sufficient for a long-lasting solution to
confront violent radicalization. We therefore call for
a proper understanding of the political, social and
economic context and environment that breeds such
violent extremism. We reaffirm our commitment to
strengthening cooperation in the fight against terrorism
through, inter alia, developing an appropriate, mutually
agreed definition ofterrorism, exchanges ofinformation
and capacity-building, and, in addition, addressing
the root causes of terrorism, such as prolonged,
unresolved conflicts, the continued suppression and
marginalization of peoples, and the denial of their
rights to self-determination in situations of foreign
occupation.

We echo in this regard what the Secretary-General
said in the context of the general debate: "Missiles kill
terrorists, but only good governance kills terrorism".
We underscore the need for a comprehensive approach
in order to respond effectively to the complex problem
of terrorism.

The OIC affirms the importance of bringing to
justice any person who supports, facilitates, participates
or attempts to participate in the financing, planning
or commission of terrorist acts. There are many
types of terrorism, and the OIC strongly condemns
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations committed
by whomsoever and wherever. We must draw the
Council's attention to Israel's acts of aggression against
the Palestinian people, which constitute war crimes
and State-sponsored terrorism. We emphasize the
importance of putting an end to such acts.

We also draw the Council's attention to the
escalating violence committed by extremist terrorist
Israeli settlers against the Palestinian population
in the occupied Palestinian territory. We call on
the international community to compel Israel, the
occupying Power, to prosecute and bring to justice all
those responsible for such crimes. We reiterate our call
on the international community to include the leaders
of the settlers and the extremist settler communities,
including the "Price Tag" and "Hilltop Youth" factions,
on the list of terrorists and criminals wanted for
international prosecution.

It is no exaggeration to say that humankind's future
depends on us uniting against those who would divide
us along the fault lines of tribe or sect, race or religion.
We must keep up our guard against those who use the
fight against terrorism or infiltrate extreme movements
to serve and widen their political agenda. Such acts will
only breed more terrorism.

With your permission, Madam President, I will
now continue in my national capacity as representative
of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.

(spoke in Arabic)

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia welcomed resolution
2170 (2014), having co-sponsored it, and resolution
2178 (2014), as both resolutions set out effective steps
that seek to defeat the phenomenon of foreign terrorist
fighters. Both resolutions also include elements to
counter violent extremism and are in line with the
positive track record of the Kingdom in terms of
initiatives to combat terrorism in all its forms.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia was one of the
first countries to take initiatives and effective steps
to combat the threat of foreing terrorist fighters. On
3 February 2014, the Government of the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia issued decrees that would penalize all
those who have participated or intend to participate
in fighting outside the Kingdom. The decrees also
criminalize all religious and extremist or other groups
that are listed and classified as terrorist organizations
domestically, regionally or internationally.

On many occasions, the Kingdom has warned
of the exacerbation of the situation in Syria, but the
international community has remained silent, failing to
heed those warnings in the desired manner. Our region
today is facing serious developments as a result of such
indifference and reluctance. As a result, the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia took effective and rapid steps to respond
to the threat and danger ofthe so-called Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL).

We called for a meeting on 12 September 2014
that included the participation of many countries,
including the United States of America. The meeting
issued a statement that clarifies the risks and threats
of ISIL and other extremist organizations, referring to
the importance of facing such an imminent threat in a
collective manner through an integrated international
coalition that would rescue the region and the entire
world.

The threat of foreign terrorist fighters is not limited
to countries where they are taking action; it goes
beyond the borders of those countries to have a negative
impact on the entire world. Therefore, the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia is of the firm conviction that regional and
international cooperation is of paramount importance
to facing this scourge.
Combating foreign terrorist fighters, particularly
extremist groups that exploit religion, must not be
limited to the security level. It should also include
uprooting the ideology and financial support that such
phenomena rely on. Many scholars and intellectuals in
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia continue to warn against
the dangers of distorted ideologies that drive terrorism.
The Council of Senior Religious Scholars of the
Kingdom recently issued a statement that affirms that
travel to areas of sedition and conflict is criminal and
anti-Islamic, and therefore prohibited. The statement
describes those who incite such acts as preachers of
evil who should be punished. Furthermore, the Grand
Mufti of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia described the
so-called Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant as one of
the biggest threats that Islam is facing today. We hope
that Islamic and religious entities in other countries
will follow suit and issue statements aimed at standing
up to misleading thought and narratives.

We underscore the importance of adopting a
comprehensive approach to facing terrorism that is
not linked to religion, ethnicity, race or color. In the
meantime, we emphasize that denying the Palestinian
people their legitimate rights while Israel continues its
occupation of Palestinian and Arab territories is one
of the main reasons that violence and extremism has
spread in our region. The crisis in Al-Quds Al-Sharif
and the continued provocation by Israel, the occupying
Power, and the criminal acts of the settlers are all proof
of that fact. Extremist groups find in such acts a pretext
to continue with their ideology and violent behaviour.
They use this pretext to say that they are working to end
occupation, injustice and aggression.

The spread of violence and extremism and the
emergence of organizations like ISIL and others come
about because of the existence of policies and practices
that lead to marginalization and sectarianism. Those
policies are practices by some countries and regimes in
the region, in addition to the fact that the international
community fails to act or put an end to the policies and
practices of the Syrian regime against its own people,
have created fertile ground for terrorist groups in Syria.
We call upon the Security Council to adopt a resolution
that would list all terrorist groups and organizations in
Syria on the sanctions list, including Hizbullah militias,
the Abu Al-Abbas faction and the Ahl Al-Haq groups.

In the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, we continue to
combat terrorism in all its forms and at all levels. The
Council should take decisive positions that reflect the
will of the international community so that we can end
and eliminate this scourge.
