Mr. Inderfurth (United States of America):At this
our first opportunity during the month of May, may I
extend the congratulations of my delegation to you on the
assumption of the Council presidency. Clearly, this is the
month for new French presidents. I wish to assure you of
our cooperation and support.
May I also take this opportunity to express my
delegation's appreciation and admiration to Ambassador
Kovanda and his delegation for the Czech Republic's
excellent stewardship of the Council during the month of
April. And, finally, may I extend my delegation's
welcome to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Georgia
for his presence here today and through him we would
like also to extend our greetings and best wishes to
President Shevardnadze.

The Council members who informally constitute the
"Friends of Georgia" and the other members of the
Council have approached this extension of the United
Nations Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG) with an
unusually high degree of consensus. This is prompted by
developments, some positive, some negative. Like other
members of the Council, we are encouraged by the fact
that the cease-fire has, by and large, been observed by
both parties. At the same time, we share with other
members the concern over the increasing number of
violent incidents directed against innocent civilians and
against members of UNOMIG and the Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS) peace-keeping force, in large
part, by armed elements that the parties claim are outside
their control. Both parties to the conflict must take steps
to rein in these elements. UNOMIG will remain only as
long as the Council is satisfied that the parties are doing
their utmost to protect UNOMIG personnel.

We also join other members of the Council in noting
with encouragement the positive role UNOMIG and the
CIS peace-keeping force are playing and the effective
coordination of these two separate missions. At the same
time, however, we are profoundly disappointed at the lack

 

of progress on the return of refugees and displaced persons
and on negotiations toward a political settlement of the
conflict. The parties must understand that the willingness of
the Council to continue its support of these processes
through the presence of UNOMIG depends on real progress
in these matters. The Abkhaz party must cease its
obstruction of refugee return, and both parties must work
seriously and genuinely with the Secretary-General's
Special Envoy and with the active facilitation of the
Russian Federation toward a political settlement.

Let me clarify my Government's support for extending
UNOMIG for approximately eight months, a longer period
than we have previously supported for UNOMIG. Our
position does not mean greater satisfaction with the
situation on the ground or with the negotiation process. Nor
does it predict infinite willingness to extend UNOMIG if its
presence is not contributing to progress toward a settlement.
Rather, we believe that, assuming the CIS Heads of States'
approval of an extension of the CIS peace-keeping
operation until 31 December 1995, the Council will be in
a better position in mid-January of 1996 to make a decision
on UNOMIG's future, knowing the disposition of the CIS
operation.

I would also like to share a few thoughts on what my
Government sees as the vital task of enhancing UNOMIG's
overall capabilities. While we support the important
contribution UNOMIG has made on the ground, we believe
it could be made even more effective. We would welcome
a review by the Secretary-General of UNOMIG's budget
and operations in light of the need to contain costs
wherever possible. We are also interested in steps that
could enhance the security of UNOMIG personnel. It is
also important that UNOMIG's mandate be completely
fulfilled, especially the directive to maintain close contacts
with both parties to the conflict and, by its presence in the
area, to contribute to conditions conducive to the safe and
orderly return of refugees and displaced persons. UNOMIG
should make better use of public information to promote
the image of the United Nations as a helpful, neutral player.

Finally, we are concerned that the UNOMIG
operations be recognized as fully supportive of Georgia's
territorial integrity, which the Council has repeatedly
affirmed. While the Abkhaz may have de facto control over
a part of the Republic of Georgia, they do not have the
rights of a sovereign State. UNOMIG's ability must be
consistent with the position of the Council that it does not
and will not accept Abkhaz independence.

