At the outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, for assuming the presidency of the Security Council for the month of June. We also extend our appreciation to the Permanent Representative of Estonia for steering the Council's agenda in the month of May. We also thank him in his capacity as Chair of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005), concerning the Sudan, for presenting the 90-day report of the Panel of Experts on the Sudan (see S/2020/36), of which we have taken note. A couple of weeks ago, the Sudan celebrated the first anniversary of the overthrow of the Al-Bashir regime at the hands of the Sudanese people, who had maintained an impressive peaceful uprising for several months until the regime gave in to the pressure and stepped down. The Sudanese people continue to march steadily towards building a prosperous, democratic and stable country that is at peace with itself and with its neighbours. The Security Council has a role to play in supporting the Sudanese people in the fulfilment of their aspirations and in the realization of their hopes, as well as in recognizing the sacrifices made by the Sudanese people since the start of the revolution. This is so both because the Council can make a difference and because it has an obvious intrinsic interest in preserving peace and security in the country. The situation in the Sudan has drastically changed over the past year, and the country expects no less than a positive reaction to these developments from the Security Council. More than 15 years ago, the Security Council adopted resolution 1591 (2005), by which sanctions were imposed. However, the sanctions have remained statically in place, despite the positive developments in the country. This is quite disturbing, as it sends a discouraging signal to the people and the Government of the Sudan that, whatever the right steps taken, sanctions will not be lifted. Lifting the sanctions would bea significant step towards improving the economic, social, and cultural conditions in the country during the transitional period. Furthermore, it would enhance the positive gains that have been achieved in the Sudan over the last few months. It is noteworthy that when resolution 2508 (2020), which extended the mandate of the Panel of Experts, was adopted last February, the Council expressed its intention to establish through the resolution "clear, well identified, and measurable key benchmarks that could serve in guiding the Security Council to review measures on the Government of [the] Sudan" (resolution 2508 (2020), para. 4). We call on the Council to establish these benchmarks and outline specific areas to which these benchmarks may relate, with the ultimate objective of ending the sanctions regime.
