Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): First of all,
Mr. President, I would like to join previous speakers in
thanking you for convening today's open debate on the
implementation of Security Council resolutions 1540
(2004) and 1673 (2006). My delegation views today's
debate as an opportunity to renew our commitment to
the full implementation of those resolutions and to
share our views on the best means of doing so.

The world today faces mounting threats from the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
Particularly frightening is the possibility of such
weapons being used by terrorists. It has become
imperative for the international community to work
together to address these threats. Against this
backdrop, the Security Council's unanimous adoption
of resolution 1540 (2004) was a historic step which
was reinforced last year with the adoption of resolution
1673 (2006).

Three years after the passage of resolution 1540
(2004), there are still daunting challenges to the
attainment of its goals. As indicated in the concept
paper prepared for today's debate (8/2007/84, annex),
there are 58 States that have not yet submitted their
first national reports on implementation. While the
submission of a report does not guarantee
implementation, it is an important first step in the
process. My delegation therefore calls for universal
submission of national reports. More intensive efforts
should be made to achieve that end. In this regard, we
welcome the 1540 Committee's programme of work to
intensify its outreach activities and to assist States in
preparing and submitting national reports.

According to the Committee's analysis of those
national reports that have been submitted, there are in
many cases significant gaps between the commitments
of States to the resolution and their practical
implementation of its requirements. There are also
imbalances in implementation among States and
regions. My delegation believes that identifying and
understanding these gaps and imbalances is important
to ensure the full and effective implementation of the
resolution in the mid to long term. In this respect, the
Committee needs to strengthen its monitoring role. It
would also be useful to promote good practices and
share lessons learned in closing the gaps and
eliminating the imbalances.

While implementation of resolution 1540 (2004)
at the national level is fundamental, full and effective
implementation will also require coordination and
cooperation at the subregional, regional and
international levels. Regional and subregional
initiatives aimed at implementation would not only
spur national Governments to action, but would also
provide a positive example for nations in other regions.

Also conducive to attaining the goals of the
resolution is the sharing of information and experience
on the non-proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction with relevant international organizations
and export control regimes. In that respect, it is
welcome and opportune that representatives of the
International Atomic Energy Agency, the Organisation
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and the World
Customs Organization are participating in today's
debate. Similarly, we welcome the initiative of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) to work closely with
international and regional organizations.
The Republic of Korea has been an active
participant in international efforts aimed at the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction in all
its aspects and is a State party to most international
disarmament and non-proliferation treaties and
multilateral export control regimes. We have faithfully
implemented resolution 1540 (2004), putting in place
the necessary legal and administrative systems to
ensure compliance. We are committed to its full
implementation at the national, regional and
international levels.

In that regard, my delegation is pleased to report
that the Republic of Korea, together with Australia -
as stated earlier by the representative of Australia -
will host an international seminar next month in Seoul
on the subject of brokering controls in all its aspects, at
which one session will be devoted to Security Council
resolutions on non-proliferation, including resolution
1540 (2004).

Let me close by commending the strenuous
efforts of the 1540 Committee and its Chairman,
Ambassador Burian, to facilitate implementation of the
resolution. We assure him of our full support and
cooperation in that important endeavour.

