Mr. Chungong Ayafor (Cameroon) (spoke in French): Allow me, in turn, to thank Mr. Kalomoh and
Mr. Ramos Horta, the Special Envoy of the Community
of Portuguese-Speaking Countries, for their very
detailed and complimentary presentations on the
situation in Guinea-Bissau. Cameroon would like to
reiterate its strong disapproval of the 14 September
military coup d'etat that brought about on 17
September the resignation of President Kumba Yala.
We take note of that resignation and we cannot but take
note of the appointment of a civil transitional
Government with a Civilian president and a civilian
prime minister. Our best wishes of success go to the
transitional Government.

We are gratified to see that the military junta has
refrained from staying in power during the transitional
period and has thus opened the way to the rapid
restoration of constitutional order in Guinea-Bissau and
made it possible for an exit from the crisis. I would like
to pay tribute to the prompt diplomatic action of the
presidents of Ghana and Nigeria, as well as of the
president of Senegal, who visited Bissau and persuaded
General Correia Seabra, the self-proclaimed President,
to hand over power to a civilian Government. We also
commend the ECOWAS initiative as well as that of the
African Union who sent a joint mission to Guinea-
Bissau.

This time, and from now on, the army must keep
the promise it made in June to the Council's mission to
West Africa not to intervene in the political process
and to serve the constitutional authorities with loyalty.
The unconstitutional change of power has far from
miraculously eliminated the many problems that
Guinea-Bissau will have to solve in partnership with
the international community if it wishes to consolidate
peace in the country.

The socio-economic crisis remains unchanged,
with the additional social tensions born from the crisis.
More than ever before, Guinea-Bissau requires the
assistance of the international community, not only to
put the electoral process back on track and to shorten
the transitional period, but also to prevent the same
causes from producing the same effects once again.

We have no set idea about the duration of the
transition but we feel that the required attention must
be given both to the proposals in the transitional
agreement handed over to the military junta by the
transitional committee, presided over by the
Archbishop of Bissau, and to the opinion expressed by
ECOWAS.

The Council should encourage all concerned
parties to continue to carefully follow the situation as it
develops - particularly the African Union, ECOWAS,
the Community of Portuguese-Speaking Countries, the
Economic and Social Council Ad Hoc Advisory Group
on Guinea-Bissau, the Group of Friends of Guinea-
Bissau and the Ad Hoc Working Group of the Security
Council on Conflict Prevention and Resolution in
Africa, chaired by Ambassador Gaspar Martins.

