Mr. Doutriaux (France) (spoke in French): The
French delegation welcomes today's adoption by the
Security Council of a resolution that reflects our
commitment to strengthening the peacekeeping ability
of the United Nations. We have taken a number of
decisions today that will enable the Council to play its
full role in implementing the significant
recommendations in the Brahimi Report.

The Security Council has indeed a paramount role
to play in maintaining international peace and security.
Hence, its responsibility in implementing proposed
reforms is essential. The work we have been
successfully doing in this connection, under the
chairmanship of Ambassador Ward, provides specific
and new responses to the expectations outlined in the
Brahimi Report.

In particular I wish to underline, in our work all
that relates to the significant strengthening in Council
consultations with troop-contributing countries - a
process which must be employed and maintained
throughout all phases of preparation and until the
successful carrying out of the mandate assigned to any
peacekeeping operation.

France will continue actively to contribute to
peacekeeping operations, notably by despatching police
officers, civilian and military experts and supporting
the formation and equipping of battalions, mainly
African, and in providing logistic and financial
support. This contribution has in the past at times been
dramatic. I have in mind the 65 French soldiers killed
in the service of the United Nations Protection Force
(UNPROFOR) in Bosnia. My country has been, and
will continue, to make contributions to other operations
authorized by the Security Council, as applies to
Bosnia and Kosovo today.

I would also mention that at the General
Assembly last September, Mr. Vedrine, on behalf of the
European Union, referred to European projects aimed
at strengthening security and defence capabilities and
crisis management capabilities, to be completed by
2003. Indeed, to date, the European Union has prepared
security forces consisting of some 60,000 soldiers and
5000 police officers. These capabilities will in due
course be made available under a United Nations
peacekeeping mandate or any operation authorized by
the Security Council.

Today the Security Council has, in our View,
responded to the appeal made by the heads of State and
Government at the recent Millennium Summit
regarding the reforms called for in the Brahimi Report.

