Mr. Corman (Turkey): As Turkey aligns itself
with the statement to be delivered by the representative
of Sweden on behalf of the European Union, I will
keep my remarks brief.

First, I wish to thank Mr. Oscar Fernandez-
Taranco, Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, for his briefing.

As international efforts to reinvigorate the search
for peace in the Middle East are under way, the
expectation is building within the international
community for a prompt resumption and early
conclusion of negotiations to resolve all permanent
status issues, as stated in the recent Quartet
declaration.

Given the fact that there has been no functional
process in the region for a while, the resumption of the
peace process on all its tracks has become a matter of
urgency. At this stage, strong affirmation is needed for
the framework of peace as embodied in the relevant
Security Council resolutions, the Madrid principles, the
Arab Peace Initiative and the Road Map obligations. It
is crucial that we keep dialogue channels open with all
parties and remain committed to the vision of two
States living side by side in peace and security. That
vision holds the key to a permanent peace in the
Middle East and has no alternative.

In this respect, we also wish to note the particular
importance of the Arab Peace Initiative, which Turkey
firmly supports. As we hope to enter a new and
intensive period, it is incumbent upon the parties to
adopt a constructive and positive approach. In this
vein, they should first fulfil their obligations emanating
from the Road Map and the relevant Security Council
resolutions.

Secondly, the parties must avoid taking steps and
declaring preconditions that might empty the peace
process of its content. The core issues are subject to
final status negotiations and should not be undermined
by unilateral acts. Any action that prejudges the final
outcome of the negotiations would only lead to a
further crisis of confidence among the parties.

Here, we wish to underline our concern, once
again, about the settlement activities of Israel in the
West Bank and East Jerusalem, as well as measures
taken by Israel that could alter the character and status
of Jerusalem and further isolate East Jerusalem from
the rest of the Palestinian territory. Turkey has
repeatedly made it clear that such policies are not
compatible with peace efforts and hamper the peace
process. They are illegal and should stop.

There is a persistent need for international efforts
in the peace process to be accompanied by decisive
actions on the ground in order to offer a real change for
the Palestinians and give them the chance to lead a
better life. At this point, we sadly note that there has
been almost no progress in recent months on
implementing resolution 1860 (2009). We re-emphasize
the fact that the full opening of the crossings into Gaza
is a must for the humanitarian response, socio-economic
recovery and reconstruction. The suffocation of Gaza
has led to immense suffering, unprecedented
unemployment and poverty rates, and almost total aid
dependency. This situation must be reversed.

I would also emphasize the fact that
reconciliation among Palestinian groups is also a must.
We hope that talks to this end will succeed and that the
presidential and legislative elections will be held at the
appropriate times.

As for Lebanon, we reaffirm our strong support
for resolution 1701 (2006) and its full implementation
by all parties. We hope that, following the elections in
Lebanon, a Government that embraces all segments of
the Lebanese people is established as soon as possible.
At the current stage, it is essential that all parties in
Lebanon act in conformity with the national dialogue
process initiated by President Michel Sleiman. We
believe that lasting stability in Lebanon is important
not only to Lebanon itself, but also to the peace and
security of the entire region.

In the Middle East, we need to maintain optimism
in the face of the challenges persisting in the region.
Currently, there have been some developments that do
give us some hope. Let us keep in mind that
opportunities rarely last forever and that now is the
right time to seize them. For our part, we continue to
work on all tracks of the Middle East peace process to
achieve a viable and comprehensive peace.

