Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America):
The Council is here today to review the work of the
1267 Committee, the Counter-Terrorism Committee
and the 1540 Committee. Most speakers have engaged
constructively in discussing ways to increase
cooperation and advance the work of the three
committees, and we appreciate those contributions. It is
disappointing, therefore, that two representatives in
particular departed from the focus of the debate to
introduce allegations that distort the facts of two cases
being adjudicated in the United States.

In the case of Mr. Luis Posada Carriles, the
United States has taken a number of legal actions with
respect to Mr. Posada. In taking these steps, the United
States has acted in ways that are consistent with
international law and with our domestic legal
framework, which provides various constitutional
safeguards to protect individual rights. As with all
democracies that follow the rule of law - as opposed
to other systems of governance - those safeguards
provide that an individual cannot be brought to trial or
extradited unless sufficient evidence has been
established that he committed the offense for which he
has been charged. In the United States, this standard is
described as "probable cause". Let me present a brief
overview of steps my Government has taken with
respect to Posada within this legal framework.

Posada entered the United States illegally in early
2005. He was detained by immigration authorities in
the United States on 17 May 2005, and he was, in
accordance with United States law, placed in removal
proceedings. On 27 September 2005, an immigration
judge ordered Posada's removal from the United States
but granted a deferral of removal to Cuba and
Venezuela under the regulations implementing the
United Nations Convention against Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment.

The court ordered that Posada "be deported and
removed from the United States to any country other
than Cuba and Venezuela willing to accept him". This
order remains in effect. The United States has been
seeking ways to implement it, consistent with the terms
of the order and United States regulations that
implement the obligations of the United States under
the Convention against Torture.

Moreover, the United States sought and obtained
a criminal indictment charging Posada with violations
of our immigration laws. The United States District
Court handling that case dismissed the indictment. As
is well known, our judges are wholly independent of
the executive branch of our Government. They enjoy
tenure for life and are fiercely independent. This
federal judge, not sitting in Florida but in Texas,
reached her decision according to her reading of the
law.

In our system, as in all those that respect the rule
of law, a decision by the courts must be obeyed unless
and until it is overturned by a higher court. The United
States filed a notice appealing the district court's
decision dismissing the case on 5 June 2007, but that
appeal has not yet been decided.

Posada also remains under investigation for past
activities. In the meantime, Posada remains subject to
the order of removal issued by the immigration judge
and is without legal status in the United States. He is
also subject to an order of supervision from the
Department of Homeland Security Immigration and
Customs Enforcement, which imposes certain
restrictions on Posada, including reporting and
monitoring requirements. In sum, the United States
continues to be engaged in an ongoing series of actions
with respect to Posada, consistent with our legal
requirements, due process and the rule of law.

In the case of the five Cubans accused of spying,
in 2001 the individuals in question were convicted in
United States federal courts of conspiracy to commit
espionage, among other charges, which included
conspiracy by one of those individuals to commit
murder, having supported and implemented a plan to
shoot down United States civilian aircraft. On
31 October 2005, the Eleventh Circuit Court of
Appeals vacated a previous ruling by a three-judge
appellate panel that ordered a new trial. On rehearing,
the Eleventh Circuit Court of Appeals as a whole
affirmed the propriety of the trial on the challenged
ground and returned the rest of the appellate issues to
the three-judge panel for a decision. The remaining
appellate issues await a decision by the court.

The five convicted spies are serving their prison
sentences while the case is processed in the United
States judicial system. The United States has always
provided the five defendants with all the guarantees of
due process inherent in the independent and impartial
United States judicial system. Despite the frustration
expressed by the two speakers who raised these cases,
we assure them that United States courts and
administrative procedures are independent and that
they fairly and impartially interpret and apply the law.

