Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to express to the entire Council my
best wishes for the new year. Allow me to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council. Allow me also to
pay tribute, as previous speakers have done, to the
outstanding work carried out by Ambassador Michel
Kafando and his entire team during the month of
December.

With respect to the subject of our debate, I should
like, again as previous speakers have done, to pay a
wholehearted tribute to the work of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Kai Eide.
Thanks to his efforts, the United Nations is now the
principal actor in Afghanistan in terms of coordinating
international action and dialogue with political actors
and Afghan society. This achievement must be
preserved, and its effects should be amplified.

This is a momentous occasion for France. For the
first time in the Security Council, the European Union
will speak through its delegation to the United Nations.
This is the result of the implementation of the Treaty of
Lisbon. I therefore welcome that representative. For
France, this is an important and a moving moment.
France, of course, associates itself with the statement
that he will deliver.

I would like to emphasize in particular the main
challenges of the year ahead. The most imminent
event, as Mr. Kai Eide said, is the London Conference
to be held on 28 January 2010. It will be an important
step in the process aimed at framing the partnership
between Afghanistan and the international community
in terms that enable full ownership by the Afghan
people of their destiny.

President Karzai made important commitments to
reform in his inaugural speech. We hope that the
London Conference and the Kabul conference to
follow will be opportunities for the Afghan
Government to launch its reform programme, in
particular in the priority areas of governance,
particularly local governance, concerning which
Mr. Eide was particularly eloquent; strengthening
Afghan civil and security forces; the fight against
corruption and drug trafficking; regional cooperation,
and the reintegration of combatants.

This programme must be based on more coherent
action by the international community. We have been
talking about this for years, and I believe that we must
at last align our actions with this commonsense
objective. The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) was given a central role in this
area by the Security Council. It should have the
necessary resources, as well as the authority that is
essential to more effective coordination. This will
involve strengthening the ties between the United
Nations and the other international organizations
present in the country, as well as with the main donors.

We therefore support the establishment of a
structure that includes the main civilian and military
actors in Afghanistan under the co-chairmanship of the
Afghan Government and the United Nations. Such a
structure, which would meet frequently and at regular
intervals, should cover civilian aid, civil-military
coordination and regional cooperation. I would stress

that this last issue should, in the future, receive
increased attention. We hope that, to this end, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General will
enhance his efforts for follow-up to and promotion of
regional dialogue.

We have taken note of the wish of the Afghan
authorities to hold legislative elections in May 2010 in
accordance with the timeline set out in the
Constitution. This choice is, of course, the sovereign
decision of the Afghan authorities alone. However, the
lessons of the presidential elections must be heeded,
and certain reforms of the electoral system must be
carried out ahead of time and in accordance with the
Constitution. We must help the Afghan authorities to
identify the necessary reforms that have a realistic
chance of being carried out before the elections. The
Afghans have shown their commitment to democracy,
and this commitment should not be betrayed. The next
elections should be held in conditions that ensure a free
and democratic choice. The fraud witnessed during the
presidential elections must not be repeated.

I would like to conclude by assuring the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative that
we share their concerns about the security of United
Nations staff. In Afghanistan, as in other countries in
crisis, the necessary means must be dedicated to
protecting United Nations personnel. The necessary
reinforcement of these means, which should be
earmarked for spending in the field as a priority, should
be carried out alongside a comprehensive reflection on
the future geographical placement of UNAMA
installations and deployment of its missions in the light
of the new political and security context, which is all
too real.

