Mr. Chambas: I am pleased to be here today to brief
the Security Council on the situation in West Africa
and the implementation of the mandate of the United
Nations Office for West Africa (UNOWA). Further to
the sixteenth report (8/2015/ 1012) of the Secretary-
General on the activities of the United Nations Office
for West Africa, which is before the Council, I would
like to highlight a few issues and to update members on
the most recent developments.

There were a number of key political developments
in West Africa in the past six months. Peaceful and
credible elections were held in several countries.

In Burkina Faso, the transitional institutions
ensured the holding of the presidential and legislative
elections in a timely manner, despite the challenges
that emerged following the failed coup d'etat of
16 September. I would like to take this opportunity
to reiterate my congratulations to the people and the
leaders of Burkina Faso for their exemplary conduct
and peaceful and responsible participation during the
polling. The inauguration of President Roch Marc
Christian Kabore marked a successful end to the
transition period.

In Guinea, a dialogue process supported by the
United Nations in coordination with regional and
international actors enabled the holding of presidential
elections in accordance with constitutional deadlines.
The peaceful holding of the elections, which resulted
in the re-election of President Alpha Conde, constitutes
an important milestone in the country's process of
democratic consolidation.

Peaceful elections were also conducted in Cote
d'Ivoire, resulting in the re-election of the incumbent,
President Alassane Ouattara.

With regard to Nigeria, I am encouraged by
the establishment of a new Government and by its
commitment to actively combating corruption. That
will contribute to the creation of an environment that
will allow the country to realize its full economic
potential.

Those developments demonstrate the democratic
resolve of the peoples of West Africa.

As Council members are aware, five presidential
elections are scheduled to take place in 2016 - in
Benin, Cabo Verde, the Gambia, Ghana and the Niger.
In the lead-up to those elections, I will continue to
call on all national stakeholders to utilize dialogue
to resolve outstanding elections-related issues so as
to create a conducive environment for the holding of
peaceful, credible and inclusive elections.

Violent extremism and terrorist activities remain
a major threat to security and development in West
Africa, further aggravating the region's humanitarian
challenges. While some progress has been made in
the fight against Boko Haram, that terrorist group
continues its indiscriminate attacks against civilians,
not only in Nigeria but also in the Niger, Chad and
Cameroon. Boko Haram continues to adapt its tactics
and is increasingly resorting to using young boys and
girls to engage in suicide attacks. In response, countries
in the region have intensified their efforts to combat
those terrorist tricks and have improved cooperation in
areas such as intelligence-sharing.

As they conduct military operations against the
group, it is critical that they maintain adherence to
international human rights, humanitarian law and
refugee law. It is also critical for countries of West and
Central Africa to work on development strategies that
address the root causes of the insurgency, notably the
underlying socioeconomic grievances of marginalized
communities. In that regard, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Bathily and I are working to
ensure that the expected Lake Chad Basin Commission
summit and the joint summits of the Economic
Community of West African States and the Economic
Community of Central African States take place as
soon as possible.

There has also been some progress in the area
of security sector reform (SSR). The new United
Nations senior security reform adviser, who was
recently appointed by the Secretary-General to support
President Alpha Conde of Guinea in his efforts to
advance the implementation of SSR, is already working
intensely with the President and his Government. At the
President's request, the technical follow-up commission
and all five technical sector committees on SSR, led by
the senior SSR adviser, have resumed the holding of
regular meetings.

Concerning drug trafficking and transnational
organized crime, in November I chaired a meeting of the
high-level policy committee of the West Africa Coast
Initiative. I was pleased to note the commitment of
countries inthe region to fight that scourge. Transnational
organized crime units in Sierra Leone, Guinea-Bissau
and Liberia have been conducting effective joint
investigations, while the unit in Cote d'Ivoire is working
to become operational shortly. Regrettably, progress
has been slower in the area of maritime security in the
Gulf of Guinea. The interregional coordination centre
in Yaounde, inaugurated in September 2014, is still not
fully operational, and the coordination centre covering
Togo, Benin, the Niger and Nigeria has yet to receive
staff, funding and equipment. We continue to urge all
partners to intensify their cooperation in this matter.

We welcome with satisfaction the news that there
are no more active Ebola cases in the region. In that
regard, I would like to pay tribute to the national,
subregional, regional and international actors that
contributed to that achievement. At present, the task of
rehabilitating essential services calls for our undivided
attention. The epidemic has dramatically served to
expose the fragility of national health systems and
to highlight the importance of effective governance.
Its repercussions will continue to be felt in the form
of secondary fatalities due to inadequate capacities
and loss of livelihoods, which have compounded an
economic crisis in countries already severely affected
by the decline in commodity prices.

I salute the resilience of the people of West Africa
in overcoming adversity, and their commitment to
uphold democratic principles. I want to assure members
that UNOWA will not relent in supporting their
efforts towards enhanced democracy and sustainable
development. In the light of the support of the Security
Council, which has consistently contributed to our
engagement, I am confident that the United Nations
will continue to remain a most relevant partner to the
countries and institutions of the West African region.

