Mr. Alday Gonzalez (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Mexico thanks you, Mr. President, for convening this
debate on a subject that is very relevant in the light
of the events of recent days in Europe and the Middle
East. We take this opportunity to extend our sincere
condolences to the delegations of Russia, Lebanon
and France for the loss of human lives and the wounds
incurred from the recent attacks.

The changing nature of the violent conflicts
in different regions of the world is entrenched in
inequality, exclusion, the lack of equal opportunities
and jobs, frustration and social alienation. It suffices
to look at the news headlines of the past few days to
understand that our Organization's work to maintain
international peace and security, prevent conflicts
and establish peaceful societies remains fragile and
insufficient. All United Nations organs, within their
respective remits, and the international community as
a whole must keep pace with these realities and work
better and more appropriately to improve our capacity
for prevention and response to build and maintain
peace. We cannot allow current conflicts to continue to
cause havoc or the conflicts of the past to return with
renewed violence.

Among the broad range of recommendations
derived from the review processes of United Nations
peacekeeping operations and the peacebuilding
architecture, perhaps none better reflects the objective
and spirit of this meeting than that stressed by the
team headed by Ambassador Gert Rosenthal to
change the epicentre of peacebuilding efforts from the
reactive perspective that has prevailed for years to a
preventive one. In that regard, the focus on building
and consolidating peace should, in my delegation's
opinion, be the guiding theme that allows us to reduce
the gap between the silos referred to in the concept
note before us (S/2015/845, annex). We believe that
the Peacebuilding Commission can and must play an
important role in this exercise.

The lessons learned over the past decade reveal
us that, in order to be successful, peacebuilding
requires a comprehensive focus on conflicts through
the establishment of a solid and unidirectional
linkage among the three pillars of the work of the
United Nations: peace and security, human rights and
development. Reversing fragmentation of efforts will
require coherent collective action to that end. In order
to translate recommendations into action, we must
approach prevention, peacebuilding and peacekeeping
as a political process that requires sustained attention
and long-term commitment and action. As part of
that dynamic, the necessary consent of Member
States should serve to bolster the principle of national
ownership.

The principle of national ownership must be
strengthened. We can build national capacities,
strengthen institutions and support good governance if
we involve the greatest number of stakeholders from
the very start, including, of course, women at every
stage. International, regional and subregional financial
organizations, when their constituent bodies allow, can
accompany and bolster the efforts of the United Nations
in addressing the causes of conflict in a preventive
manner.

As the Secretary-General noted at the beginning
of this meeting, the issue of financial resources is
also relevant to strengthening the Organization's
prevention and response capacities. My delegation
believes that there is no better investment than
investing in peace, development and security for our
societies. We believe that the requests and mandates
to do more must be accompanied by a predictable
budgetary structure and strategic planning that allows
us to strengthen efficiency and effectiveness. We
therefore support and will continue to support firmly
the important recommendations made by the Advisory
Group of Experts on the Review of the Peacebuilding
Architecture and the High-level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations in favour of the immediate adoption
of proposals to establish a special and separate account
for special political missions, which are among the main
tools of the Council and the Organization in prevention,
mediation and conflict resolution.

Prevention is urgent and the risks of inaction are
greater than ever. The current session of the General
Assembly, focused on the follow-up of the review
processes in different bodies and commissions, provides
us with a valuable opportunity to convert our rhetorical
commitments into early and effective action aimed at
the prevention of violence and the establishment of
peaceful societies.

