Ms. Loj (Denmark): Let me express my gratitude
to you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting. It is
most appropriate that it is Benin that is guiding us
through the challenges pertaining to cross-border
issues in West Africa. I also thank the Secretary-
General, his Special Representative and the
Representative of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) for sharing their thoughts
with us on this important matter.

I would like to associate myself with the
statement to be delivered later by the Permanent
Representative of Luxembourg on behalf of the
European Union (EU).

The violence, conflict and instability that haunt
much of West Africa have taken a terrible toll in terms
of lives and the welfare and development of the
peoples of the subregion. It is therefore only
appropriate that the Council, on a regular basis, should
take stock of the problems of West Africa. In that
regard, we thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2005/86).

We are pleased to note that some progress has
been made towards peace, stability and democracy
since the Council's last debate. Elections are scheduled
for this year in three of the countries on the Council's
agenda - events that could finally prove the power of
the ballot over the bullet as a means of legitimate
transfer of authority in that part of the world.

There are, however, numerous grounds for
continued concern, not least the deteriorating situation
in Cote d'Ivoire, which has strong repercussions in the
whole region, such as stalling economic activity,
reversing migrant flows and fuelling flows of refugees,
increasing the use of mercenaries and the acceptance of
impunity.

It is evident that the root causes of the conflicts
have yet to be tackled, and equally evident that
addressing the situation in individual countries in
isolation will not bring lasting peace to West Africa.
Together with other actors in the security, humanitarian
and development fields, the Council must design its
response to the conflicts within an overall subregional
framework for joint and integrated action. Only in that
way can we ensure that all the actors involved in
conflict prevention in West Africa pull in the same
direction and guarantee viable exit strategies. The
forthcoming action plan by the United Nations Office
in West Africa (UNOWA), ECOWAS and the EU will
hopefully contribute to that end.

Against that background, let me briefly offer
some thoughts on areas of action that we deem
particularly important.

First, the strengthened African involvement in
conflict prevention and management is to be welcomed
and encouraged. The prompt and firm response of
ECOWAS to the recent developments in Togo is a clear
case in point and deserves our full support. Denmark
firmly believes that African ownership and
participation in conflict management should be further
strengthened and encouraged. The Council should
explore how to best support the ongoing efforts to
build an African security architecture and should
closely work with ECOWAS and the African Union
(AU) to advance ways and means of cooperation.
When we say this, it should not be misinterpreted as a
way of extricating ourselves from the problems of the
continent, but rather as evidence of our firm conviction
that Africa needs home-grown solutions to its
problems. The goal should be to establish efficient
partnerships and an equitable division of labour
between the United Nations and African organizations
in accordance with their comparative advantages. To
that end, ECOWAS and the AU should aim at further
harmonizing their policies, institutions and activities,
and should clearly indicate their focus areas.
Let me note that Denmark contributes actively to
enhancing the capacity of African regional and
subregional organizations in conflict prevention not
only through the European Union but also through
substantial bilateral assistance. Thus, Denmark,
through its Africa Programme for Peace, allocates €33
million to such activities.

Secondly, I would like to stress the continued role
of United Nations missions in the region and the need
to make the most of them. Many initiatives have been
launched to increase the liaison across missions. We
look forward to the specific report on inter-mission
cooperation.

We strongly believe that more can still be done to
join forces and pool assets across the United Nations
missions in West Africa to better tackle cross-border
issues. The effort to stop sanctions-busters, soldiers of
fortune and mercenaries from operating across borders
and taking their deadly business from one country to
the next could be enhanced by, inter alia, mandating
peace operations to engage in the monitoring and
enforcement of sanctions, including joint cross-border
controls. Further sharing of resources would free up
capacity for other pressing tasks. With approximately
25,000 United Nations peacekeepers in the region,
there should be room for economies of scale. We
recognize the practical problems involved, but, instead
of being paralysed by such problems, we should
stimulate new and constructive thinking.

Thirdly, with regard to specific areas of action, I
would like to reiterate the calls for the development
and dissemination of best practices for security sector
reform, including the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) process. Experience in West
Africa suggests that the choices made by security and
armed actors in times of heightened political conflicts
are crucial in determining whether or not States
descend into chaos. Depoliticizing the role of security
forces and subjecting them to democratic oversight are
prerequisites for preventing new conflict and building
peace.

The approach to security sector reform must go
beyond regular military and police forces; it must also
include Government-supported militias, irregular
combatants and civil defence groups, and it must be
tackled within the wider context of the judiciary and
the legislature. The DDR processes in the region must
be further harmonized. In that regard, we are pleased to
note the plans of the Secretary-General. As we
mentioned last week during the debate on small arms
(see S/PV.5127), the possibility of funding a larger
share of DDR-related activities in peace operations
through assessed contributions should be approached
with an open mind.

The DDR process should be tailored to
specifically take into account the problem of children
and discontented, disillusioned West African youth.
Denmark strongly believes that that challenge must be
addressed within the security-development nexus.
There is a need to deal with both youngsters directly
involved in fighting and minors who have been kept as
sex objects and forced labourers by armed groups and
who, in many instances, have ended up as victims of
HIV/AIDS and illegal drugs. To counteract the ease
with which youngsters are drawn directly or indirectly
into the abyss of violence, looting and killing, national
and external actors must carefully assist the young
generation in building a civilian life where their
potential can be released and their aspirations fulfilled.
The young generation should be acknowledged as
capable citizens and drawn into mainstream politics.

In conclusion, the clear interrelationship among
the three themes that the Council has debated within
the past six working days - small arms and light
weapons, children and armed conflict and cross-border
problems in West Africa - is worth noting. Each of
the debates has made clear how security and
development are closely interrelated. They have also
made clear that the demand on national, subregional,
regional and international actors to tackle the root
causes of conflict in Africa in general and in West
Africa in particular is mounting, not waning. An
adequate response can be achieved only if all of us join
forces in a common strategic approach. Denmark
stands ready to do its share.

