Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): First of all, I would like to commend the Chinese presidency for convening today's debate on such a timely and important topic. I also welcome the adoption of presidential statement S/PRST/2020/5. Ithank Ms. DiCarlo, Ms. Mohammed and Mr. Dieye for their enlightening briefings. As we have heard, Da'esh and Al-Qaida affiliates are entrenched in conflict zones, in particular in the Sahel, Somalia and the Arabian peninsula, where they target, with misleading rhetoric, those who are often marginalized and disillusioned by the dearth of economic opportunities. Local conflicts are exploited by terrorist movements, such as Boko Haram, Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb and Al-Shabaab. Such groups appropriate functions generally conducted by States by imposing their ideology of violent extremism. We are concerned about the increase in the number of attacks perpetrated by Da'esh and Al-Qaida affiliates in the Sahel. The fact that such groups increasingly work together, despite their rivalry in the Middle East and elsewhere in the world, is also worrisome. They attack civilian infrastructure, military convoys and Government buildings. Terrorism on the African continent dovetails with transnational crime and is compounded by other sources of instability, such as the proliferation of armed groups and human trafficking. The challenges are formidable. We must overcome them by working with the African continent. The continent needs our support. Africa can count on the support of my country and, as Belgium is a State member of the European Union, I can also say that of the European Union. As many representatives brought up earlier, I recall the importance of following a comprehensive approach in the fight against terrorism. It is indeed clear that the phenomenon of terrorism in Africa extends far beyond the area of maintaining law and order. It is also deeply rooted in the challenges specific to the region and requires an integrated and comprehensive approach on the part of society. We will not succeed by simply putting in place increasingly sophisticated surveillance systems, or by creating a culture of repression at the hands of security forces. African countries in which terrorism finds fertile ground are also in need of economic development and political prospects rooted in quality education. It is imperative therefore to continue increasing young people's resilience to withstand the toxic rhetoric of Da'esh and Al-Qaida affiliates, while at the same time providing them with sustainable and inclusive economic opportunities and prospects for the future. In that regard, I would like to refer to the joint communication of 9 March from the European Commission and the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, entitled "Towards a comprehensive strategy with Africa", which highlights in particular the importance of our cooperation on peace and governance. In order to increase the resilience of African communities to withstand the harmful influence of terrorism, it will be imperative to strengthen governance, address the sense of exclusion and the lack of trust in Government institutions, enable civil society to operate in a safe and thriving space, promote political inclusion, including that of women, in the development of strategies to combat violent extremism, develop counter-terrorism policy that does not prevent individuals and civil society from enjoying their human rights and basic freedoms, acknowledge the significant role to be played by non-governmental organizations in the impartial delivery of humanitarian aid, and, lastly, mitigate the negative effects of the fight against terrorism on those humanitarian activities. I welcome the fact that African countries are increasingly coming together on this difficult issue, with several regional and subregional initiatives in partnership with the United Nations from which the same conclusions are being drawn. The points that I just brought up are reflected in the Charter of the United Nations, numerous Security Council resolutions and the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. Belgium more than ever supports the United Nations efforts in the fight against terrorism on the African continent and the partnerships between the United Nations and regional organizations within that framework. Lastly, the fight against terrorism can be effective only if all measures taken by Member States to counter it comply with all obligations under international law, human rights law, international refugee law and international humanitarian law. We stand ready to continue our efforts in the fight against terrorism, side by side and together with our African partners in full solidarity.
