Mr. Ettalhi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, on behalf of my country, I
should like to convey my deepest condolences to the
peoples of China and Myanmar on the huge human
losses they have suffered.

I should also like to thank the United Kingdom
for organizing this debate on an issue of great
importance. We highly appreciate the presence of
Mr. Miliband, Secretary of State for Foreign and
Commonwealth Affairs of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
First, I wish to emphasize that my delegation
aligns itself with the statement to be made by the
representative of Jamaica on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement. I should like to make a few additional
remarks.

As was declared at the 2005 World Summit,
development, peace, security and human rights are
interdependent and mutually reinforcing areas. That
basic principle should be taken into consideration in
any discussion about post-conflict peacebuilding. In
that context and because of the limitations of our
experience, I should like to make a few brief
comments.

First, in post-conflict peacebuilding, it is essential
that peacekeeping forces should not be withdrawn
before ensuring that the conditions in the country
concerned have become appropriate, because a
premature withdrawal could plunge the country back
into conflict and violence - a situation that is
particularly difficult to address. Peacebuilding requires
that we take a comprehensive approach in restoring a
secure environment, placing priority on building State
institutions, rebuilding police and military forces,
establishing the rule of law and promoting human
rights, with a particular emphasis on eradicating
poverty, hunger and marginalization. At a later stage, it
requires that we lay the foundations for sustainable
development and build the Government's capacity to
provide essential public services, including health care
and education, and to ovate employment opportunities.
All of that should be carried out with full respect for
the sovereignty of the country concerned and for its
ownership of all processes under its leadership.

Secondly, viability and sustainability of the
peacebuilding process requires the commitment and
participation of all local actors and responsible
implementation. As already noted, the process should
be comprehensive and based on mutual commitments,
pledges and contacts between all national actors
concerned.

Thirdly, we wish to highlight the important role
that can be played by regional and subregional
organizations and States, in addition to the
international community, by providing the necessary
support for the efforts of the country concerned in
order to increase its confidence and ensure that it does
not slide back into violence, so that it can make the
transition to economic stability and prosperity.

We also wish to emphasize the pivotal role that
can be played by neighbouring States in achieving
national reconciliation and accord - particularly in
Africa, because of transborder cultural and tribal
relationships. Here, too, it is essential to provide
international support for the Government concerned, in
the form of the funds and expertise needed to facilitate
its implementation of post-conflict projects and
strategies in accordance with its priorities. We do not
deny the importance of providing such support at the
bilateral level, but we believe that it is more effective if
it is provided to the Peacebuilding Fund and to experts
who work under United Nations auspices.

Fourthly, we believe that it is imperative to
establish mechanisms for full coordination and
expertise-sharing between the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Economic and Social Council so
as to guarantee the effective performance of those
United Nations organs in the area of post-conflict
peacebuilding, and so that they can mobilize donors,
ensure that pledges are honoured and move beyond
addressing immediate problems to comprehensive
reconstruction and sustained assistance, which should
be provided to all development projects in the
countries concerned.

Fifthly, the Peacebuilding Commission, the
Peacebuilding Support Office and the Peacebuilding
Fund are the peacebuilding structures of the United
Nations. Since its establishment, the Commission has
sought to take a comprehensive approach to post-
conflict peacebuilding that takes into account the links
between security, development, human rights and the
rule of law. Maintaining that approach will ensure that
countries do not relapse into conflict and violence.

Finally, as emphasized by many preceding
speakers, the international community must provide the
necessary funding to the Peacebuilding Commission by
donating to the Peacebuilding Fund, so that post-
conflict countries can carry out their strategies and
help the United Nations consolidate the peace. That
includes implementing projects in priority areas,
mainly disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
of ex-combatants, security sector reform, reconciliation
efforts and reconstruction, which are essential for
sustainable development.

We thank the United Kingdom for providing the
final version of the draft presidential statement that
was circulated this morning and which we support.

