Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (interpretation from Chinese): China has all along called for all the parties
concerned to take a flexible approach and respond to the
constructive proposals by the Arab League and the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) so as to find an
early solution to the Lockerbie issue. On the basis of this
position, the Chinese delegation welcomes the latest
positive development on the issue and the spirit of
compromise displayed by all the parties concerned. We
express appreciation to the Arab League, the OAU and
the parties for their effective work over this long period.

The facts prove that only by pursuing peaceful
diplomatic efforts and cooperation can effective ways be
found to solve international disputes.

We hope that all parties involved in the Lockerbie
case will continue to act in a positive and flexible spirit
and, through dialogue and consultations, will reach an
agreement on all the details, with a view to starting the
trial proceedings as soon as possible.

China is strongly opposed to any form of terrorism.
We must strengthen international cooperation to eradicate
this scourge. We condemn the disaster over Lockerbie,
which occurred 10 years ago, and we are deeply
concerned about the long delay in resolving the case.

We hope that the draft resolution before us will
further promote cooperation among all the parties and
facilitate the early determination of truth so that
perpetrators will be punished in accordance with the law,
international justice will be upheld and the families of the
Victims will feel that justice has been served.

The Chinese delegation hopes that the current
positive development on the Lockerbie case will facilitate
the early lifting of sanctions against Libya. The
humanitarian consequences for the Libyan people of the
protracted sanctions cannot be ignored. It is our hope that
the latest development and the cooperation from Libya

 

will make it possible for the Council to take an early
decision on the lifting of sanctions.
For these reasons, my delegation will vote in favour
of the draft resolution before us.

We would like to thank the sponsors of the text for
having incorporated some of our proposals. However, I
would like to point out that some elements of the text could
have been improved, so as to create a better climate for
resolving this question. We regret that the sponsors have
not incorporated some other constructive proposals from
our side in the text.

Finally, I would like to repeat that there has been no
change in China's reservations concerning resolutions 748
(1992) and 883 (1993) referred to in the text.

