Mr. Nteturuye (Burundi) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank you sincerely, Mr. President, for
having organized this important public meeting on the
Great Lakes region. I would also like to pay tribute to
Ambassador Jean-David Levitte for his brilliant
statement introducing the report of the Security
Council mission to the Great Lakes region and for his
leadership of the Council mission.

The delegation of Burundi welcomes the
Council's mission to the Great Lakes region and, in
particular, its visit to Burundi, which enabled the
Council to examine and assess the conflict ravaging my
own country and the region at large.

The Council's report has tried to deal with the
main issues of the Burundi conflict: the problem of
security and the future of the peace process. On
security issues, the Government of Burundi is pleased
to note that finally the Council was able to hear from
the mediator and other leaders in the Great Lakes
region about the danger of total war in Burundi due to
spillover from the war in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. My delegation welcomes the very clear
message given by the Council to all the protagonists in
the Burundi conflict.

In the course of its talks with the two rebel
groups, the Council was also able to recognize that
those groups regard the ceasefire as the lowest priority
in their plans. As for the role of the region in seeking a
solution to the security problem in Burundi, the
Council will have seen that some are really committed
to helping right now, while others are still reluctant and
keep repeating to whoever will listen that there is no
infiltration or cross-over along their borders with
Burundi.

My delegation would like to reaffirm that the
rebel groups and those that support them are nurturing
the hope that there can be a military solution in
Burundi, thus endangering the peace process. My
delegation is equally convinced that some of Burundi's
neighbouring countries have adopted an attitude that is
contrary to the spirit of the peace agreement, despite
the fact that they have co-sponsored it. The Security
Council must therefore act without delay. It must
receive responses from those countries and those armed
groups to the proposals made to them by the Council
during the visit to the effect that they must truly
cooperate with the Government in settling security
issues along the common border. The Council can no
longer delay, because the longer the delay, the less
likely it is that full-scale war can be averted. The
Government of Burundi supports the position of the
mediator and of some leaders in the region who are
calling for the imposition of immediate sanctions on
armed groups and those that support them. These
sanctions are envisaged in the Arusha process and in
the Lusaka process.

My delegation proposes that the next meeting
with the armed groups, the third Libreville meeting,
should be scheduled as soon as possible, and that the
date set should be taken as a deadline for determining
the definitive approach to be taken concerning the
armed groups and other actors in the Burundi conflict.
To wait any longer would be to spoil any chance of
achieving an end to the Burundi conflict.

The Burundi Government is particularly pleased
at the Security Council's proposal to establish a joint
Tanzanian-Burundian commission to deal with the
issue of refugees. Indeed, three weeks ago, a tri-partite
agreement on repatriating Burundi refugees was signed
in Dar es Salaam by the Government of Burundi, the
Government of the United Republic of Tanzania and
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR). My Government would like to
repeat here that it is prepared to take in these refugees
and calls on the Tanzanian Government to accept the
immediate establishment of this joint commission so
that together we can launch a campaign to mobilize for
the return of those who wish to come back, who could
then return to their homes or wait temporarily in
reception centres.

All questions relating to psychological and
logistical preparations for repatriation, for receiving
these people in Burundi, for the security aspects of
repatriation and for reintegration - all of this has to be
considered jointly by the three signatories to the
Agreement mentioned earlier. The United Nations,
through UNHCR, is invited to encourage this project
and, for some time, to maintain the level of resources
being used for the refugees currently in the camps in
Tanzania. In making this proposal, the Burundi
Government intends to help maintain the civilian
nature of the refugee camps, and to end their use as
centres for recruiting fighters, as places for organizing
infiltrations by the rebel groups and as fall-back points.

The Government of Burundi has taken note of the
intention of the Tanzanian authorities to repatriate the
Burundian refugees. This is an interesting
development, which the Government of Burundi
welcomes. We invite all partners to work together to
harmonize its realization. Certainly, such an operation
will contribute to the progressive improvement of
security within the borders of Burundi and enable those
who are repatriated gradually to feel as safe as their
brothers who remained in the country already do.

Specific proposals such as those I have just
described deserve the support of the Council, as the
many meetings between the Burundian and Tanzanian
authorities have not yet yielded positive results on the
ground.

The intensification of the war since last February
has dealt a severe blow to the peace process, in
particular to the implementation of the peace
agreement, which has become difficult simply because
of the fact of the war. The establishment of transitional
institutions has been delayed because there has been no
ceasefire, and people are hoping for peace and security
above all else.

My delegation welcomes the Council's
willingness to professionalize the mediation team. We
especially welcome the proposal to strengthen the
office of the Representative of the Secretary-General in
Bujumbura and to broaden its mandate. The
Government of Burundi has always hoped that the
process will be brought back home to Burundi. We
hope that the group dealing with the follow-up and
implementation of the peace agreement will shift its
headquarters from Arusha to Bujumbura, and that the
question of the neutrality of some of the members of
the mediation team will be settled once and for all.

In conclusion, the Security Council has now been
to Burundi and to the other countries in the region. It is
an encouraging initiative. Conclusions have already
been drawn; action is now needed in order to prevent
disaster in Burundi. We hope that the messages
addressed to one and all will soon have a positive
impact. If not, the Council will quickly have to reassess
the situation and take further steps to ensure the well-
being of the people of Burundi and the Great Lakes
region.

For its part, the Government of Burundi has
already demonstrated its willingness to encourage
compromise solutions. It remains open to all attempts
to implement the peace agreement insofar as is
possible. Burundi pays tribute to the remarkable work
carried out by Nelson Mandela, the regional initiative
and the representatives of the Secretary-General on the
ground, in particular Mr. Jean Arnault, and we hope
that the momentum created by the recent Security
Council visit to the Great Lakes region will not be lost.

