Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): We
welcome the presence of His Excellency the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Colombia at this meeting.

We are here today almost three years after the
signing of the Colombian Final Agreement for Ending
the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace,
which ended a bloody conflict of more than 50-
year that resulted in many dead, injured and missing
persons. Since its conclusion and to this very day, the
Government has achieved many successes and national
gains that will undoubtedly have a positive effect on the
overall situation in Colombia. The peace agreement,
however, continues to face many challenges that
require the concerted efforts of the parties to maintain
and build upon those achievements, leading to its full
implementation. I will be brief in focusing on three
major issues.

First, concerning the economic and social
reintegration process, we appreciate the efforts of
the Colombian Government to guarantee the social
and economic reintegration of former members of
the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-
Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP) through collective and
individual plans, initiatives and projects, adopted by
the National Council on Economic and Social Policy.
We look forward to seeing the implementation of the
objectives related to the reintegration process within
the established deadlines and to the acceleration of the
reintegration process through the provision of legal and
security guarantees to former members of the FARC-
EP, while remaining fully aware of the many challenges
facing the implementation of the peace agreement.

Secondly, with regard to the security situation,
we are concerned about the ongoing killings and
acts of violence and intimidation directed against
social leaders, human rights activists and indigenous
leaders. That requires the National Government and
regional, local and civil society organizations to take
further action. We commend the pact for life, signed
between the Colombian Government and civil society
organizations, which will provide security guarantees
to local communities, human rights defenders and social
leaders. We look forward to the adoption as soon as
possible of the statutory law of the Special Jurisdiction
for Peace, in accordance with the constitutional
framework. It is key to building trust and creating the
necessary political and security conditions to complete
the implementation of the peace agreement in all its
dimensions in order to strengthen the principles of
justice and no impunity.

Thirdly, concerning we commend the ongoing
efforts of the United Nations Verification Mission
in Colombia and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of Mission to strengthen
the peace process by cooperating with national,
local and territorial authorities, as well as civil and
international organizations, in addition to the private
sector. We also commend the Mission's role in engaging
young people and youth organizations in integrating a
youth perspective into its activities. We have seen many
initiatives and dialogues launched by the United Nations
Mission within the reintegration process. We also
reaffirm the role of women in implementing the peace
process and the national development plan for building
peace and achieving reconciliation in Colombia.

In conclusion, we commend the initiatives taken
by the Government of President Duque to pursue the
implementation of the peace agreement. In the presence
of His Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Colombia, we renew our full support for the peace
process, which has become a resounding success story
thanks to his efforts and the will and determination of
the friendly Colombian people.

