Ms. Murillo (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to congratulate China for convening this
debate, which gives us an opportunity to reiterate our
commitment to the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations. My delegation associates itself with
the statements made by the representatives of Maldives
on behalf of the Accountability, Consistency and
Transparency (ACT) group and Austria on behalf of the
Group of Friends of the Rule of Law.

Seventy years after the San Francisco Conference,
conflict prevention remains one of the central reasons
for the existence of the United Nations. It is undeniable
that the maintenance of peace and security is closely
linked to the resolution of issues related to development
and respect for human rights, which are also central
goals of the Organization in accordance with the
Charter. Therefore, Costa Rica wishes to make the
following comments in its national capacity.

First, it is vital to adjust the Council's work in terms
of prevention and the peaceful settlement of disputes.
The Security Council has the means necessary to
take measures under Chapter VII, but is much less
accustomed to adopting peaceful measures under
Chapter VI. This must change. As members of the
Group of Friends of Mediation, Costa Rica calls for the
available preventive diplomacy tools to be used to the
maximum extent and highlights the role of regional and
subregional organizations in this respect. We also hope
that the Council recognizes this and coordinates its
work with other United Nations agencies with related
competencies.

Secondly, we highlight the link between conflict
and serious deteriorations in human rights situations.
Such situations, when they occur, should be reported
to the relevant entities, including the Security Council.
Sovereignty must be understood as belonging to a
sovereign State that is responsible for protecting its
populations from mass atrocities. In this sense, Costa
Rica reiterates its support for the Secretary-General's
Rights Up Front initiative. We also reiterate that due
account should be taken of the protection of civilians
and human rights issues in general in the formulation
of peacekeeping mission mandates.

Thirdly, Costa Rica stresses that the Council
cannot continue to ignore Article 26 of the Charter,
which compels it to develop plans for the establishment
of an arms control system to promote the establishment
and maintenance of international peace and security
through minimizing the diversion of the world's human
and economic resources towards weapons. From our
point of view, such resources would be better used for
development.

Fourthly, Costa Rica urges the Council to use more
flexible working methods and thus be more agile in
its consideration of situations and more inclusive, on
the basis of the principle of the sovereign equality of
States. We reiterate our call for the full and systematic
implementation of presidential note S/2010/507 and its
updates and for the formal adoption of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

Fifthly, Costa Rica, first as part of the group of five
small nations and now as part of the ACT group, has
opposed the use of the veto, especially in situations of
genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes. We
support the French proposal of a code of conduct on the
use of the veto and call on the permanent members to
adopt a declaration of principles to mark the seventieth
anniversary of the Organization.

Finally, in the lead-up to the appointment of a new
Secretary-General, Costa Rica calls for that process to
be more inclusive, transparent and democratic. To that
end, we must define profiles and hear statements by
those who present themselves for election. The General
Assembly must hold a vote on at least two candidates
who have been preselected by the Council. We must
overcome this challenge, extend the election period and
make clear that this election will be for a single term.
My delegation believes that, in the light of the relevant
resolutions of the Assembly and with the strong support
of the Council, the Organization, which brings together
every State in the world, will find the best person to take
on the great challenges of being Secretary-General and
to fight tirelessly for the maintenance of international
peace and security and the interests and aspirations of
humankind.

