Mr. Sahebzada Ahmed Khan (Pakistan): We
would like to thank the United States for organizing
today's important debate on an issue of great
contemporary importance and relevance. We are also
grateful to Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson and
the briefers for their useful insights on the subject.

First of all, I would like to pay tribute to and salute
the journalists who have fallen in the line of duty. They
are indeed the fallen brave.

The role and the importance of media in shaping
public opinion and moral and political choices vis-a-vis
conflict situations are becoming increasingly decisive
in the modern world. For that reason, threats to the
safety and security ofjournalists and associated media
personnel have increased manifoldly in recent times.

Security Council resolution 1738 (2006),
unanimously adopted by the Council more than six
years ago, strongly condemned any intentional attacks
against journalists, media professionals and associated
personnel and sent out a strong signal to the parties
to armed conflict that they should comply with their
obligations under international law. The resolution also
made a strong call for ending impunity in that regard.

While reiterating the provisions of that resolution,
we need to take a fresh look at contemporary threats
to journalists in armed conflicts, in view of the
increasingly complex nature of conflict situations,
increased use of terror tactics, blurring of boundaries
between warring parties in non-international armed
conflicts and between war correspondents and
independent journalists, and new and emerging trends
such as the concept of embeddedjournalism and use by
media of protection afforded by private armed escorts.

It is a matter of concern that despite clear provisions
of international law - in particular article 79 of
Additional Protocol I of the Geneva Conventions, which
clearly identifies journalists engaged in professional
missions in areas of armed conflict as civilians,
provided they take no action that prejudices their
civilian status - the deliberate targeting, arbitrary
detention and internment of journalists in situations of
armed conflict continue to be on the rise.

It seems that the problem is not a dearth of
international legal standards and norms, but a lack
of their understanding and implementation. It is
therefore important to engage in a well-coordinated
and comprehensive international awareness-raising
campaign that highlights the existing provisions of
international law and points out the consequences
of their violation. Furthermore, ending impunity by
bringing the perpetrators of attacks against journalist
to justice would have a significant impact on the
situation. The Security Council can play an important
role by reinforcing this message in its decisions.

To ensure the neutrality and impartiality of
journalists, such concepts as embedded journalism
need to be carefully analysed, especially with regard
to their impact on the safety and security ofjournalists.
Moreover, employing distinctive emblems in conflict
situations may also help.

Achieving the delicate balance between the safety
and security of journalists and media personnel with
the need for unfettered access to conflict areas is of
crucial importance. The authorities concerned must
share all information necessary to ensure the safety of
media personnel, who should in turn take their advice
into account and respect local laws and regulations.
There is a balance to be struck between personal safety
and professional prowess. Furthermore, increased
resources must be made available to train journalists
covering situations of armed conflict, focusing on ways
to cope with the changing nature of armed conflicts and
the increasing threats of terrorism and kidnappings for
ransom.

Today's debate is a reiteration of the strong
message of resolution 1738 (2006) that the Security
Council remains focused on the issue of the protection
ofjournalists in armed conflict and is willing to play
its role in this regard. We hope that we will continue to
stand united towards ensuring this end.

