Mr. Granovsky (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Your participation, Mr. President, in this
meeting of the Security Council today shows how
important the situation in the Great Lakes region is in
the Council's agenda.

May I greet His Excellency President Paul
Kagame of the Rwandese Republic and express
gratitude to him for his readiness to meet with
members of the Council in order to exchange opinions
on the problem of settling the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Our fundamental
position in favour of the earliest possible political
settlement in the Democratic Republic of the Congo on
the basis of the preservation of the territorial integrity
of that country in accordance with the Lusaka and
subsequent agreements, and also in accordance with
Security Council resolutions 1304 (2000) and 1332
(2000), remains unchanged.

We in Russia are closely following the
development of the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo after the recent tragic event
there. We note with satisfaction that the new leadership
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo confirms its
dedication to a settlement ofthe conflict on the basis of
the Lusaka Agreement and expresses its readiness to
enter into dialogue with its neighbours on the issue of
ensuring security in the subregion and to achieve
national reconciliation and democratization in its
country by opening up the inter-Congolese dialogue.
We hope that in the near future these statements will be
given tangible confirmation, and we call on all States
engaged in the conflict not to miss the window of
opportunity offered for a renewal of the peace process.

It is essential to break the vicious circle of mutual
distrust and take genuine steps towards a settlement of
the conflict. In this context we welcome the readiness
of the Rwandan leadership to start a withdrawal of
forces from the Pweto region, one of the most likely to
flare up. We also call upon the other parties to the
conflict to fulfil their obligations under the
disengagement plan and to refrain from activities that
might lead to a further destabilization of the situation.
In general we attach the greatest importance to the
earliest possible withdrawal of all foreign troops from
the Democratic Republic of the Congo under the time
frame of the Lusaka Agreement, on the understanding
that, as required by Security Council resolutions 1304
(2000) and 1332 (2000), this process should start with
a withdrawal of those forces that entered the
Democratic Republic of the Congo without the
invitation ofthe Government.

Of course, we fully recognize that the long-term
settlement of the conflict in the Democratic Republic
ofthe Congo and in the Great Lakes region of Africa is
impossible without a solution of the illegal armed
groups. We call upon all parties to the conflict to
cooperate in ensuring the disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation of members of the illegal
armed groups in order to create conditions for security
for all the countries of the subregion. At the same time,
we would like to emphasize that from our viewpoint,
solving this problem by force is impossible. For the
process to be successful, it must be based upon a
democratization of political life and a solution of inter-
ethnic problems, not only in the Democratic Republic
ofthe Congo but in all neighbouring countries.

We are particularly alarmed by reports of mass
violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law in the eastern provinces of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, which are not
under Government control. We call upon those who are
concerned not to allow such violations and to cooperate
with international humanitarian personnel by providing
free access to all those in need of assistance.

This month the Council has to review the
fulfilment by the United Nations Organization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) of
its mandate in that country. This entails an analysis of
the extent to which the parties to the conflict are
cooperating with the Mission and are fulfilling their
obligations concerning ceasefire and disengagement of
armed forces. If the results of this review show that the
parties are filled with a genuine political will to carry
out these tasks, this will undoubtedly help the Security
Council in considering the deployment of the second
phase of MONUC peacekeeping operations.

