The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of
Lebanon.

I wish at the outset to once again welcome His
Excellency Mr. Ahmet Davutoglu, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Turkey. I also thank the Deputy Secretary-
General for her presence here today. My thanks go also
to Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco for his briefing.

As all members know, the Israeli occupier's navy
carried out a raid - an action that could be described
as piracy - against a freedom flotilla transporting tons
of humanitarian assistance to Gaza. This incident
caused at least 15 deaths and a number of injuries.

First of all, on behalf of Lebanon, I convey our
sincere condolences to the families of the martyrs who
fell as a result of this barbarous Israeli attack and wish
a speedy recovery to the injured. According to reports,
the Israeli navy opened fire on the flotilla after white
flags had been raised by those on board and before
those forces had even boarded a single ship. There
were some 600 unarmed civilians from 40 countries on
the vessels in the flotilla; they included 1976 Nobel
Peace Prize laureate Mairead Corrigan Maguire of
Northern Ireland and a Holocaust survivor, Hedy
Epstein, along with foreign parliamentarians and other
eminent individuals, both officials and private citizens.
The flotilla was carrying medical equipment,
prefabricated houses, building materials and electric
wheelchairs for the disabled.

In spite of the humanitarian nature of the flotilla,
the occupier's navy deployed three missile-launching
patrol boats in the attack. Lebanon considers that this
aggression is one of a series of actions by Israel against
innocent civilians. It is a flagrant violation of the
Charter of the United Nations, international law,
international humanitarian law and the law of the sea.

First of all, Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter
states that States must refrain from the threat or use of
force against the territorial integrity or political
independence of any State or in any other manner
inconsistent with the purposes of the United Nations. I
do not believe that anyone here considers that this
attack is consistent with those purposes.

Secondly, article 87 (a) of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea, which enshrines
international practice, states that the high seas are open
to all States without foreign intervention and must be
used for peaceful purposes. But the news that we have
heard confirms that this attack took place on the high
seas. Thirdly, article 89 of the Convention states that
no State has the legal right to submit any portion of the
high seas to its own sovereignty.
Fourthly, article 30 of the Fourth Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War states that occupying Powers
have the responsibility to facilitate visits to protected
persons by representatives of institutions intended to
provide material assistance. In Gaza, Israel continues
in an act of collective punishment to impose an illegal
blockade by systematically closing checkpoints,
preventing freedom of movement, including of sick
people, and blocking access for indispensable
humanitarian assistance including food, medicine, fuel
and construction materials.

Israel acknowledges the blockade, as Daniel
Ayalon, Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs, said at a
press conference earlier today. He described it as legal.
But the law he had in mind is clearly totally different
from the one that the United Nations recognizes and
that we all respect: their law is the law of the jungle,
which the United Nations has declared must be
combated. The blockade imposed by Israel on families
in Gaza, because the regime there is hostile to Israel, is
nothing less than example of the collective punishment
imposed by Israel for more than three years, which has
intensified since the most recent Israeli war against
Gaza in late 2008. Israel makes no distinction between
civilians and military personnel.

Finally, Lebanon insists that there be
accountability for this crime. We demand that all those
arrested be freed immediately, that this abominable
aggression against unarmed innocents be firmly
condemned, that an investigation immediately take
place to identify the perpetrators so that they may be
punished and to undo the harm caused to the victims,
and - perhaps first and foremost - that the blockade
imposed on Gaza be lifted immediately.

Lebanon wishes to express its support for the
draft presidential statement proposed by the delegation
of Turkey.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
Palestine.

