The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Georgia and Germany, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the consideration without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Alasania
(Georgia) took a seat at the Council table;
Ms. Gross (Germany) took the seat reserved for
her at the side ofthe Council Chamber.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document 8/2007/200, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by France, Germany, the
Russian Federation, the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of
America.

Members of the Council also have before them
the report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Abkhazia, Georgia, document S/2007/ 182.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Belgium, China, Congo, France, Ghana,
Indonesia, Italy, Panama, Peru, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Slovakia, South Africa, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America


The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1752 (2007).

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 10.20 am.
07-30537

