I would like to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia and the Special Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission for Somalia for their briefings and efforts. I reiterate our full support for those efforts. We also thank Ms. Hassan for her efforts towards greater inclusion. Today I would like to address the political situation, human rights issues, the humanitarian situation and latest security developments in Somalia. With regard to the political situation, Belgium noted the decision of the authorities to adopt an indirect electoral model for the 2020-2021 elections. We welcome the dialogue that made it possible to reach that consensus. We appreciate the authorities' commitment to holding genuine elections by universal suffrage in 2024-2025 and encourage them to do everything in their power to allow the elections to take place under the best possible conditions. We also welcome their commitment to ensuring the participation of women in those processes. We urge the authorities to expand the democratic space in order to allow the participation of a large portion of the population, including women as well as young people and displaced persons, in those processes, which will be decisive in determining the country's future. In that context, we reiterate our concern regarding the violations suffered by journalists carrying out their work and exercising their freedom of expression. Those attacks and constraints also contribute, by their very existence, to the population's lack of consensus and support for its authorities. However, the Federal Government's appointment of a special prosecutor to investigate the killing of the journalists gives us hope that justice will be done in this instance. Once the milestone of the elections has passed, we hope to see continued cooperation between the Federal Government and the federal member states. Dialogue is necessary, even crucial, to ensure a strengthened working federal model. The revision of the Constitution must also continue. Alongside those expectations and challenges, Belgium would like to commend the Government's adoption of a national climate-change policy. That was discussed last Friday at the inaugural meeting of the Council's Informal Group of Experts on Climate and Security. In respect of the human rights and humanitarian situation in the country, Belgium remains extremely concerned about the numerous and serious violations against children, as documented in the latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/1113). We stress the importance of following up the latest findings of the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict. We call on all parties to end those violations. In that regard, we welcome the release of 33 children by the Somali security forces in August. Belgium also encourages the Government to continue its efforts with a view to implementing the legislation necessary to combat several types of violations, including the draft law on sexual violence. On that point, we remain deeply concerned about the introduction in Parliament of a new text that is clearly incompatible with Somalia's international obligations. We regret that the Independent National Commission on Human Rights is yet to be established, three years after its official launch. That institution would play a crucial role in monitoring the human rights situation in Somalia. As for the humanitarian situation, it remains complex. No one can ignore for any longer the triple threat posed by the coronavirus disease pandemic, flooding and the desert locust invasion, adding to an already persistent fragility. It is estimated that 2021 will see 4 million Somalis benefit from humanitarian assistance. Belgium calls for far-reaching support for those efforts. Finally, I should like to say a few words regarding the security sector. Al-Shabaab remains the primary threat to the security and stability of the country. We strongly condemn the criminal actions of that group. The development and deployment of the Somali National Army is essential to containing that threat and protecting the population. We wish to recall that the sanctions regime is another tool for combating that threat. However, the fight against Al-Shabaab must be carried out with full respect for human rights and international humanitarian law. Belgium welcomes the ongoing consultative process aimed at revising the transition plan. That document will be crucial both in guiding Somalia, with the help of its partners, towards regaining control of its security and enabling the reconfiguration of the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). The independent assessment of the latter will grant options to the Security Council concerning that reconfiguration. We hope that the African Union will expeditiously engage in a joint reflection on that matter. In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the European Union's support for Somalia, whether through the provision of funding for AMISOM; the European Union Training Mission for Somalia and the European Union Capacity-Building Mission in Somalia; or the counter-maritime-piracy force, Operation Atalanta. Providing support for institutional capacity-building is also very important. Once security is restored, the Somali authorities must provide the population with the basic services and freedoms to which it rightfully aspires.
