Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): I
should like at the outset, on behalf of the French
delegation, to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
and to thank the Ambassador of Qatar and his
delegation for their conduct of the presidency last
month. My delegation would also like to welcome the
new members of the Council and to thank those States
that left the Council at the end of last year. Finally, I
wish to welcome the presence of the Secretary-
General, His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and to
congratulate him once again on his assumption of his
current duties. He can always count on France's full
support as he carries out his weighty and demanding,
yet exciting, responsibilities.

My delegation would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for having organized today's meeting. It
is indeed crucial that the Council be able to begin this
dialogue with the Secretary-General so that we can
address together the considerable challenges facing the
Organization today in the area of peace and security.

Those challenges are increasingly diverse and
complex. Armed conflicts continue to persist in parts of
the world - in particular on the African continent,
with the crises in Cote d'Ivoire, Darfur and Somalia.
The crises affecting the Middle East are a major source
of concern. To that must be added new threats,
beginning with terrorism and the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction.

The responsibility of the Council is to respond
effectively and efficiently to each of those threats. The
Council, and through it the United Nations, is
increasingly being called upon. The deployment of
more than 80,000 Blue Helmets throughout the world
and the prospects of new operations - in the Sudan
and Nepal, for instance - illustrate that point. How are
we to meet those challenges?

First, we must work together, in unity. In the face
of threats that go beyond borders, security will be
07-20384

achieved only through a collective effort. That entails
two things. We must have a common view of the
challenges to be overcome and of the solutions to be
deployed. We must also continue to strengthen
cooperation between the Council, the Secretary-
General and regional organizations. Those joint efforts
are prerequisites to our effectiveness.

In addition, the Council must be more able than it
is today to prevent crises. That means that the United
Nations must have an enhanced conflict-prevention
capacity, that the Secretary-General must be able to
alert the Council as quickly as possible as to possible
risks of destabilization and that, lastly, we must be able
to define comprehensive prevention strategies.

Furthermore, we must pay close attention to the
management of the post-conflict period. The
Peacebuilding Commission must of course play its role
fully in that regard, as it has already begun to do with
regard to Burundi and Sierra Leone. The Council must
evaluate its efforts, consider as needed ways to
increase effectiveness and take into account in its
future efforts recommendations to be made by the
Commission. Lastly, the Council must continue to
consider, in close cooperation with the Secretary-
General, ways to perfect the instruments at its disposal.

First, with regard to the maintenance of peace,
the stakes are well known, namely, proper management
of resources, more effective support for transitional
processes, better coordination between protagonists,
and special attention to the political process - which
must necessarily be the basis for peacekeeping
operations. That must be followed by the
implementation of sanctions and other binding
measures decided upon by the Council, in connection
with which the Council has recently taken a number of
important decisions. The Council must continue along
that path in order to ensure the full implementation of
such measures, as well as the effectiveness and
transparency of its procedures.

Those are several avenues for action that we
should pursue together. We must also not forget that
peace and security also entail combating poverty,
pandemics and corruption, as well as protecting human
rights and fighting impunity. For justice is a
precondition for peace. In that regard, the International
Criminal Court will be an essential tool in the future.

The challenges we must overcome are daunting.
Unfortunately, the work before us continues to be
3
enormous. Thus we must continue our joint efforts to
further improve the effectiveness of our actions. That is
incumbent upon us all, as is the responsibility to
protect.

