Mr. Valero Bricefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your conduct of
this debate.

The fight against terrorism is a responsibility of
all countries and should be carried out within the
framework of multilateralism and international
cooperation based on respect for self-determination,
sovereignty and non-interference in the internal affairs
States, in accordance with the Charter of United
Nations and international and regional conventions and
protocols on the subject.

Some Governments draw up lists of countries that
allegedly collaborate with this crime, while they shelter
dangerous international terrorists on their soil. We
should recall that resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624
(2005) urged States not to give refuge to terrorists and
not to resort to political motivations for refusing
requests for extradition.

It has been 34 years since the bombing of Cubana
Airlines flight 455 over the waters of Barbados, in
which 73 innocent civilians were murdered, and Luis
Posada Carriles, the person responsible for that
terrorist attack, remains free in the United States. On
July 2, the Salvadoran terrorist Francisco Chavez
Abarca - who is accused of being responsible for
several explosive attacks in Cuba - was caught at
Venezuela's Maiquetia International Airport. He
confessed that he had gone to Venezuela to sabotage
the parliamentary elections and that he had the support
of Luis Posada Carriles. We therefore reiterate to the
Government of the United States our request for the
extradition of Luis Posada Carriles or, barring that, at
least try him for the terrorist acts he has confessed.

Terrorists Raul Diaz Pefia, Jose Antonio Colina
and German Rodolfo Varela, sentenced to prison in
Venezuela for their involvement in placing bombs at
the Spanish and Colombian consulates in 2003, have
fled to the United States. Those crimes were committed
a few months after the oil sabotage and coup against
President Hugo Chavez Frias. Venezuela has requested
the Government of the United States to extradite
Colina and Varela. But that has been denied and they
have been given refuge and protection on the grounds
of supposed political asylum. They have also granted a
visa to Raul Diaz Pena, a fugitive from Venezuelan
justice.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela supported
General Assembly resolution 64/297. We reiterate our
commitment to the implementation of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.

Venezuela is committed to the fight against
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, whatever
its origin or motive, including State terrorism, which
today is one of the most evil instruments of subjugation
and neocolonial domination.

