Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation wishes to thank Ambassador
Greenstock for his briefing on the work of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC). Since its establishment,
the CTC has accomplished a great deal of effective
work. Its fair, open and transparent working methods
have won acclaim by the vast majority of Member
States. Coordination and cooperation among the
subcommittees are proceeding smoothly. We believe
that the Committee's review of the first phase of its
work has been fruitful. My delegation agrees with
Ambassador Greenstock's summary and assessment of
the Committee's work to date. We also appreciate the
efforts and the great amount of work done by the
experts and the Secretariat. Like other members, China
endorses the Committee's work programme for the
fourth 90-day period and the procedure for the second-
phase review.

Ambassador Greenstock pointed out in his report
that the Committee has a strong interest in capacity-
building. My delegation has also noted that, in the
second-phase review, the Committee will focus on the
question of providing the assistance needed by Member
States to implement resolution 1373 (2001). We appeal
to potential providers of assistance to respond actively
to the Committee's call and to provide timely and
effective assistance to countries in need.

We endorse the Committee's pragmatic working
methods, intended to step up the pace of work in the
interest of soon completing the review of national
reports.

The fight against terrorism is a new task for the
Security Council as it discharges its responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security. In
order to enable the United Nations to play its core role
in the international fight against terrorism, the Security
Council must focus on the real problems involved and
take measures to facilitate their resolution, stepping up
international counter-terrorism cooperation so as to
make such efforts more effective.

The work of the CTC to date has laid a good
foundation for the counter-terrorism efforts of Member
States and for international cooperation to that end. We
should note, however, that capacity-building for
combating terrorism is a long-term process - one that
is inseparable from the international fight against
terrorism. The Security Council should focus on how
the counter-terrorism efforts of the United Nations can
be integrated into the international fight against
terrorism.

