Mr. Monteiro (Portugal): Last March, in an open
debate on this item, Portugal welcomed the proposals put
forward by the Organization of African Unity and the
League of Arab States to find a compromise solution to
the question of the bombing of the Pan Am and UTA
flights. Those proposals, aimed at avoiding further delays
in the serving of justice and at putting an end to the
suffering of the Libyan people, were envisaged by
Portugal as a constructive political effort.

We believe that justice delayed is justice denied, first
of all, to the relatives of the Victims suffering the loss of
their beloved. Justice delayed is justice denied also to the
whole international community defending itself against
terrorism and upholding international law. Finally, justice
delayed is justice denied also to the innocent Libyan
people, who are enduring sanctions imposed on their
country.

Any compromise solution should obviously be
consistent with the legal and political dimensions
enshrined in the Security Council's resolutions. And we
should not lose sight of our goal of enabling justice to be
rendered.

 

We were convinced, then, that the time had come for
the United Nations, and the Security Council in particular,
to find more efficient ways to bring this matter to an end.
Today, with the adoption of this draft resolution, the
Security Council will show that it is up to the challenge.
The members of the Council have proved to be open to
positive and serious proposals. My delegation
acknowledges, in particular, the efforts undertaken by the
United Kingdom and the United States to find alternative
solutions that will enable the Council to respond fully to the
concerns of the international community.

By adopting this draft resolution, the Council will
open the way to bringing to trial the two persons charged
with the bombing of Pan Am flight 103, a hideous crime
that has gone unpunished for almost 10 years now. In this
trial, the accused will enjoy fully the rights enshrined in the
European Convention on Human Rights, as that instrument
continues to apply to procedure in accordance with Scottish
law. The solution found could not be more reassuring that
the accused will enjoy a fair trial.

The Council is responding with a position of openness
and dynamism to the will of the international community.
That is, after all, the role of the Security Council, upon
which the general membership of the United Nations, under
the Charter, has conferred the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security. We shall
always recall that in performing that role the Council acts
on their behalf.

My delegation commends the Governments of the
United Kingdom and of the United States for this positive
step. We also would like to thank the Government of the
Netherlands for its indispensable cooperation. We welcome
the positive response of the Libyan Government. The
solution that has been put forward reveals the vitality of the
Council. Today, through the Council's decisive action,
justice will finally be able to emerge and sanctions to be
lifted.

We are confident that the opportunity afforded by this
draft resolution, which my Government fully supports, will
not be missed.

