Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
appreciates Egypt's initiative to convene this open
Security Council debate on countering the narratives
and ideologies of terrorism. China also welcomes
Foreign Minister Selim's presiding over this meeting.
I thank the Foreign Ministers and Deputy Foreign
Ministers who have come here today to participate
in the meeting. Thank Deputy Secretary-General
Eliasson for his briefing. I also listened carefully to
the statements made by Secretary-General Afifi and
Vice-President Crown.

Terrorism constitutes a grave threat to international
peace and security and is a common challenge for
humankind. The international community should
resolutely combat terrorism, wherever and whenever
it occurs and whatever form or manifestation it may
take. A unified standard should be adhered to and no
link should be made to any particular ethnic group
or religion. Efforts should be made to abide by the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, build consensus among Member States, take
coordinated and concerted actions, integrate political,
economic, legal, cultural and educational measures and
commit to eliminating breeding grounds for terrorism.

At present, terrorist and extremist forces are taking
advantage of new technologies, such as the Internet and
social media, to deliberately distort religious doctrines,
propagate terrrorist ideology and extremism and incite
hatred, discrimination and violence. A portion of the
population in some countries, youth in particular, are
swayed by terrorist ideology and extremism to commit
extreme and terrorist acts that inflict severe harm.
That has become a prominent trend in the current fight
against terrorism. The international community should
pay close attention to that and join hands to address it.

First, it is imperative to eradicate the foundations
of terrorist ideology. Terrorism is rooted in terrorist
ideology and violent extremism. All countries should
incorporate counter-terrorism into their national
security and development strategies; oppose the use
of distorted religious doctrines or any other means
to incite hatred, discrimination, violence and other
extremist behaviour; and resolutely combat such
narratives and behaviour. Efforts must be made to
follow the law and close down places used to spread
and disseminate terrorist ideologies and extremism,
while offenders must be held accountable. We should
launch anti-terrorist publicity campaigns to increase
public awareness about counter-terrorism.

Secondly, we must cut off the channels used for
spreading terrorist ideologies. New technologies, such
as the Internet and social media, have been used by
terrorists as a new platform to spread terrorist ideologies
and extremism. The international community must take
effective measures to prevent terrorist organizations
from using the Internet to disseminate audiovisual
materials to incite violence; spread terrorist ideologies
and extremism; and recruit for, finance, plan and carry
out terrorist activities. All countries must strengthen
their relevant legislation and law enforcement, step
up their Internet surveillance and control and prohibit
the transmission of and effectively delete information
containing terrorist and extremist content. Internet
providers must increase their self-discipline and raise
their legal awareness and sense of responsibility by
taking the initiative to take down the relevant content
in a timely manner.

Thirdly, we must enhance cooperation and
strengthen the international counter-terrorism network.
In combating the spread of terrorist ideologies and
extremism, the primary responsibility of national
Governments should be clarified and the leading and
coordinating role of the United Nations and the Security
Council must be brought into full play. All parties
should fully implement the relevant Security Council
resolutions and enhance information exchanges, border
control and law-enforcement cooperation; combat
terrorist organizations' cross-border training and their
export and spread of terrorist ideologies and extremism
to other countries; and thwart the cross-border
movement of terrorists.

Fourthly, it is essential to promote dialogue among
civilizations and build a new type of international
relations. Dialogue and exchanges are an effective means
to promote understanding among different civilizations,
religions and cultures, bolster mutual inclusiveness and
achieve common development. The United Nations
and the international community should vigorously
promote dialogue among civilizations characterized by
mutual respect, openness and inclusiveness; advocate
learning among the various civilizations; foster a social
environment favouring equal treatment and harmonious
coexistence among the different ethnic groups, cultures
and religions; construct a new type of international
relations centred on win-win cooperation and build a
common destiny for humankind.

China is an important member of the international
counter-terrorism front. Not long ago, Chinapromulgated
a counter-terrorism law and thereby committed itself to
stepping up the fight against terrorism and promoting
international cooperation in that field. As is clearly set
out in the counter-terrorism law, importance must be
attached to countering the narratives and ideologies of
terrorism and extremism, fighting against extremism
in all its forms and manifestations that seeks to incite
hatred and discrimination and advocate Violence by
distorting religious doctrines or other means, thereby
removing the ideological foundation of terrorism.

In conformity with the provisions of that law, China
will prevent and fight against terrorism, maintain
State security and the safety of its people and their
properties, actively take part in and promote bilateral
and multilateral counter-terrorism corporation,
resolutely counter the narratives and ideologies of
terrorism and advance international counter-terrorism
cooperation to make continued progress in a common
effort to maintain world peace and stability.

