Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the adoption of resolution 2259 (2015). This
important resolution lends all the unanimous support
of the Council to the Libyan Political Agreement
of 17 December, as did several ministers with their
presence in Skhirat or Rome.

We pay tribute to the Libyan negotiators who
shouldered their responsibilities and who prioritized
the interests of their country above personal ambition.
They managed to find the compromises necessary to
finally offer their compatriots the prospect of ending
the crisis. We also congratulate Bernardino Leon and
Martin Kobler, who engaged tirelessly in supporting
the negotiations.

The political phase that is coming to an end is not
a point of arrival but a starting point. We all know
that the coming weeks will be decisive. The United
Nations and Member States have a crucial role to play
in giving their full support to the future Government,
including in terms of security, to stabilize Libya and
fight terrorism. France, in particular with its European
Union partners, will play its full part. Let us not fool
ourselves - the new authorities will soon put to the test
by all those who seek to undermine the process. To the
latter, we say that there is still time to join the positive
dynamic that has been launched, but that if they persist
in their obstructionism our Council will soon bring all
the consequences to bear.

I take this opportunity to personally commend my
five colleagues from Chad, Chile, Jordan, Lithuania
and Nigeria who will soon be leaving the Council.
We will miss them but they can be proud of what they
and their teams have accomplished. I also wish every
success in the Council to the new members that will
join us on 1 January.

In recent times, the Council has demonstrated
its vitality and capacity to act. We end the year on
several notes of hope with the adoption of resolution
2259 (2015), which opens a fragile but genuine path to
peace in Libya; resolution 2249 (2015), which embodies
our total, collective resolve to eradicate the scourge
of Daesh; and resolution 2254 (2015), the first on the
political track in Syria since the crisis erupted there.
Let us work tirelessly together to nurture these seeds of
hope. IfI may so say, let us be inspired by the spirit of
Paris - the spirit of resilience and unity that emerged
from the terrorist attacks on my country and that gave
birth to resolution 2249 (2015) against Daesh. It was the
spirit of Paris, too, that embued the twenty-first session
of the Conference of Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change and made
it a success that has been hailed throughout the world
and a fine symbol of the multilateral action that we all
cherish, in service to the ideals of the United Nations.

