Mr. Ben-Shaban (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): First of all, Mr. President, I would
like to congratulate you on your effective handling of
the work of the Council this month. I also wish to
congratulate your predecessor, the Chinese
Ambassador, for the wise way in which he conducted
the work of the Council last month.
Mr. President, your initiative to organize this
debate on conflict prevention and resolution in Africa
comes at the right time, considering that Africa is the
theatre of a number of developments. Consequently,
the Council's desired role in Africa must be reviewed
and compared to efforts to prevent conflict in Africa in
order to help that continent overcome its difficulties
and surmount its obstacles.

Every day the international community
increasingly acknowledges the importance of dealing
with the conflicts that arise in certain parts of Africa
and the need to settle them peacefully. This means that
the international community is becoming more aware
of the importance of dealing with the root causes of
these conflicts, of the link that exists between them,
and of reform, reconstruction and sustainable
development and the role these play in solidifying
peace.

It should be kept in mind that effective
prevention and recovery strategies require the
establishment of a comprehensive approach through
which a series of measures can be undertaken -
including, for example, policy, humanitarian and
institutional measures and steps to strengthen
sustainable development, eradicate poverty and
promote national reconciliation, good governance,
democracy, the rule of law and respect for and
protection of human rights.

In resolution 1625 (2005) the Security Council,
reaffirming its responsibility for international peace
and security, expressed its determination to strengthen
United Nations effectiveness in the area of the
prevention of armed conflict and to follow up
situations that could result in armed conflict. However,
there is still much for the Council to do in resolving
those most complex issues in the international arena,
which entail overlapping historical, political and social
factors, as well as the negative effects of colonization
in that continent.

Given the special nature of conflicts in Africa and
the overlapping of the numerous factors to which I
have just referred, the establishment of regional and
subregional organizations in Africa has effectively
contributed to resolving some problems and ending
others. That is because those organizations possess the
necessary knowledge and are in a position to
understand the various dimensions of the conflicts on
the continent. My delegation therefore supports the
current trend of allowing regional organizations to plan
a larger role in the maintenance of peace and security
on the African continent, with United Nations
participation.

07-4920]
If cooperation between the Council and those
organizations is carried out in a methodical and
institutional manner, that should lead to a great deal of
interaction, experience-sharing and joint efforts to help
significantly in resolving African conflicts. The basis
for such cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations consists in community of
purpose and integration of effort in dealing with the
challenges facing the establishment of peace and
security in Africa.

Since its inception in 1999, the African Union has
steadily worked to improve its role of a partner of the
United Nations and its cooperation with United
Nations peacekeeping missions. It has contributed
proactively to mediation and reconciliation and
reconstruction efforts in a number of African countries,
including Angola, Ethiopia, Eritrea, Burundi, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Sierra Leone,
Guinea-Bissau, C6te d'Ivoire, Liberia, Sudan, Uganda
and Somalia, to name a few.

The African Union has played an essential role in
the maintenance of international peace and security,
thereby lightening the Council's burden. We at the
United Nations should therefore render greater support
to the African Union and cooperate with it. The United
Nations should respond positively to its need to build
up its peacebuilding capacity and to finance its
operations.

General Assembly resolution 60/ 1, adopted at the
2005 World Summit, in fact encourages such initiatives
by the African Union and subregional organizations in
the areas of conflict prevention, resolution and
mediation, with United Nations help. Whereas Security
Council resolution 1631 (2005) reaffirmed the
Council's primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, it also recognized the
increasing contribution made by regional
organizations.

My country has always supported efforts to
prevent conflicts or resolve them peacefully, in
accordance with the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations and the norms of international law.
Libya has acted as a key mediator in resolving a
number of African conflicts and disputes. It has
effectively enshrined the principle of the peaceful
resolution of disputes, making an effort to mediate and
end conflicts in a number of countries, including Chad,

07-4920]
the Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Sudan.

My country hopes that greater efforts will be
devoted to conflict prevention in Africa so that African
countries can concentrate on development issues and
on achieving prosperity and dignified lives for their
peoples.

