The President (spoke in French): I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the representative of Belgium. I wish to begin by congratulating Prime Minister Edi Rama and his country on assuming the chairmanship-in-office of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). As the largest regional security organization, the OSCE plays a key role in promoting dialogue, building confidence and preventing conflict from the western Balkans to Central Asia. We welcome the goals set and presented by the OSCE Chairperson-in-Office. He can count on Belgium's support in reaching them. I am convinced that they will contribute to the promotion of peace and security, for which the Security Council is a guarantor. I would like to make three points. First, we welcome the priority Mr. Rama intends to give to the Ukrainian crisis, as demonstrated by his recent visit to that country. The crisis is one of the gravest violations of the founding principles of the OSCE and, I recall, of the Charter of the United Nations. We underline the OSCE's constructive role on this issue, particularly through its Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine. The Mission's mandate must be respected, which requires secure, unconditional and unhindered access to all of Ukrainian territory, including in Crimea and along the border with Russia. We call on all parties to work for a lasting solution to the conflict, which must be based on respect for the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity of Ukraine within its internationally recognized borders. Dialogue is crucial in that regard, both in the Normandy format and within the framework of the Trilateral Contact Group, which can be fully effective only if the ceasefire is scrupulously applied on the ground. Secondly, I highlight Mr. Rama's desire to combat violence against women and girls and to promote their role in matters of peace and security. Twenty years after the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), the integrationof the gender dimension in all our activities must remain a priority. We welcome the commitments made in this area by the OSCE in April 2019. This twentieth anniversary must be used as an opportunity to make an honest assessment of our progress and to chart a path forward. Respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms are core elements of the OSCE comprehensive security concept. Unfortunately, we note a disturbing deterioration in the human rights situation in many regions where the OSCE is active. In that regard, we share Mr. Rama's desire to promote tolerance and non-discrimination with a view to combating hate speech. Thirdly, the OSCE plays a key role in preventing and combating transnational threats, such as terrorism, organized crime and trafficking in human beings. This last point is a priority for our country, as evidenced by the organization by Belgium of an Arria Formula meeting on 25 October 2019. We welcome the good cooperation between the OSCE and the United Nations in that regard, particularly in the context of the Inter-Agency Coordination Group against Trafficking in Persons, chaired by UN-Women and the OSCE. This unique and innovative model is an example of effective multilateralism, and we would do well to replicate it throughout the United Nations system. In conclusion, Belgium supports the strengthening and deepening of synergies between the United Nations and the OSCE. The various dimensions of the OSCE reflect an integrated approach to security, which is necessary for the establishment of lasting peace - objectives that the Council must support. I now resume my functions as President of the Council. The representative of Germany has asked for the floor to make a further statement.
