Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): Let me begin
by welcoming His Excellency Vice-President Oscar
Naranjo Trujillo back to the Council, and allow me also
to thank him warmly for the personal leadership he has
shown in implementing the Final Agreement for Ending
the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace
and in working very closely with the United Nations and
the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia. I
would also like to thank Special Representative Arnault
for his briefing today and for all the excellent work he
and his team have carried out in recent months.

The United Kingdom welcomes the congressional
and presidential elections held between March and
June, which were the least violence and most inclusive
in Colombia for decades. On behalf of the British
Government, I would like to congratulate President-
elect Ivan Duque Marquez on his electoral victory and
also Vice-President-elect Marta Ramirez - the first
woman to take up that office in Colombia. For the first
time in a generation, elections were not dominated by
the conflict but defined by campaigns about issues
affecting ordinary people.

We also warmly welcome another remarkable
milestone brought about by the peace process. For
the first time, the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria
del Comun (FARC) participated in elections and, last
Friday, joined the new Congress.

The speed of the transition continues to surprise
and inspire all who follow this journey, but as with all
such transitions the challenges remain considerable,
and as the special representative has just said, the
2018 elections mark the beginning of a new phase
of consolidating the peace process and broadening
its ownership to all constituencies. Dialogue and
cooperation will continue to be an essential part of that
work and FARC's presence in Congress will enable
its voice to join others in building a consensus about
the future.

We commend the statement of President Santos
on Friday welcoming the FARC to the Congress and
landing its commitment to working within Colombia's
Constitution and democracy. We welcome President-
elect Duque's rejection of polarization and his
commitment to working for unity.

We recognize the enormity of the achievements in
the implementation of the peace agreement to date, but
as set out in the Secretary-General's report (8/2018/723),
we also recognize the significant work that remains.
Although the elections were the most peaceful in recent
history, a significant achievement, we are concerned
by the security situation in some post-conflict areas,
particularly due to the proliferation of illegal armed
groups. Violence between these groups has brought new
fighting to some areas and displacements, especially in
the Pacific coast region. That has claimed the lives of
an increasing number of human rights defenders and
social activists, who in many cases are targeted because
they champion the rights of local communities.

I welcome the steps taken by the Government to
reduce that violence, including the recent commitment

by both President Santos and President-elect Duque
to new special protective measures for social leaders
in rural areas. We hope that the measures will help to
address that challenge and we welcome the recruitment
of more women officers in the National Protection Unit
as a positive step.
As the Special Representative mentioned, on
social economic reintegration of FARC members, we
agree with the priorities that he has set out for the
coming months and we hope that the parties will seize
the opportunity to inject renewed momentum into
improving security and accelerating the reintegration
of former combatants, socioeconomic development
and crop substitution programmes. I also note that
negotiations with the National Liberation Army
continue in Cuba. We will welcome any developments
that lead to an end to violence.

Let me conclude by paying tribute once more to
President Santos, who took the bold step of coming to
the Security Council to ask for our support in 2016.
His Government started an extraordinary journey that
belongs to all Colombians, and the United Kingdom
remains committed to supporting them all the way to the
end. The Council has been incredibly proud to support
Colombia's peace agreement over the past two and half
years. In a world where conflicts destroy so many lives
and cause untold suffering, Colombia's peace process
offers inspiration and hope to us all. We look forward
to continuing to work with President-elect Duque and
his Government on continued implementation over the
months and years ahead to consolidate gains already
made for the Colombian people and to continue to
inspire peacemakers around the world.

