Mr. Valero Bricefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela once again pays tribute to our
brother country Colombia on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council.

We welcome the briefing by Mr. Pascoe, Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, and we endorse
the statement made by the Permanent Representative of
the Arab Republic of Egypt on behalf of the countries
members of the Non-Aligned Movement.

The demolition of houses and the continuing
retaliatory measures carried out by Israel, the
occupying Power, in the occupied Palestinian
territories, including East Jerusalem, are illegal acts
that pose major obstacles to the achievement of peace
in the region. Those actions are aimed at altering the

demographic composition, character and configuration
of Palestinian territory, in flagrant violation of
international humanitarian law and the relevant
Security Council and other United Nations resolutions.

We regret that the draft resolution on the
illegality of Israeli settlement construction was not
adopted, even though it enjoyed the support of the
overwhelming majority of States. The United Nations
and the Security Council must take the measures
necessary for the State of Israel to comply with the
resolutions that promote the creation of two States
living side by side within peaceful, secure and
recognized borders. Our country reaffirms the need for
Israel to fully respect the provisions of the Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War in the Palestinian territories,
including East Jerusalem, and the other occupied Arab
territories.

Venezuela appreciates the fact that, over the past
few months, a growing number of countries have
recognized Palestine as a free and independent State.
This constitutes a major contribution to the peace
process in the Middle East.

The humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip
remains serious owing to the sustained and brutal
blockade by the State of Israel. Venezuela demands
once again the immediate and unconditional lifting of
this illegal and unilateral measure.

Venezuela calls on the State of Israel to respect
the sovereignty of Lebanon and avert further conflicts
such as that which took place in July 2006. Only
through direct negotiations between the parties, as
established by resolution 1701 (2006), can constructive
solutions be reached.

Venezuela also reiterates the need for Israel to
withdraw from the occupied Syrian Golan, in keeping
with resolution 498 (1981) and in compliance with
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).

As several members of the Council have brought
up the topic of Libya in this forum, the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela would like to reiterate its
concern regarding resolution 1973 (2011), which has
led to military aggression against that country. If some
members of the Council exceed their legal powers and
decide of their own accord to redefine international
law, the United Nations loses its raison d'etre.

I would recall that representatives of 14 countries
of Latin America and the Caribbean, Africa and Asia
submitted, on 31 March, a communique to the
President of the Security Council for the month of
March, the Permanent Representative of China, in
which we asked this body to work closely with
countries and organizations in the region and take
urgent measures leading to an immediate ceasefire and
a peaceful and sustainable solution reflecting the will
of the Libyan people.

What action has been taken by the Security
Council to implement the ceasefire and seek peace?
What measures are being taken to prevent the military
occupation of Libya? The Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela opts for peace in the world. That is why
President Hugo Chavez Frias has called for the
creation of impartial international bodies aimed at
promoting dialogue among Libyans and leading to a
lasting, sustainable peace.

Allow me to conclude by stating that it is
imperative that the military aggression by Israel
against the Palestinian people cease, and that an
immediate end be put to Jewish settlements in the
region. As stated by our President, the only way to
achieve peace is by way ofjustice.

