Ms. Guo Xiaomei (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
wish at the outset to thank President Robinson,
Prosecutor Brammertz, President Byron and Prosecutor
Jallow for their briefings on the implementation of the
completion strategies of the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and for the
reports submitted to the Council (see S/2010/588 and S/2010/574).
We note that the work of the Tribunals continued
to register new progress during the reporting period.
We acknowledge that progress. In 2003, the Security
Council adopted resolution 1503 (2003), establishing
the timetable for the completion strategies and calling
on the Tribunals to complete all their work by 2010. As
we approach 2011, we note that the timetables
established by the Security Council will not be met.
According to the latest reports of the two Tribunals, the
ICTR's timetable will be extended to the end of 2013,
while that of the ICTY will be extended to 2015. We
express our concern over the delays in the relevant
work.

We understand that there are many reasons
behind the delays, some likely beyond the anticipation
of the Tribunals. The Tribunals have worked
strenuously to enhance the efficiency of their work, but
as noted in the ICTR's report, "[c]ontinuing efforts to
further improve pretrial and trial management as well
as the judgement drafting process are therefore crucial"
(S/20] 0/5 74, para. 34). We hope that the Tribunals will
pursue their efforts in that regard, accelerate the pace
of their work and complete their tasks as soon as
possible. We also note the concern expressed by both
Tribunals regarding the retention of staff. It is our hope
that appropriate solutions can be found to this problem.

Referring cases and fugitives, to the maximum
extent possible, to countries willing and able to handle
them will be an important step in the implementation of
the completion strategies. We note that the ICTR
Prosecutor has asked to refer three cases to Rwanda for
trial. We welcome this development and hope to see
positive results. We also support the countries
concerned in rendering full cooperation to the Tribunals.

The Security Council Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals is conducting intensive
consultations on a draft resolution on the residual

mechanisms for the two Tribunals, in the expectation
that agreement can be reached by the end of the year. I
take this opportunity to thank Austria, as Chair of the
Working Group, and the United Nations Office of
Legal Affairs for their tireless efforts on behalf of the
Working Group. We will continue actively and
constructively to participate in the consultations, and
look forward to reaching agreement by the end of the
year

