Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish to express my honour and pleasure at seeing you,
Mr. J ose Antonio Garcia Belaunde, Minister of Foreign
Affairs of Peru, presiding over the work of the Security
Council on this very important and sensitive issue.
Your presence adds value and prestige to the excellent
work being done by the Peruvian presidency.

I would like to thank Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
for her work on this issue since her appointment earlier
this year. I would also like to thank Mr. Gabriel Oling
Olang, the representative of Save the Children.

Allow me also to thank the Secretary-General for
his report on the issue, which covers situations of
serious concern and takes note of the progress being
made towards the "era of application" in the handling
of the issue of children and armed conflict.

We are pleased to observe that progress has been
made in the implementation of resolution 1612 (2005),
in particular with regard to establishing the monitoring
and reporting mechanism in the seven situations that
were designated as priorities for the first phase. We
understand the difficulties and challenges inherent in
such a complex, multi-stakeholder initiative. We
remain convinced, however, that no effort must be
spared in achieving adequate coordination between all
the relevant entities of the United Nations system that
can contribute to the implementation of the
mechanism. We believe that could make it possible to
provide reliable, accurate and objective reports that
will enable us to devise the necessary measures to
protect children affected by armed conflict.

In the same vein, we hope that, through its
Working Group established pursuant to Security
Council resolution 1612 (2005), the Security Council
will carry out its work in coordination with the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council. We
can be more effective only if we place this important
issue in the context of the larger problem of the overall
vulnerabilities and needs of children. The complexity
of the issue requires that all the appropriate bodies of
the United Nations, working in close cooperation with
Member States and non-governmental organizations,
adequately address its many components, including
social and economic aspects and, in particular, the
issues of demobilization and reintegration.

Among the measures launched to address the
issue of children and armed conflict are concrete and
time-bound action plans to put an end to the
recruitment and use of children by parties involved in
armed conflict. We have taken note of the progress
made recently in the implementation of that strategy.
We encourage the Security Council to continue to
develop it in close coordination with United Nations
peacekeeping missions and country teams.

We also very much appreciate the positive impact
of the deployment of child protection advisers. The
report of the Secretary-General provides preliminary
30

information regarding the study currently being carried
out by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations on
the role such advisers play in gathering the necessary
information for monitoring and reporting purposes.
That document will also be important in establishing
the conditions for incorporating child protection issues
into peacekeeping missions and training programmes.
We look forward to considering the results of the study,
with a view to enhancing the effectiveness of this
strategy.

Brazil remains fully committed to the promotion
and protection of the rights of the child in general. We
are determined to contribute to maximizing the
effectiveness of the response of the United Nations
system to the issue of children and armed conflict. We
believe that to be crucial to ensuring that children are
not victimized by war and to securing a future in which
children can enjoy hope and know trust as they emerge
from conflict situations.

