Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): The Bangladesh
delegation wishes to congratulate the Japanese
delegation for its successful presidency of the Council
this month. We also appreciate this initiative to focus
on peacebuilding in Africa and the detailed concept
note (S/2016/586, annex) prepared for that purpose.

The Secretary General's Advisory Group of Experts
on the Review of the Peacebuilding Architecture gave,
in its report last year (S/2015/490), due emphasis to
reorienting our thoughts on peacebuilding based on the
experience and knowledge gathered through work in
Africa over the past decade. It was perhaps only logical
that the nearly identical resolutions adopted by the
General Assembly (resolution 70/262) and the Security
Council (resolution 2282 (2016)) on the peacebuilding
architecture review earlier this year devoted particular
attention to further streamlining and energizing the
United Nations peacebuilding activities in Africa.

Against that backdrop, it is encouraging to
follow the good tidings from the African Union (AU)
with regard to the further sharpening of its focus on
peacebuilding and sustaining peace under the aegis of
the African peace and security architecture. In parallel,
several initiatives are afoot to accelerate the pace of
regional and subregional economic integration for
sustainable development in Africa. The convergence of
such priorities between the AU and the United Nations
makes it particularly good news for peacebuilding,
which will gain further momentum, especially in the
conflict-affected least-developed xountries presently
on the Peacebuilding Commission's (PBC) agenda.

It is important to recognize that the United Nations
peacebuilding work in Africa over the past ten years
has been critical in reaching consensus on the notion of
sustaining peace. The agreed definition of sustaining
peace justifiably broadens the traditional and rather
restrictive notion of peacebuilding, and underscores
the importance of sustained political accompaniment
across the entire spectrum of conflicts, including
relapses into conflict. We stress that that notion should
be duly acknowledged by all principal organs of the
United Nations and all other relevant stakeholders in
order to give peacebuilding a real chance to deliver
on its potential in national, regional and multilateral
contexts. In that connection, we wish to reiterate the
importance that we attach to five critical issues.

First, the centrality of national ownership and
leadership in peacebuilding must be valued and
preserved, including in all affected African countries.
It is of paramount importance to foster an environment
for inclusive peacebuilding in which a diverse set of
national actors with legitimate voices and interest have
the opportunity to participate and contribute.

Secondly, we feel encouraged to see some positive,
ongoing efforts within the United Nations, including
on the ground, to break down the silos in sustaining
peace. It must remain a constant preoccupation for
the PBC, through its convening and advisory roles,
to further consolidate such efforts, particularly those
aimed at bringing the security and development actors
closer together without undermining their respective
mandates and competence. The PBC's country-specific
configurations have certain good practices in that
regard that can be suitably replicated or scaled up
across the system.

Thirdly, we welcome the upswing in the PBC's
interaction with the relevant regional and subregional
organizations, especially in Africa, and its growing
focus on regional, cross-cutting issues. The PBC's
value-added work can seek to make a difference
in addressing various relevant and emerging
issues of concern, including the seminal task of
institution-building. In that context, we recognize the
important work being done by Japan on viable and
long-term institution-building in countries emerging
from or at risk of conflict.

F ourthly, the PBC's gender strategy and discussions
on young people's role in peacebuilding are valuable
contributions to promoting the inclusive agenda of
sustaining peace. We look forward to the expected
adoption of the gender strategy in September, which we
believe can be a useful contribution to advancing the
women, peace and security agenda, including in Africa.

Fifthly, and perhaps most importantly, the issue of
financing for peacebuilding remains a major stumbling
block to reaching its potential. We hope the unequivocal
emphasis on increased, predictable and sustainable
financing in this year's peacebuilding architecture
resolutions will help garner sufficient political support
towards mobilizing much-needed resources, including
for the Peacebuilding Fund. We look forward to creative
ideas from the Secretary-General on mobilizing
finances, factoring in both assessed and voluntary
contributions. The underfunded mechanisms within the
African Union also merit the international community's
added attention.

Bangladesh remains an ardent believer in
peacebuilding and will continue to remain engaged in
further strengthening the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture, with particular focus on Africa. Our
Government has recently taken an initiative, with the
assurance of support by the Japanese Government, to
establish a peacebuilding centre in Dhaka. We believe
the centre will add to regional and international efforts
in this regard through substantive research and training
activities. We invite interested partners from Africa
and elsewhere to come forward in making this initiative
a success.

