Mr. Barbalie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I would
first would like to thank Ambassador Osorio for his
quarterly report and the outstanding work he has done
as Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006).

Bosnia and Herzegovina supports the work of the
Committee, which continues to play a critical role in
monitoring and improving the enforcement of Security
Council resolutions on Iran. We welcome the very
useful and informative midterm report and we look
forward to having the final report of the Panel of
Experts published and made available to all States
Members of the United Nations. We also express our
support for the Committee's intention to hold an open
briefing by the Chair in the near future aimed at
assisting Member States in their efforts to implement
the relevant Security Council resolutions.

Bosnia and Herzegovina has consistently
believed that only the full implementation of the
safeguards agreements under the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) can
ensure that nuclear energy is used in a safe and
responsible manner. The role of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) as an implementing
agency remains the most reliable instrument for
verifying compliance with the Treaty's stipulations. We
strongly believe that all States without exception must
submit their nuclear facilities to the International
Atomic Energy Agency safeguards regime and must be
transparent in fulfilling their commitments.

In that context, we remain concerned about
Iranian nuclear activities. The most recent report of the
Director General of the IAEA (S/2011/695, annex),
published on 8 November, indicates that Iran has not
suspended its enrichment-related activities or heavy
water-related projects, as required by the resolutions of
the Security Council and as requested by the IAEA
Board of Governors. We therefore call upon Iran to
comply with the relevant Security Council resolutions
and implement the Additional Protocol and all
measures requested by the IAEA. We hope that Iran
will finally engage with the IAEA in order to clarify all
outstanding issues regarding its nuclear programme.

Bosnia and Herzegovina still believes that it is
possible to reach a comprehensive, negotiated and
long-term solution to the Iranian nuclear issue. We
therefore reiterate our call upon all parties concerned
to redouble diplomatic efforts and engage in
constructive discussion aimed at restoring international
confidence in the exclusively peaceful nature of the
Iranian nuclear programme.

