The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council for the month of August 2009, I should
like to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of
the Council, to our Ugandan colleagues for their service
in the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of July 2009. I am sure I speak for all members of the
Security Council in expressing great admiration for the
way in which Ambassador Rugunda and his team
conducted the Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Children and armed conflict

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Argentina, Australia, Belgium,
Benin, Canada, Chile, the Comoros, Cote d'Ivoire, the
Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, Germany, Greece,
Guatemala, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Kazakhstan, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Monaco, the Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Peru, Portugal, the Republic of
Korea, Rwanda, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the United Republic of Tanzania
and Uruguay, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual practice,
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite
those representatives to participate in the consideration
of the item, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber


The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
2

and to Mr. Louis-Georges Arsenault, Director of the
Office of Emergency Programmes at the United
Nations Children's Fund.

It is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2009/399, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by 46 Member States:
Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Benin, Burkina
Faso, Canada, Chile, the Comoros, Costa Rica, Cote
d'Ivoire, Croatia, the Czech Republic, Denmark,
Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Iceland,
Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Luxembourg, Mexico, Monaco, the Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Peru, Portugal, the Republic of
Korea, Rwanda, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, Turkey, the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, the United Republic of
Tanzania, the United States of America and Uruguay.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Austria, Burkina Faso, China, Costa Rica,
Croatia, France, Japan, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Mexico, Russian Federation, Turkey, Uganda,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Viet Nam.


The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1882 (2009).

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.


