Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I would like to thank Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and Under-Secretary- General Mark Lowcock for their updates. I also thank Ms. Alsaidy and Ms. Almasadi for their briefings and welcome the presence of the Permanent Representative of Yemen at our meeting today. Viet Nam is very concerned about military escalation in different parts of Yemen and the recent reports about civilian casualties, including children and women. The continued military escalation across Yemen has caused the security situation to further deteriorate against the backdrop of the outbreak of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. The possibility of a severe food security crisis in Yemen is another concern for us. The recent report by the United Nations Children's Fund, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the World Food Programme said that the number of people in acute food insecurity is projected to increase from 2 million to 3.2 million in the next six months. In addition, economic crisis, conflict, floods, desert locusts and now COVID-19 could deepen the dire humanitarian situation in the country. The shortage of funding could also put the humanitarian work being done at the risk of being stopped. Furthermore, we remain gravely concerned about the growing risk that the FSO SAFER oil tanker could rupture, causing an environmental, economic and humanitarian catastrophe for Yemen and the region. Against this background, my delegation wishes to make the following points. First, we urge all the parties concerned to reach an immediate and nationwide ceasefire in Yemen so that the humanitarian work and the fight against the COVID-19 pandemic could be facilitated. Secondly, we reiterate our call for all parties to uphold their obligations under international humanitarian law with respect to the protection of civilians and civilian objects, especially women and children. We urge all parties, especially local ones, to further provide safe and unhindered access for humanitarian assistance. We call on all potential donors and other partners to continue funding humanitarian work and making contributions to overcome severe food insecurity and save the lives of people in Yemen. Thirdly, we join other Member States in calling on all relevant parties to fully implement the Stockholm Agreement and the Riyadh agreement with United Nations mediation. We also stress the importance of ensuring the meaningful participation of women in the political process. Fourthly, with regard to the FSO SAFER oil tanker, we join other Member States and the United Nations in reiterating the call for the Houthis to provide access and the necessary support for the United Nations technical team to undertake their tasks to prevent environmental disaster in the region. Last but not least, we reiterate our support for Martin Griffiths' three-pillar approach, and call on all parties concerned, inside and outside Yemen, to undertake all efforts to achieve an immediate nationwide ceasefire and restart a Yemeni-led and Yemeni-owned inclusive political process.
