Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman for
his briefing.

China welcomes the Secretary-General's report
(S/2017/467) on the threat ofthe Isalmic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) to international peace and security.

Recently, Egypt, Afghanistan, the United
Kingdom, France and Iran suffered terrorist attacks.
The attacks caused enormous civilian casualties
and significant property losses. Terrorism is a
common enemy of humankind and its impact goes
beyond borders. No country can respond to terrorism
singlehandedly or insulate itself from the scourge. The
international community should embrace the concept
of a community bound by a common destiny, identify
new trends and patterns in the evolution of terrorism,
enhance cooperation and work collectively to respond
to the threat.

First, we must garner international consensus on
the fight against terrorism. Terrorism represents a
threat to humankind. The international community
should uphold unified standards, adopt a zero-tolerance
approach without any distinction. Regardless of a
terrorist's location, their pretexts, which country they
are targeting or which tactics they use, terrorism must
be fought with resolve. International counter-terrorism
efforts must respect the sovereignty of the countries
concerned, which bear the primary responsibility of
fighting terrorism. Those efforts must also defer to
the leading role of the United Nations and the Security
Council and abide by the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations. Terrorism shall not be
associated with any specific ethnicity or religion.

Secondly, we must eliminate breeding grounds of
terrorism. At present the major terrorist elements and
forces are entrenched in conflict zones, including Iraq
and Syria, benefiting from regional turmoil, launching
terrorist attacks in regions beyond conflict zones
and threatening regional and international peace and
security. The international community should address
regional hotspots with a heightened sense of urgency,
encourage the relevant parties to resolve regional
conflicts through political processes and dialogue,
maintain regional peace, stability and development,
and eradicate the causes of terrorism at an early date.
Thirdly, we must disrupt the terrorist transit
network. With continuous progress being made in
international counter-terrorism efforts, terrorist fighters
are travelling to or returning to other countries in the
relevant regions and beyond, seriously threatening the
security of countries of destination, transit and origin.
The countries concerned must enhance cooperation in
the fields of border control and law enforcement, share
information and intelligence, disrupt terrorist transit
networks and respond collectively to the threat posed
by returning terrorists.

Fourthly, we must cut off the financing channels for
terrorist activities. These are increasingly diversified
and include the plundering of natural resources;
narcotics and human trafficking; and the smuggling
of cultural relics, with the funds raised being used
for terrorist activities. The international community
must take countermeasures and implement the relevant
Security Council resolutions, including resolutions 2199
(2015) and 2253 (2015); enhance financial regulations
and enforcement cooperation; and crack down on all
forms of financing by terrorist organizations.

Fifthly, it is important to suppress the use of
the Internet by terrorist organizations. Terrorist
organizations are using the Internet and social media
as a platform to spread their violent and extremist
ideologies and to disseminate terrorist propaganda
as well as engage in financing, recruitment and the
incitement and planning of terrorist activities. All
States must fully implement the relevant Security
Council resolutions and enhance cyber legislation,
enforcement and regulation. The United Nations
should play a coordinating role in the international
community's efforts to carry out pragmatic cooperation
and collectively crack down on the use of the Internet
for terrorist purposes.

China is an important member of the international
force against terrorism. In recent years China has
participated in meaningful ways in multilateral counter-
terrorism mechanisms, including the United Nations,
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization and the Global
Counterterrorism Forum. China will continue to
participate and to promote multilateral and bilateral
counter-terrorism cooperation, enhance the sharing of
counter-terrorism intelligence, and provide counter-
terrorism supplies and capacity-building to developing
countries to the extent of our ability.

China stands ready to work with all countries
to respond collectively to the threat of terrorism and
violent extremism and to maintain international peace
and stability.

