The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
China.

I wish to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Zarif for his briefing. I also welcome
His Excellency Prime Minister Dacic of Serbia to
this meeting, as well as his statement. I also listened
carefully to the statement by Mr. Thaci.

China respects the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Serbia and understands the legitimate
concerns of that country on the question of Kosovo.
Resolution 1244 (1999) provides the essential legal
basis for finding a solution to the question of Kosovo.
China believes that the best approach in that connection
is to find a mutually acceptable settlement through
dialogue and negotiations on the basis of the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations
and within the framework of the relevant Council
resolutions. China commends Serbia for its efforts in
finding a political solution to the question of Kosovo
and welcomes the pragmatic and constructive dialogue
that is being actively pursued by both Belgrade and
Pristina. We also welcome the agreements that both
parties included recently on telecommunication and
energy.

China has taken note of the fact that the overall
security situation in Kosovo remains calm, thanks to
the efforts of the parties concerned. In the wake of
the violence during the elections in northern Kosovo
on 3 November, Prime Minister Thaci and others
concerned appealed to the electorate in northern
Kosovo to put aside past grievances and participate in
the elections in a responsible manner. China commends
Prime Minister Thaci for his efforts and is happy to see
that the relevant elections were rerun on 17 November.
We encourage both parties to continue the process of
dialogue, effectively implement the agreements that
have been signed and work in a way so as to maintain
peace and stability in the Balkans and Europe at large.

China commends the efforts carried out by the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) under the leadership of Special
Representative Zarif, and supports UNMIK's efforts to
continue to discharge the Council's mandate. We hope
that the international presences, including UNMMIK,
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo and
the Kosovo Force, will strengthen their coordiantion and
work in synergy so as to play a positive and constructive
role in facililating a solution to the question of Kosovo.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speaker. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 5.20pm.
