Mr. Hill (Australia): We welcome the opportunity
to again address the Security Council on the important
issues of Timor-Leste, and thank the Council for giving
those matters its attention.

We appreciate the fact that Prime Minister
Ramos-Horta has been able to be with us today and to
contribute to our deliberations. His considered and
balanced report of the circumstances in Timor-Leste
was, I think, a demonstration of what a great asset he is
to his nation. The fact that he is prepared to accept the
baton of leadership in such difficult circumstances is
highly commendable.

Timor-Leste continues to need the sustained
attention and support of United Nations Member
States, and the international community willingly and
generously supported Timor-Leste as it addressed the
setbacks that occurred last year on its path towards
successful nationhood. We welcome the ongoing and
broad-ranging work of the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) to address those
challenges. We congratulate Mr. Atul Khare on his
appointment as the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Timor-Leste and on the way in
which he is carrying out the job. We thank all those
who are serving in the Mission in Timor-Leste and
those here at Headquarters who are giving them such
professional and capable support.

We agree with the Secretary-General's comments
in his most recent report that the long-term
commitment of the international community to Timor-
Leste remains critical to enabling Timor-Leste to return
as a nation to the path of stability and development in a
climate of democratic, accountable and responsive
governance. We therefore strongly support the renewal
of UNMIT's mandate for a further 12 months.

Australia is prepared to remain at the forefront of
the efforts of the international community to assist
Timor-Leste. We are currently providing some 810
troops as part of the international security force, which
of course is supporting UNMIT police and United
Nations personnel in maintaining law and order and

security. Australia has increased contributions to
address humanitarian aspects of the crisis to some
$A10 million.

In the lead up to presidential and parliamentary
elections in Timor-Leste, we welcome UNMIT's
support for political and community reconciliation. We
consider that Timor-Leste's political future is
ultimately a matter for the Timorese people. Timor-
Leste's political leaders must, of course, take
responsibility for resolving their differences
constitutionally and peacefully. This year's presidential
and parliamentary elections will be the first national
elections to be managed by the Timorese people
themselves. The conduct of free, fair and transparent
elections will be a critical test of the robustness of
Timor-Leste's new democracy, but it will also require
the support of the international community.

We welcome the United Nation's provision of
technical and logistical assistance to East Timor for
those elections and the three-person independent
electoral certification team that is monitoring the
election process. We would encourage that the
certification team's useful reports be acknowledged and
its constructive recommendations implemented.
Australia has provided $A1.3 million to support a
United Nations Development Programme project aimed
at strengthening electoral institutions and processes.

UNMIT police and the international security
force continue to maintain stability in Timor-Leste,
which will be an especially important role in the lead-
up to national elections. Whilst the overall situation
has improved, obviously, since May last year, I agree
with others that it continues to remain fragile.

The recent signing of two security-related
arrangements - the technical arrangement covering
the parametres of the international security force
deployment and the memorandum of understanding
establishing the Trilateral Coordination Forum -
demonstrates to the Timorese people the shared
commitment of the United Nations, Australia and
Timor-Leste to ensuring stability and security. Those
arrangements formalize the close working relationship
that has developed between the United Nations, the
international security force and the Timor-Leste
Government.
Australia emphasizes the need to build a
sustainable Timorese police force that will have the
confidence and culture to be able to deal with any
future crisis of law and order in a fair and just way. We
are willing to offer significant assistance to such a
force. We also emphasize the need for a comprehensive
and timely security sector review to address the future
direction and shape of the Timor-Leste defence force.
Australia stands ready again to assist in that process.

The international community has again come to
the assistance of Timor-Leste. UNMIT represents an
important opportunity to repair and rebuild the
developing institutions that were damaged or destroyed
last year and to further strengthen those institutions
that did show resilience through the crisis. The
international security force provides an important
support function to ensure that UNMIT is able to focus
on those important activities. We now encourage the
people of Timor-Leste to take responsibility for their
own affairs, and especially look forward to the conduct
of peaceful and trouble-free elections.

