Mr. Labbe (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I would like
to thank Chad, as current President of the Security
Council, and you, Sir, for taking the initiative to
convene this important debate on threats to peace and
security: terrorism and cross-border crime. Both of
the latter are threats to world peace and stability that
make it essential that we agree on a strategy that can
enable us to deal successfully with its multi-faceted
manifestations.

The delegation of Chile would like to join those
who have once again expressed their condolences to
Pakistan in the wake of the horrific terrorist attack
in Peshawar. The victims chosen for the attack,
and the barbarism with which it was carried out,
reflect the extremes that such terrorist logic can lead
to. It is also a massive wake-up call telling us all to
respond effectively - I repeat, effectively - to the
terrible threat that looms over all of us, because an
attack of this nature is indeed an attack on the entire
international community. In that context, my country
greatly appreciates the thorough report on the issue
under discussion today, expressed in the concept note
distributed by the presidency (S/2014/869, annex).
Chile agrees with its main elements, in particular the
proposal to initiate a strategic review of the existing
tools in order to shrink the strategic space that cross-
border crime provides to terrorist groups.

Such interaction between terrorism and organized
crime, on various levels, for which we have irrefutable
evidence, directly undermines our ability to build a
safe world. While there is no single consensus on a
definition of what constitutes terrorism, we know that
we are talking about is an unacceptable and illegitimate
political instrument. Some terrorist groups use terms
such as "armies", "resistance fronts" or "political
parties" in an effort to gain some legitimacy in achieving
their ends. However, it is the means they use in their
fight that are reprehensible and that should be fought
with all possible energy and force. Time and time again
in the discussion of this issue, Chile has pointed out
that there can be no justification for terrorist acts.

The role of the United Nations in combating
these phenomena is fundamental, and it is essential
that we reinforce our existing arsenal through
coherent and systematic implementation of the
international instruments designed to fight terrorism
and transnational organized crime. The weakening of
States' authority and capacity through the action of
terrorist groups, armed with the proceeds of cross-
border organized crime, not only affects the cross-
border reality of a State and its citizens, it also alters
the geometry of international security, including, of
course, United Nations action, conducted through
peacekeeping and security operations.

As a result, international coordination and
cooperation to fight terrorist financing associated
with money-laundering by criminal organizations
continue to be one of the most significant challenges
the international community has faced in this decade.
In that regard, we also consider it relevant to take into
consideration best practices and lessons learned from
the work of the Council's sanctions committees. Their
efforts aimed at controlling the illicit trade in arms and
natural resources are an effective tool for identifying
cross-border crime and terrorism's main sources of
access and financing.

Chile is aware of the various positions that exist
on the links between organized crime and terrorism.
While acknowledging that not all organized crime
groups are terrorists and not all terrorists are organized
crime groups, it must nonetheless be admitted that
many terrorist groups operate and are financed
through illegal activities such as extortion, the use
and recruitment of children, the illicit smuggling of
migrants and trafficking of humans, kidnapping, arms
and drug trafficking, mineral smuggling, fishing and
other illegal ways of exploiting natural resources.
Furthermore, few terrorist groups can operate without
conducting activities linked to organized crime. That
is why the involvement of terrorist groups in organized
criminal activity for the purpose of financing offers a
connection that should be analysed in depth both from
an operational and a strategic viewpoint.

Terrorism and transnational criminal organizations
are capable of undermining societies and the
Governments and security of their Citizens, including
the most vulnerable. In our opinion, preventing
and suppressing such activities is a priority, but
categorizing such crimes cannot be the only way to
address the phenomenon. Once again, we would like
to emphasize that some of the most effective tools we
have for fighting them are education, the elimination of
inequality, inclusive development and continued work
with society's most marginalized groups.

Given the complex interaction of these two
phenomena, and with special attention to their potential
effect on civil society, States and the international
system, the strategic review that Chad has proposed
will enable us to better understand the links between
them and help us to better establish our capacities for
their prevention and eradication. For that reason, Chile
is very grateful to Chad.

Chile will continue to support the fight against
terrorism and cross-border crime, out of the conviction
that we are thereby contributing to the dignity, peace,
stability and inclusive development of our societies.
