Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Azerbaijan for convening today's meeting. This
is the sixth time that the Security Council has held
an open debate on its working methods. This fully
demonstrates the importance that the Security Council
attaches to improving its working methods.

The Charter of the United Nations entrusts the
Security Council with the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and
security. As the core of the United Nations collective
security machinery, the Security Council has major
responsibilities in responding to threats and challenges
of all kinds to international security. Following the Cold
War, the Security Council has conducted preventive
diplomacy efforts, resolved disputes through mediation
and good offices, and made important efforts and
obtained positive results in peacekeeping, post-conflict
rebuilding and peacebuilding,

In recent years, the broader United Nations
membership has been asking the Security Council to
improve its working methods and transparency so as
to better fulfil the responsibility entrusted to it by the
Charter of the United Nations. China fully understands
that concern and pays sincere attention to the broader
membership. China has been making sincere efforts,
with other members of the Council, to push for
positive results in improving the Council's working
methods. There has been an increase in the number of
open meetings held every year. The President of the
Council holds monthly briefings to non-members on
the progress of the Council's work, and this has now
become Council practice. The Council also attaches
importance to informal interactive dialogues and
Arria Formula meetings, inter alia. In that way, the
Council can strengthen its exchanges and interaction
with Member States, regional organizations and civil
society.

This year, the Security Council has adopted
presidential statements on improving the efficiency of
the open meetings of the Security Council, maintaining
regular communications with the Peacebuilding
Commission and its country-specific configurations,
and increasing its exchanges with regional organizations
and troop-contributing countries.

The Charter of the United Nations provides that the

Security Council formulate its own rules of procedure.
China earnestly supports the full implementation of the
2010 note by the President of the Council (S/2010/507)
on improving the Council's working methods, which
sums up experiences and explores specific measures
and recommendations for improving the working
methods of the Council, increasing its transparency and
improving its authority and efficiency so as to facilitate
the Council playing a greater role in maintaining
international peace and security. I would like to make
the following points.

First, in order to better fulfil its responsibility
of maintaining international peace and security, the
Council should focus its resources and efforts on dealing
with major and pressing issues that are significant for
international peace and security. In recent years, the
number of thematic debates in the Council has been
on the increase. Some of these debates have even
exceeded the mandate of the Council and eroded the
scope of work of other United Nations bodies. The
Security Council and other United Nations bodies
have their respective functions and they should use
their comparative advantages and expertise and avoid
duplication of efforts.

Secondly, broad consensus should be reached
through full negotiations and patient consultations
during the Council's decision-making process. It
should be ensured that all members of the Council have
sufficient time to study the relevant draft resolutions or
draft presidential statements. The Council should avoid
forcibly pushing for drafts on which there are major
differences of opinion in order to preserve the unity of
the Council.

Thirdly, the Security Council should heed
the opinions of the Member States, especially the
ideas of the countries involved. China supports the
strengthening of the Council's coordination and
cooperation with regional organizations, in accordance
with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations,
so as to fully utilize the comparative advantages of
regional organizations in dealing with issues in which
they have advantages.

Fourthly, the Security Council should endeavour
to strengthen its communication and interaction
with troop-contributing countries. We support the
Security Council in fully utilizing the working groups
on peacekeeping and troop-contributing countries
and other mechanisms to strengthen communication
and exchanges and take into account the ideas of
troop-contributing countries. The concerns of troop-
contributing countries should also be heeded in
peacekeeping deployments and mandate adjustments.

Fifthly, the Security Council should, through an
increase in its open debates, allow Member States to
better understand the work of the Security Council.
We can also use the Arria Formula and other types of
meetings to listen to the ideas of other countries so as to
strengthen the Council's interaction and dialogue with
States that are not members of the Council.

