We welcome the holding of this open debate, which invites us to reflect on the contemporary factors that underlie the emergence of new conflicts or the exacerbation of existing ones. In the current fragile circumstances, this issue takes on even greater significance. We wish to thank the briefers for their lucid presentations. Throughout its participation in the Security Council as a non-permanent member, Peru had opportunity to closely follow the dynamics of poverty and insecurity affecting various developing countries and to recognize the urgent need to address them. At the same time, we note that there is no one-size-fits-all formula, but that the specificities of each situation, respective national development priorities and the voluntary nature of any process must be taken into consideration. It is clear that the global challenges imposed by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic extend to the field of international security. We have observed how the impact of the disease translates into greater levels of poverty and marginalization, the erosion of confidence in public institutions, loss of political legitimacy due to the postponement of electoral processes, new violations of human rights and the stagnation of peace processes promoted by the United Nations. Those realities should lead us to strengthen dialogue, prevention and mediation actions and international cooperation. We wish to highlight the validity of the tools for peaceful solutions contemplated in the Charter of the Organization to sustain and develop the collective security system, thereby preventing the emergence of new threats to peace. The challenge underlying this critical juncture is to register tangible progress in the fight against the disease, while affirming multilateralism as the most appropriate instrument for concerted and supportive action by States and other actors involved, at both the national and international levels, in order to achieve fair, balanced and inclusive results. In the immediate future, there must be urgent compliance with the global ceasefire called for by Secretary-General Antonio Guterres, which Peru has supported from the very beginning. It is an essential measure to prevent and mitigate the devastating effects of COVID-19 and to strengthen diplomatic action. Peru also believes it is essential to understand that the growing socioeconomic and environmental impacts of climate change are producing humanitarian crises and conflicts that, due to their scope, may result in threats to international peace and security. Consequently, we believe it necessary for the Council to strengthen and systematize its coordination with the United Nations system, especially with those bodies directly involved in preventing and mitigating the negative effects of climate change. We stress that such coordination should take into account the competencies and mandates of the various entities of the system while promoting favourable synergies to address the particular needs of and risk, crisis or conflict situations faced by various Member States. We believe that, from the Council's perspective, this implies having timely information on the impact of climate change, regarding both the situations on the Council's agenda and those where it is necessary to act preventively to maintain international peace and security. I wish to conclude by stressing the importance of greater involvement in these issues by regional and subregional organizations, financial institutions, the private sector, academia and civil society. The Peacebuilding Commission has played a crucial role in that regard, which the international community must acknowledge and support.
