Mr. Saikal (Afghanistan): Let me congratulate
Spain on its successful leadership of the Security
Council this month. We wish to thank Ambassador
Roman Oyarzun Marchesi and his team at the Spanish
Mission for their dedicated efforts as penholder for
Afghanistan during the past two years and welcome
Japan's assumption of this important task. I thank
the outgoing Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon,
for his recent report (S/2016/1049) on the situation in
Afghanistan. We are grateful to Ambassador Tadamichi
Yamamoto, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan, for his comprehensive briefing
and outstanding leadership of the United Nations work
in Afghanistan.

Two years after the three-pronged transition,
with focus on reforms and renewed international
commitments, Afghanistan has defied odds by
standing on its own and managing complex challenges,
notwithstanding a high price in lost lives and denied
opportunities. From the perspective ofsecurity, in recent
months our armed forces have proved their strength by
repulsing unprecedented waves of attacks in various
provinces. Economically, Afghanistan's regional
connectivity has been growing fast. And politically,
our vibrant course of democratization continues with
electoral reform on track. However, with a high rate of
return of refugees, coupled with the increased number
of internally displaced persons resulting from terrorist
attacks, we have fresh humanitarian challenges ahead
of us this winter and beyond.

In 2016, parallel to the challenges, we witnessed
significant developments that reflected strong
international military and civilian support for
Afghanistan. In July, our international partners
at the NATO Warsaw Summit pledged continued
assistance towards the sustainability of our security
forces. In September, the Council reaffirmed its full
support to Afghanistan through presidential statement
S/PRST/20l6/14. In October, the Brussels Conference
on Afghanistan renewed the partnership for prosperity
and peace between our country and the international
community. In November, the General Assembly
unanimously adopted resolution 71/9 entitled, "The
situation in Afghanistan", which reiterated the
commitment of the international community for a
stable Afghanistan. Those developments represent
the clear consolidation of international consensus on
Afghanistan, for which we are deeply grateful. On
behalf of my Government and my people, let me thank
all Member States for their positive contributions to
Afghanistan's stability and progress. In particular, we
are grateful to the United States, Germany, the United
Kingdom and Turkey for forging the Warsaw Summit
consensus on Afghanistan, and the European Union
for galvanizing renewed international development
commitments for our country.

Effective counter-terrorism requires a clear regional
and global security architecture and constructive
engagement among the relevant stakeholders. For too
long, terror has found a comfort zone in the occasional
tectonic shifts and grinds of security fault lines,
along with negative rivalries of regional and global
powers. Scattered, fragmented and slow counter-
terrorism measures have been exploited by terrorists to
manoeuvre, spread violence and create discord among
people. In the face of growing terrorism worldwide,
we must increase trust, collaboration and coordination
among relevant Member States for a comprehensive
response based on the rule of law and established
international norms.

In that context, any kind of outside contact with
the Taliban or other such groups without the prior
knowledge and approval of the Government of
Afghanistan is seen as a legitimization ofterror, a direct
breach of our sovereignty and a clear contravention of
the United Nations sanctions regimes and the Vienna
Convention on Diplomatic Relations, which will not be
tolerated. Fighting terror with terror, no matter what
the justification, is a sign of weakness of the civilized
world and a return to impasse and stagnation. Certainly,
our people will suffer most from this irrational and
reckless policy.

In the campaign against terrorism, Afghanistan
ought to be a symbol of international cooperation.
We welcome the regional and global convergence of
legitimate interests in our security, political stability
and development. The surest way to protect those
interests in Afghanistan is to desist from ill-conceived
attempts at regional orchestration of Afghanistan's
insecurity, enhance official State-to-State cooperation
and support our national security forces.

At the peak of the international military presence in
2012, the casualty rate of coalition forces was over 400,
and the approximate cost of war amounted to around
$110 billion; in 2016, the casualty rate has dropped to
16, and financial costs are estimated to be less than
one-eleventh of that figure. Hence, today our forces are
at the forefront of countering terrorism on behalf of the
world and need to be fully supported.

It must be noted that in October and November,
various provinces of Afghanistan became the target of
terrorist attacks that are unprecedented in our country's
modern history. The enemy's intention was to establish a
parallel geography for the Taliban, but the commitment
and bravery of our security forces prevented terrorists
from realizing their wicked ambitions.

Due to its sensitive geostrategic location,
Afghanistan firmly believes in regionalism and
multilateral diplomacy. The sixth Ministerial
Conference of the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process, held
two weeks ago in Amritsar, acknowledged the support
that terrorism derives in our region and called for the
dismantling of regional terrorist sanctuaries and safe
havens. Further, it called upon all States to take action
against those terrorist entities in accordance with
their respective national counter-terrorism policies,
their international obligations and the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. The Conference
welcomed and supported Afghanistan's initiative
in taking the lead in exploring a regional counter-
terrorism strategy, in keeping with the Charter of the
United Nations. At Amritsar, President Ghani proposed
an Asian and international mechanism to verify cross-
frontier activities and terrorist operations. Verification
of nefarious activities would present our neighbour
hard evidence to undercut their plausible deniability
and blame games, and shift the focus to where it should
be - a unified response to countering terrorism.
At the United Nations level, consideration of
new three-tier measures for a more effective counter-
terrorism strategy is needed. During our debates, we
ought to address the impact of negative State rivalries
and State use of violence in pursuit of political objectives
on the growth of terrorism. At an operational level, we
need to refine and enrich relevant existing resolutions
or adopt new resolutions to target the drivers of such
policies within State structures. At the implementation
level, effectively enforcing the counter-terrorism
resolutions, including the sanctions regimes on the
Taliban, Al-Qaida and Da'esh, and those who use the
State apparatus to nurture them, can have a significant
impact on war and peace in Afghanistan. We want the
timely inclusion of select irredeemable Taliban leaders
on the sanctions list and a review of those delisted so
far. There is an urgent need for increased and more
meaningful interaction between the United Nations
counter-terrorism bodies and Afghan security agencies.
We welcome the Sanctions Committee's November visit
to Afghanistan, where relevant issues were discussed
with the senior leadership.

Winter in Afghanistan begins in two days. For the
Taliban and their supporters in our neighbourhood,
that usually marks the official end of their fighting
season. Most Taliban militiamen return to the warmth
of madrasas in Pakistan for rest and recuperation and to
refuel for the next fighting season. Often, around this
time of year, the regional orchestrator of violence in
our country reverts to the notion of peace talks. Thus
their seasonality and tactical use of war and peace
continues, leaving little room for genuine peace efforts.
Nevertheless, we once again urge all Afghan Taliban
groups and their foreign supporters to enter into genuine
peace talks with the Government of Afghanistan. In
that endeavour, we recognize the importance of the role
of neighbouring countries, in particular Pakistan, and
other regional partners.

We have made some progress towards the
implementation of the peace agreement signed with
Hezb-i-Islami (Gulbuddin) on 29 September. The
cessation of violence with former belligerent members
of the group has held for nearly three months. Their
disarmament and reintegration require careful
planning. The agreement presents an opportunity to
put the future together, not justify the past. Making
the agreement work will necessitate collective and
careful efforts from all stakeholders, across domestic
and international spectrums. Those who want to take
advantage of this historic opportunity should refrain
from all derogatory, divisive and xenophobic activities.
The Government pardon is not a justification of their
past violent activities and should neither be misused
nor abused. It is noteworthy; the people of Afghanistan
have the full right to seek justice, in accordance with
their fundamental rights. We expect the implementation
of the agreement to improve security, strengthen the
political stability and national unity of the Afghan
people and set a good precedent in the peace process.

Recently, President Ghani and Chief Executive
Abdullah have displayed a renewed level of consensus
in the work of the national unity Government, in
particular in relation to the appointment of new
commissioners at the electoral bodies, which marks a
decisive step forward to strengthening the credibility,
transparency and integrity of our future elections.
We expect the Independent Election Commission to
announce the date of our upcoming parliamentary
and district council elections in the near future. Talks
on other subjects are still ongoing to strengthen our
political stability and democratic process.

Afghanistan has progressed steadily on the path of
economic cooperation through regional connectivity
and tangible development projects. The recent
inauguration of the Turkmenistan-Afghanistan railway,
following the arrival of a cargo train from China, and the
construction of the Iran-Afghanistan railway, together
with the forthcoming cargo air corridor between
Afghanistan and India, are reviving centuries-old trade
routes that will help revitalize the regional economy.
However, insecurity presents a primary obstacle to our
economic reform and infrastructure-building agenda.

The Taliban's recent statement of support for
major development projects has no genuine basis. As
mentioned, insecurity created by the Taliban undercuts
economic development in the country and challenges
regional connectivity. On 17 December, just a couple
of days ago, the Taliban targeted five female airport
personnel in Kandahar airport. That is their real nature.
Any expression of support willbe deemed legitimate only
when expressed through deeds, such as the immediate
cessation of violence and their genuine joining of the
peace process. Compared to previous years, the rate
of civilian casualties has gone down marginally in
Afghanistan. However, terrorists continue to attack
soft targets mercilessly, as manifested by the rising
percentage of child casualties this year. The recent
targeting of religious gatherings was aimed at stoking
ethnic and sectarian tensions among our people. But let
me reiterate that Afghans stand united in the face of
such divisive strategies.
The Government of Afghanistan, in collaboration
with the United Nations and other international
partners, continues to work on creating equal
opportunities for women, pursuant to resolution 1325
(2000). We have also improved workplace conditions
for women and strengthened the legal framework
for their physical protection. In that regard, the
recently revised penal code is among our other recent
achievements. We are highly determined to bring all
human rights violators to justice, including those in
the highest positions of Government. It is important
that national and international stakeholders further
strengthen the independence of the Afghan judiciary
without politicizing or ethnicizing the course ofjustice.

During the past 10 months, Afghanistan has
witnessed the return of nearly 1 million of its nationals.
Increased policing and uncertainty over their status
in Pakistan, including the fear of eviction, have led
to a huge surge of returnees. That fact, along with
internal displacements resulting from conflict, might
exacerbate the already difficult humanitarian crisis
as winter approaches. We invite the international
community to support the flash appeal of the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs to provide
immediate life-saving assistance while we continue to
work on a comprehensive solution.

Recently, we have initiated a string of consultations
with relevant line ministries, United Nations agencies
and other related stakeholders to provide immediate
response packages during the winter season to needy
returnees and internally displaced persons. In the
broader context, we are seeking long-term, viable
solutions for those problems. In that context, the further
assistance of the international community remains of
vital importance.

Our efforts to curb the menace of narcotics and
to break its link with criminality are ongoing. In
October, the Ministry of Counter-Narcotics, along
with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
released the executove summary of the Afghanistan
Opium Survey 2016, which noted an increase in poppy
production. However, our counter-narcotics operations
continue unabated with recent unprecedented seizures.
One thing is clear - insecurity creates fertile ground
for drug production. We maintain the view that a viable
solution to the narcotics problem must be based on the
principle of shared responsibility. A verification regime
of cultivation, production, trafficking and demand
would probably prove that Afghanistan beneficits the
least from drug profits.
We have reached the end of an eventful year,
with key developments that signify an enormous leap
forward for Afghanistan. The regional and international
consensus has reached new heights, as reflected in
the Warsaw NATO Summit, the Brussels Conference
and Heart of Asia Ministerial Conference, and the
unanimous adoption of General Assembly resolution
71/9 on Afghanistan. Together, those events have
established a firm foundation to enhance our strategic
cooperation into the new year.

The Council and the international community are
well aware that terrorism remains a constant threat to
the security of all peoples and societies. That said, let
us approach the coming year with a new confidence
and commitment to secure a stable and self-reliant
Afghanistan. We must not forget that our joint
partnership is in fact a strategic investment for a more
safe and prosperous world order.

