Mr. Koenders (Netherlands): I would like to
express my sincere gratitude to the Arab Republic of
Egypt for organizing this important debate.

Today's debate is, in my View, a very timely one,
timely because of the upcoming review of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and because
of the several, very tragic events that have happened
recently: terrorist bombs in Ankara and Istanbul and
gunmen attacking a hotel in Ouagadougou. Last week
I was on the beach in C6te d'Ivoire to pay tribute to
those who were killed in Grand-Bassam. The dozens
of ordinary men, women and children in a park in
Lahore killed by a suicide bomber targeting Christians
at Easter; the dozens of lives lost in terrorist strikes
at Brussels' airport and metro, and today, the tragic
attacks in Baghdad killing at least 85 people underline
the urgency of this debate. My thoughts and sympathies
go to the victims of terrorism all over the world and to
their families. I would like also to pay my condolences
to you, Mr. President, because of the lost policemen
in Egypt this weekend. Such attacks try to create fear,
panic and the destruction of our ways of life and our
freedoms. They try to instil fear and division among us,
and they will not succeed because their attacks underline
the vital importance of international cooperation in the
fight against terrorism, in preventing violent extremism
and in offering alternative messaging.

Nobody in this Chamber can afford to go it alone,
if we want to achieve long-term success. Foreign
terrorist fighters, a new term, are in fact not foreign,
as they come from among us, from the social fabric of
our societies. Nobody can go it alone; we are all going
through stress tests in our societies, and one of the main
lessons we can draw from the recent attacks in the past
month is the need to think globally and act very locally.

As such, the Kingdom of the Netherlands welcomes
the Secretary-General's Plan of Action to Prevent
Violent Extremism, and underlines the importance of
building national action plans. Such comprehensive
plans should not be perceived as an exercise in finger
pointing. No - all of us face the same challenge of
violent extremism, and we have to work together to
meet it effectively. Sharing information is one key
element of cooperation, and frankly we need more
trust among ourselves and our nations and among our
law-enforcement agencies, our border guards and our
intelligence operations. We need to break the code
of silence that sustains networks of foreign terrorist
fighters and facilitates suspected terrorists, who operate
under the radar. We need to work with the private sector
and with civil society to break the silence and stop
terrorist financing in a legal and effective framework.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands has committed
to contributing robustly to the multilateral approach
to cooperation, including through the Global Counter-
Terrorism Forum, which we currently co-Chair together
with the Kingdom of Morocco. In that Forum, we work
to streamline our national policies on, for example,
the rehabilitation of former terrorists, because that is
a second obligation, namely, to achieve a better balance
between dissuasive and preventative approaches.
We have to work in our prisons, with returnees, with
youth, with police and with religious leaders. That is
the day-to-day work in our societies. The Jordan-led
Aqaba Middle East peace process poses an example
of an effective exchange of lessons learned, building
bridges between countries and increasing our day-to-
day collaboration.

Even though Governments can be instrumental in
delivering a strong and positive narrative, messages
are more effective when they are developed and
disseminated by our new generations. To young people
who question the legitimacy of authority in general, any
message disseminated only by a Government could be
received with suspicion. So what are our alternatives?
We need to acknowledge that we as Governments often
try to fight a modern battle with old weapons. We need
young people, who can understand the motivations for
joining brutal terrorist groups, who speak the right
language and who know how to communicate via apps
and online tools.

We need to promote the positive role played by
young people who have fled from the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Sham and who are brave enough to speak
up. As a Government, the Netherlands can empower
them, with you and others to protect them against those
who want to stifle their voices. For that we have to work
with all the stakeholders - the teachers, the business
community, the parents and even the sports clubs.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands believes freedom
of speech is crucial for stimulating critical thinking,
which is one of the strongest weapons against extremist
propaganda. Last year, our association of journalists
organized a road show on press freedom and taught
young people how to question the opinions that they
encounter. We should reach out to children at an early
age to familiarize them with alternatives to violent
narratives. In Jordan and Lebanon, we are working
with local partners to build bridges between refugee
communities and host communities, with education for
children on values like tolerance, diversity and respect
for others.

In conclusion, let me make two final observations.
First, the Council has not heard me use the word
"counternarrative". I don't actually care much for that
word because, to me, it sounds defensive and reactive.
There are no general counternarratives that can do
justice to an individual's life in all its brilliance and
confusion and with all its challenges and rewards. I
prefer to use terms such as "positive" or "inclusive"
narrative.

My second observation is that working with our
young people should be our top priority for preventing
violent extremism. They are our first line of defence,
the people who can build bridges between countries
and prevent their friends from becoming terrorists.
But they need our help, at the national, local and
international levels. In order to enable them to be the
voice of reason, we must ensure that we put in place
appropriate international frameworks and policies for
upholding the standards of international human rights,
the rule of law and the freedoms that distinguish us
from barbaric terrorist groups. The only way to make
our strategy work is to teach young people to be critical
thinkers, make up their own minds and take control of
their own lives without hurting others. They are the
agents of change.

