Mr. Heusgen (Germany): Let me first say that the Security Council has come home. I thank you, Mr. President, for all your efforts. I think it is good that we are back in the Chamber and that we are able to see and talk to each other. I thank you very much for your initiative. With regard to Mali, let me first thank the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and, indirectly or directly, my colleague from the Niger for what ECOWAS has done in terms of engagement and mediation. Let me also welcome the transitional arrangements. As colleagues before me have said, what is important is that those arrangements now be implemented not only in terms of timelines but also in terms of the transition to a civilian leadership. I believe that we have said that such a transition offers Mali a new and fresh start. We all sincerely hope that the new authorities do not let their population down. I thank Special Representative of the Secretary- General Annadif for his briefing. He very clearly explained the basis for what has happened, namely, the loss of the population's trust in the political actors. I believe that it is key that the new leadership regain its trust. The Estonian Ambassador has just highlighted the importance of the new leadership regaining the people's trust and addressing their grievances. The key to that is an inclusive Government. Just like my Belgian colleague and others said, it is truly a bad start that, in the month of the twenty-fifth of the Beijing Declaration and the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), there are 21 men and four women. Why do leaders not understand that in such transitions, in order to get an inclusive Government to answer to the needs of the people, there must be a fair number - S50 per cent, or even 30 per cent - of women in the Government. I ask that it be reported back how important it is to have an inclusive Government. That means that the transitional leaders have a discussion with civil society, women's organizations, youth, artists and people from all levels of society. On the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, my French colleague, European Union colleagues and other colleagues have said everything. There is a clear road map and it needs to be implemented. Also, with the regard to security sector reform, it is important that it continue, and the justice sector is key. The justice sector has to work. Impunity is not an option. If you want to regain the trust of the people, those who have committed crimes have to be held accountable. Otherwise, it will not work. I want to reconfirm to the Ambassador of Mali the German commitment to his country. We are a major troop contributor. We very much appreciate what my Belgian colleague just said concerning the cooperation that we have among the countries of the European Union, in particular with Belgium, in our engagement.We stand by our engagement. We also promote political dialogue. We are ready also in the framework of what Philippe Kridelka said with regard to stronger engagement concerning police officers. We will remain engaged through humanitarian assistance, development cooperation and stabilization mechanisms. Germany will stand by his side. We know how difficult the situation is - and climate change has repercussions that make the work even more difficult - but Issa Konfourou must not let his people down.
