Mrs. Schwalger (New Zealand): New Zealand is
grateful to Jordan for presiding over today's debate.
Jordan's positive role in the region, and the generosity
it has shown to Syrian refugees, is highly appreciated.

It is increasingly apparent that the burden of the
Syrian conflict for Jordan, Turkey, Lebanon, Egypt
and Iraq is unsustainable. We cannot expect countries
in the region to absorb its effects indefinitely. The
economic and social impact will seriously damage
basic institutions and the social fabric. We are already
seeing the devastating impact on children who are
unable to access basic education and are losing hope
for a productive and dignified future.

Over the past four years, the Council has watched
Syria disintegrate from a stable middle-income country
to one of ruin and despair. The adoption of resolution
2139 (2014) gave hope that the humanitarian situation
would improve. However, more than a year later, and
in the fifth year of the conflict, it is clear that there has
been little improvement. Non-compliance has become
the new norm. As we heard this morning, possible
responses to the unfolding catastrophe, such as an arms
embargo, a no-fly zone or boots on the ground, have
not come to fruition. This afternoon, we will hear more
on Special Envoy de Mistura's freeze proposal, but we
cannot be optimistic about that, either. We all know
what is off the table; the time has come to ask what is
on the table.

As the carnage in Syria continues to unfold,
the Council must find renewed will to put aside
its differences. We must think creatively about the
pragmatic things we can do to make a difference in
the lives of the Syrian people and those affected by
the crisis in the region. New Zealand will continue
to work with Jordan and Spain, as co-penholders on
Syrian humanitarian issues, to pursue concrete action
on medical neutrality, humanitarian access to besieged
areas and other options outlined by Under-Secretary-
General Amos this morning. We encourage fellow
Council members to join us in doing so.

The terrible situation in Yarmouk has served to
remind us why wider action on humanitarian access
to the 440,000 people trapped in besieged areas
throughout Syria is so important. As well, as we heard
this morning, the Secretary-General's latest report
(S/2015/264) informs that only 0.3 per cent of besieged
areas had access to medical assistance in March. That
is completely unacceptable.

In eastern Ghouta, 10 patients have died due to a
lack of dialysis equipment, with remaining supplies
expected to run out in the next few weeks, thus
threatening the lives of 23 more patients awaiting
treatment. That is why we support calls that, as a
concrete step, the Council should request the Secretary-
General to conduct a humanitarian assessment mission
to besieged areas and report its findings to the Council
as soon as possible.

Many here will recall that before there was Security
Council action on chemical weapons and on cross-
border humanitarian access, it was all deemed too hard.
Yet, still, progress was made. Let us do the same with
other aspects of resolution 2139 (2014).

Donors have been generous in responding to
humanitarian appeals. Neighbouring countries'
attempts to alleviate the consequences of the conflict
are to be saluted. However, a lasting solution will be
found only by addressing the root causes of the conflict
and finding a sustainable political solution.

Today's presidential statement (S/PRST/2015/10)
demonstrates that the Council can speak with one voice
on Syria. Now it is time for Council members to act
with unanimity.

