Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Mr. Onanga-Anyanga, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for the Central African Republic,
Mr. Nebie, Special Representative of the African
Union to the Central African Republic, and Brigadier
General Herminio Teodoro Maio, Force Commander
of the European Union Military Training Mission, for
their briefings.

Under the leadership of President Touadera, the
political process in the Central African Republic has
made positive progress. Meanwhile, the security
situation in the country remains fragile, with continuing
armed clashes among armed groups. The country
therefore still faces challenges in its effort to achieve
lasting peace and stability. Recently, the second round
of consultations under the African Initiative for Peace
and Reconciliation was held successfully.

China welcomes that development. We call on the
relevant parties to bear in mind the overall national and
State interests, to take concrete steps to implement a
ceasefire agreement, to promote disarmament and the
peace and reconciliation process, to stop the incitement
of hatred, and to overcome differences through dialogue
and consultation.

China commends the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) for its
important role in maintaining stability in the Central
African Republic. We strongly condemn the attacks
against peacekeepers and express our condolences
and sympathy to the bereaved families. We support
the Government of the Central African Republic in
conducting prompt investigations in order to bring the
perpetrators to justice.

China also supports MINUSCA's efforts to improve
its protection and early-warning capability and to take
concrete and effective steps to ensure the safety and
security of its personnel. China supports the African
Union, the Economic Community of Central African
States and other regional and subregional organizations
in their efforts to promote a political process in the
Central African Republic. The United Nations, the
African Union and other regional and subregional
organizations should enhance their cooperation with
the Government of the Central African Republic so
as to promote national reconciliation and peace in the
country in a joint effort to help it to achieve peace and
development as soon as possible. China also calls on the
international community to continue to support to the
Government of the Central African Republic in its State
capacity-building efforts and to provide the necessary
assistance to the Government in order to maintain
security and stability, respond to the humanitarian
crisis and address the root causes of the conflict.

