Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): My delegation
strongly condemns the terrorist killing of over 130
students, mostly aged between 12 and 16, in a school in
Peshawar, Pakistan. This is a totally outrageous act of
cowardice, and our hearts are with the families of the
victims and the people and Government of Pakistan.

1 would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening today's open debate. Its importance is
further underlined by your presence. I would also like to
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his briefing,
as well as his ongoing efforts to improve the agility of
peacekeeping operations, and my deep appreciation

goes to Mr. Pierre Buyoya for his statement on behalf
of the African Union (AU).

The Republic of Korea welcomes the fact that the
strategic partnership between the United Nations and
the AU has steadily broadened and deepened, especially
in the areas of conflict prevention, crisis management,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. We are particularly
encouraged to see enhanced interaction between the
two bodies, as exemplified by the annual meeting
between the Security Council and the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union. The growing
United Nations-AU cooperation is most noteworthy
in the area of peacekeeping. Over the past decade, the
AU's contributions to United Nations peace operations
have become more visible than ever. African countries
are now contributing nearly half of all uniformed
personnel, which is a record high. Moreover, the AU
peacekeeping missions have proved critical to swift
responses to crises, as illustrated in Darfur, Somalia,
Mali and the Central African Republic.

Despite such progress, however, there are
challenges on the ground. First is the fact that the lack
of adequate financial and logistical resources remains
a serious problem that undermines the AU's capacity
to undertake effective peacekeeping missions. We must
work together to find a creative solution to securing
predictable, sustainable and flexible financing for
AU peacekeeping operations under United Nations
mandates. Concerted efforts are also needed to
strengthen African capacities to enhance its operational
and institutional effectiveness.

Secondly, achieving the effective transition of
regional forces into a United Nations peacekeeping
mission remains a difficult task where greater United
Nations-AU collaboration is required. As we learned
from the case of Mali, better coordination is critical
to the rapid deployment of well-trained and -equipped
troops. In that context, we support the ongoing efforts
of the AU, in close cooperation with the United Nations
and international partners, to operationalize an African
capacity for immediate response to crises, as well as
the African Standby Force. Such enhanced cooperation
with the African Union is essential not only to the
operational aspects but also in the planning phases. Our
experiences from the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic and the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali indicate
that the transition process works best when there is
coordinated cooperation beginning with the planning
stage between the United Nations and the AU. At the
same time, we hope that logistical and traning support
from bilateral partners will also continue to reinforce
United Nations activities.

Before concluding, we would also like to
underline that peacekeeping alone is not sufficient for
addressing conflicts. Given the interconnectedness of
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and conflict prevention,
support should continue in parallel so as to enhance
the AU's capacities in conflict prevention and
peacebuilding. Cooperation between the Peacebuilding
Commission and the AU should also be strengthened
in order to support national and regional efforts to
consolidate peace. In that regard, we hope that the 2015
review of peace operations will address those areas in a
comprehensive and strategic way.

Finally, I would like to express our full support for
today's presidential statement (S/PRST/2014/27) and
thank Chad for drafting and leading the negotiations on
it to a successful conclusion. We hope that the Council,
building on today's discussion, will continue to explore
ways to strengthen the partnership between it and the
African Union for maintaining international peace and
security.

