Mr. Zinsou (Benin) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 1566 (2004). Terrorism is one of the greatest
scourges facing humankind today. It represents a grave
violation of human rights and deeply shocks the human
conscience. That is why we must be resolute in our
struggle to eliminate it.

We express our deepest condolences to the
families of the victims of recent attacks, which we
firmly condemn.

As terrorism is a global problem, the fight we
have undertaken to eliminate it requires ongoing
mobilization and sustained cooperation among all
Member States. We therefore welcome the commitment
reiterated by the Council to a dialogue among
civilizations and to the resolution of regional conflicts
and development problems as a means of strengthening
the combat against terrorism.
We therefore had no difficulty in associating
ourselves with an initiative designed to do away with
any justification of indiscriminate acts of terror against
civilians, because my delegation believes that the
protection of civilians in conflict situations is the very
expression of the sacred principle of humanity.

Nevertheless, I must state here that the combat
against terrorism should be waged on the basis of strict
respect for the fundamental principles enshrined in the
Charter. My delegation is therefore of the view that
none of the provisions of the resolution which has just
been adopted should be interpreted in such a manner as

to violate the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations.

In that connection, paragraph 2 of Article 24 of
the Charter states that:

"In discharging these duties the Security
Council shall act in accordance with the purposes
and principles of the United Nations."

It is in that spirit that we urge Member States to
implement, in strict respect of the Charter, measures
adopted pursuant to the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council. Only in that way can they retain their
legitimacy under international law and international
humanitarian law.

My country welcomes the idea of setting up an
international fund to compensate victims of terrorism
and their kin. The principles underlying the creation of
such a fund are a sense of responsibility and an
obligation of active solidarity towards its victims.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to thank
the sponsors of the resolution.

