Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation welcomes and thanks Mr.
Okitundu, the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, for his statement on the current situation
in his country.

We would like also to thank the Secretary-
General for his eighth report on the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUC), and to express our gratitude for
the very important presentation made by Mr.
Guehenno, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations.

We would like also to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Otunnu,
for his briefing, which was very moving. Hearing of
the plight of the children in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo gives us a sense of urgency to make greater
efforts to put an end to the current conflict.

The report of the Secretary-General presents a
comprehensive and realistic analysis of the situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and contains
very sound proposals. We agree with his assessment of
the situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
and we support his ideas regarding the next phase of
the deployment of MONUC.

We believe that, following the visit of the
Security Council mission to the Great Lakes region, the
report of the Secretary-General, the relevant Council
resolutions and the activities of MONUC will further
promote the development of the peace process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

At present, the armed forces of the parties to the
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo have
basically completed the disengagement process; the
ceasefire has held; the cooperation of the parties with
MONUC has improved; and preparations for the inter-
Congolese political dialogue are under way. At the
same time, there is an increase in bilateral and
multilateral contacts at various levels among countries
in the Great Lakes region.

This positive momentum in developments in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has shown the
international community that a window of opportunity
exists and has increased its confidence in the peace
process, but we must also note that there is still a long
way to go before a genuine peace is realized.

The situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and in the Great Lakes region as a whole
remains fraught with difficulties and risks. The peace
efforts made by the parties to the conflict still fall far
short of the expectations of the international
community. Recently, some armed groups, with the
support of certain parties, have continued to engage in
acts of violence. The Front de liberation du Congo
(FLC) has not completed disengagement, and we are
still waiting for the Rassemblement Congolais pour la
democratie (RCD-Goma) to take corrective actions to
achieve the demilitarization of Kisangani. Furthermore,
the parties concerned still have not provided to the
Joint Military Commission and MONUC detailed
information on their armed forces and armed groups.

The reopening of the Congo river system, as
Under-Secretary-General Guehenno said, is of central
importance. However, difficulties and obstacles
remain.

We also find the attitude of the RCD, as described
by Mr. Guehenno, very disturbing. We call on the RCD
fully to cooperate with MONUC.

The draft resolution to be adopted by the Security
Council contains explicit stipulations as to the
responsibility of various parties in the next phase of the
peace process in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. The key issue remains whether the parties
concerned have the political will to resolve the conflict
by peaceful means as soon as possible, and whether
they want to translate such will into practical action.

Recently many countries have called on the
international community and the United Nations in
particular to devote the necessary attention to Africa.
Africa should not become a neglected continent. It is
encouraging that the United Nations and the Security
Council are devoting considerable attention to the
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
in the Great Lakes region as a whole.

On the other hand, ultimately the fate of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo lies in the hands of
the people of that country - the Government, political
parties, armed groups and civil society. The fate of the
countries in the Great Lakes region, in the same vein,
also lies in the hands of the peoples ofthose countries.

We therefore call on the parties to the conflict in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in the Great
Lakes region to preserve the hard-won momentum for
peace and to take practical actions to cooperate with
the United Nations in a common effort to promote the
peace process. This includes implementation of the
commitments they undertook during Mr. Otunnu's visit
on the question of child soldiers.

Indeed, peace in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is in the interest of the parties concerned, of the
people of that country and of the Great Lakes region as
a whole.

