I thank Special Representative Leila Zerrougui and the Ambassador of the Niger for their interventions. I would like to emphasize three points. First is the adaptation of our response to the persistent security challenges. Certain regions, such as the Kasais or Tanganyika, are entering a promising phase of stabilization. The Congolese authorities must continue to consolidate the progress that has been achieved in strengthening institutions and socioeconomic development in order to take over from the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), which has begun to disengage in these regions. Other regions remain heavily affected by violence against civilians, particularly women and children, as well as against the security forces. Sexual violence persists. It is in these regions, in Ituri and the Kivus, that the Mission's efforts must be recentred to meet the conditions for its withdrawal when the time comes. Moreover, a regional approach remains indispensable, as the violence in the east is perpetrated by national as well as foreign armed groups. The joint strategy being prepared with the Congolese authorities to allow for a progressive transfer of MONUSCO's tasks has to address the root causes of the conflicts. It will have to include clear and realistic indicators in terms of disarmament, demobilization, repatriation, reintegration and reinstallation of foreign armed groups, in terms of security sector reform, rule of law, and control of the exploitation of natural resources. That brings me to my second point. Violations of human rights and international humanitarian law are on the rise, particularly in the east. The Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004), concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo, whose work I commend, can do more to address this - for example, by making additional designations. The development of a national strategy for the fight against impunity and the implementation of transitional justice mechanisms is essential. The Congolese authorities must also continue to cooperate fully with the International Criminal Court. The end of the tenth Ebola epidemic in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as of the measles outbreak, are major successes. Efforts must continue to combat the coronavirus disease, cholera and the Ebola epidemic that has broken out in the western part of the country. The threat of famine is a matter of particular concern. The Government knows that it can count on the full support of France, as evidenced by the European humanitarian airlift set up before the summer. We must be fully vigilant with regard to the protection of hospitals and humanitarian personnel. I welcome the mobilization of MONUSCO to contribute to the safety of Dr. Mukwege and the Panzi clinic. Local protection capacities must be further strengthened. Finally - and this is my third point - improving MONUSCO's action must remain at the centre of our attention in view of the renewal of its mandate. All possible measures must be taken to enable MONUSCO to attain its full operational capacity. An ambitious reform of the Force Intervention Brigade also remains indispensable. Last December, the Council unanimously underlined the importance of improving the efficiency of the Brigade by assigning new staff officers and additional units. As President Tshilombo Tshisekedi recalled before the General Assembly (see A/75/PV.5), the Democratic Republic of the Congo supports the principle of an enhancement of the Brigade's operational capacity. We therefore encourage the Secretariat and the contributing countries to continue their discussions in order to swiftly achieve the implementation of the Council's decisions. The Force Intervention Brigade played a major role in the defeat of the Mouvement du 23 mars in 2013 thanks to its offensive posture. It is that dynamism and agility that must be swiftly restored in order to protect civilians and neutralize armed groups. The full engagement of contributing countries is indispensable in that regard. We owe this to the Congolese State and to the population. It is time for resolution 1325 (2000), whose twentieth anniversary we are celebrating this month, to become a reality for Congolese women and men. France, in its national capacity and within the Council, will continue to support the rights of women in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Resolution 2538 (2020) must also be operationally implemented within MONUSCO. A new stage in the relationship between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the United Nations is taking shape. The long-term peace and stability of the country depend on it.
