Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): North Korea is no
longer athreat faced by a single country or a single region.
It is instead a threat that confronts us all. The two tests
in the past month were of an intercontinental missile,
extending the threat much further than before, to many
more countries. In a world where North Korean missile
tests seem routine, let me be clear - this is not business
as usual. Let us make no mistake. As North Korea's
missile capabilities advance, so too does its contempt
and disregard for the Security Council. We must meet
this belligerence with clear, unequivocal condemnation
and with clear, unequivocal consequences.

Today, we have banned North Korean exports of
coal, iron ore, lead and seafood. These are the lifeline
exports that sustain Kim Jong Un's deadly aspirations.
In simple terms, should the North Korean regime
continue its reckless pursuit of an illegal missile
programme and a deadly nuclear programme, it will
have vastly less resources to do so.

We have also capped the number of foreign workers
from North Korea. Every year, the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea sends thousands of ordinary workers
overseas. They often endure poor conditions and long
hours, and their toil serves to provide critical foreign
currency for North Korean Government coffers. This
is undoubtedly a form of modern slavery, and today
we have taken the first step to ending it. The world
will now monitor and curtail work authorizations for
these desperate expatriates. And those who are already
victims of this abusive system can trust that the United
Kingdom will continue to work towards a complete end
to North Korea's institutionalized modern slavery.

North Korea bears full responsibility for the
measures we have enacted today. By acting in flagrant
violation of its legal obligations, and by going against
the will of the Security Council expressed in countless
resolutions, North Korea has chosen the path it now
finds itself on. It is a path that, at a minimum, will lead
to further suffering for its own people, and at most
could prove to be catastrophic for the whole world.

It does not have to be this way. North Korea should
forgo the path of provocation - forgo the path of
further escalation. There is no reason why the people of
North Korea cannot share the normal, prosperous life
of their neighbours. The world would welcome them,
not threaten them. So in the Chamber, let us once again
call on North Korea to halt and reverse its nuclear and
missile development programmes. Let us once again
call on it to prioritize the well-being of its people over
its illegal and destabilizing military programmes.

North Korea's security and well-being do not
depend on nuclear weapons. They do not depend on
far-reaching missiles. They do not depend on a myth
of self-sufficient defiance of the wider world. To live
in constant tension with the world cannot be in the
interests of North Korea's regime, let alone its people.

We have taken a step forward. We have spoken
with a unified voice that we are ready to act in an
unprecedented way in response to North Korea's
reckless nuclear pursuit. Every country must ensure
that these measures are adhered to. Every country must
live up to its word. This time, there is too much at stake.
We simply cannot afford to fail.

