Mr. Ilkin (Turkey): Although Turkey has aligned
itself with the statement delivered by the representative
of Finland on behalf of the European Union, I should
nevertheless like to expound upon a number of issues
that we deem fundamental at this critical and highly
sensitive juncture in the region.

The briefing that the Secretary-General gave to
the Security Council yesterday clearly illustrated the
dire and dangerous situation prevailing in the Middle
East. It also pointed to the ways and means to put an
end to the bloodshed and to emerge from the present
turmoil and impasse.

Innocent Lebanese, Palestinian and Israeli
civilians are losing their lives. Lebanon is facing
destruction, and the infrastructure in the Gaza Strip is
being devastated. What is more, those tragic events, if
unchecked, might have negative implications for the
region, which is already burdened with intractable
problems. Given the volatile situation on the ground,

the international community should have been more
active in preventing the escalation of tension from
reaching its current proportions.

We cannot in any way condone hostage-taking,
and we cannot deny the right to self-defence. Israeli
military personnel have to be released immediately.
The hostage-takers should have realized by now that
their action has been totally counter-productive and has
led to great loss and suffering among their own
peoples.

On the other hand, Israel should not resort to
disproportionate and indiscriminate use of force and
violence. We cannot allow the destruction of Lebanon
or of the hopes of Palestinians for a viable State. What
is currently taking place in the region goes far beyond
self-defence and in the long-run will not serve the
interests of Israel. Furthermore, by fomenting negative
sentiments, it damages prospects for dialogue and
reconciliation, which are at the heart of the two-State
solution. We call on all parties to act with the utmost
restraint.

In order to stop civilian casualties and the
destruction of infrastructure, the first thing that needs
to be done is to achieve a ceasefire. At the same time,
the three abducted soldiers should immediately be
handed over to Israel. The elected Palestinian officials
should be freed. We hope that we will eventually reach
a stage when women and children prisoners could also
be released. The relevant parties should immediately
start to work on putting in place the elements that
could form the political basis of a lasting ceasefire, as
stressed by the Secretary-General. The countries in the
region, as well as the international community, have a
moral duty to create a positive atmosphere towards that
end and to prevent the region from falling victim to
violence, misery and desperation. We must ensure that
common sense and moderation prevail in the Middle
East.
On the other hand, we should all agree that the
root cause of what we are witnessing is the
continuation of the Middle East problem. Until and
unless a just, equitable and lasting solution is found to
the problem, there can be no permanent peace and
security in the region. Unilateral steps and
arrangements and the use of force are no substitutes for
a comprehensive settlement.

For decades, Turkey has provided substantial
assistance to Palestinians. In the light of recent events,
that assistance will continue unabated. Turkey is also
prepared to contribute to the efforts to bring relief to
the suffering Lebanese people. Both peoples need the
full solidarity and support of the international
community.

What is happening in the region, if not stopped
immediately, will go down in history as a most
regrettable episode for all of humankind.

