Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
The delegation of Colombia would also like to
welcome the presence of Ms. Catherine Bertini, the
Executive Director of the World Food Programme
(WFP), and to thank her for her very informative
briefing. My delegation would also like to express its
heartfelt thanks to her and her co-workers in WFP for
the praiseworthy work that that organization has been
doing to help millions of people throughout the world.

We would also like to specifically address the
contribution that WFP has made to the operations of
the international community in Afghanistan and the
fact that it is continuing to work in the country to meet
the pressing nutritional needs of the population. As we
know, WFP is one of the most effective and genuine
responses and presents the true face of the United
Nations and the international community to the
neediest and those with the greatest need, those who
lack food. Judging by its results, it should feel very
satisfied, and we are very grateful to it. My delegation
would thus like to join all those who have expressed
their thanks and praise at this meeting.

Having heard Ms. Bertini talk about WFP work in
Afghanistan and other conflict situations, we are
prompted to ask some questions.

First of all, it seems to us that in the course of
recent months in Afghanistan the donor efforts were
concentrated primarily on emergency, short-term food
aid. Free food for schoolchildren, particularly girls, has
been highly beneficial. However, in the long run, there
might be the mistaken impression that the reason for
studying is to get food for free. The distribution of
foodstuffs in urban areas might lead to an exodus of
people from the rural areas to the cities, which would
have a damaging effect on food production in the
country. We would like to know how WFP has planned
to meet the long-term requirements to provide and/or
produce foodstuffs in Afghanistan.

Secondly, aware that the security conditions in
the country and the massive presence of the
international community - humanitarian workers,
military personnel, representatives of the news media
and press and political observers, etc. - will have an
impact on the efficiency in distributing foodstuffs,
several agencies have complained that the presence of
international military staff dressed in civilian clothes
may cause confusion among the Afghan population
when it comes to distinguishing between humanitarian
and military personnel, thereby putting some
humanitarian operations at risk. We would like to hear
what Ms. Bertini has to say about this, especially since
later in her statement she asked for greater efforts and
more effective responses in providing protection to
workers.

Finally, at the end of her term at the head of the
World Food Programme, my delegation wishes to ask
Ms. Bertini what lessons she was able to draw with
respect to the Organization's interaction and dialogue
with armed non-State actors in Afghanistan and other
conflict areas to ensure access for humanitarian
workers to the most vulnerable sectors in an emergency
and to facilitate the distribution of food among those
populations. We know that the Inter-Agency Standing
Committee, presided over by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, has been
debating this issue, and we would like to hear her
perspective on the question of food aid.

Finally, I wanted to reiterate my delegation's
appreciation and admiration for the work she has
accomplished and to wish her much success in her
future activities.

