Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (Spoke in Chinese): China
would like to thank Secretary-General Guterres for his
briefing.

China condemns the recent violent attacks in
Myanmar's Rakhine state and supports Myanmar's
efforts to maintain domestic stability. We sincerely
hope that order will again prevail as soon as possible
so that no more harm will come to innocent civilians,
and that social stability, unity among ethnic groups and
economic development will be sustained.

The question of Rakhine state is rooted in a nexus
of complex historical ethnic and religious factors.
Many of the differences and antagonisms in the state
have built up over a long time; there is no quick fix.
A viable solution will be one that goes hand in hand
with the peace and reconciliation process in Myanmar.
China has taken note of a series of measures taken
by the Government of Myanmar to ease the situation
in Rakhine state and maintain its stability, which is
conducive to the search for a long-term solution to
the issue. It behoves the international community to
view the difficulties and challenges confronting the
Government of Myanmar objectively, while exercising
patience and providing support and help.

China commends Bangladesh for overcoming
its own difficulties to improve the humanitarian
situation on the ground. We welcome the Myanmar
Government's cooperation in humanitarian operations
with the International Committee of the Red Cross
and other international bodies. The international
community should encourage and support dialogue
and communication between the two countries so that
they can duly address the mass exodus of the Muslim
population seeking refuge in Bangladesh and find a
definitive solution.

China, as a friendly neighbour of both Myanmar
and Bangladesh, has been actively engaging with those
countries to influence them positively and encourage
them to address the issue through dialogue and
consultation. China has provided and will continue
to provide assistance necessary for accommodating
the displaced.

As we speak, the situation on the ground is beginning
to stabilize. All parties should work constructively to
help reinforce that momentum, de-escalate the situation
and alleviate the humanitarian conditions step by step.
China stands ready to work with all parties concerned
to contribute constructively to the restoration of order
and the achievement of peace and stability in Rakhine
state.

