The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Colombia to
participate in the meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/20l7/801, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in
Colombia, and document S/2017/830, which contains a
letter dated 2 October 2017 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council.

Following consultations among the members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on their behalf:

"Following the completion of the lZ-month
mandate of the United Nations Mission in Colombia
(the Mission) on 25 September 2017, the Security
Council welcomes the remarkable achievements
in Colombia following the Final Agreement for
Ending the Conflict and Building a stable and Long
Lasting Peace reached between the Government of
Colombia and the Revolutionary Armed Forces of
Colombia - People's Army (FARC-EP).

"The Security Council takes note ofthe report of

the Secretary-General of 25 September (S/2017/801)

and welcomes the assessments, recommendations

and lessons learned therein. The Security Council

expresses its intention to take them into account
in the context of its ongoing efforts to enhance the
overall effectiveness of United Nations missions.

"The Security Council recalls resolutions
2261 (2016) and 2307 (2016) and congratulates
the parties on the historic. progress made since
the signing of the Final Agreement, including
the culmination of the ceasefire, the cessation of
hostilities, the process of laying down of arms and
the transformation of the FARC-EP into a political
party, bringing over five decades of conflict
between them to a close. The Council pays tribute
to the political will of the parties in achieving
these milestones and to the leadership and spirit
of cooperation they demonstrated in calling for the
United Nations to partner with them in an innovative
tripartite monitoring and verification mechanism
(MVM). The Security Council emphasizes that
their determination and commitment have ensured
that Colombia's peace process continues to be a
source of inspiration for the resolution of conflicts
globally and retains the potential to set an example
for peace processes elsewhere in the world.

"The Security Council expresses its gratitude
for the exemplary manner in which the Mission,
led by Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Jean Arnault, accomplished the two tasks
mandated to it by the Security Council, based upon
the agreement by the parties, in having coordinated
the MVM. for the monitoring and verification of the
ceasefire and cessation of hostilities and overseen
the laying down of arms process. The Security
Council underscores that this work played a vital
role in supporting the successful implementation
of the corresponding provisions in the peace
agreement. The Council welcomes the Mission's
work with the MVM. to promote a gender-sensitive
approach. The Council expresses its appreciation
to the Mission for delivering the swift, flexible
and tailored support envisaged by the Council and
demonstrating the potential of the United Nations
at its best.

"The Security Council also expresses its
gratitude to the observer-contributing countries,
particularly those from the Community of Latin
American and Caribbean States. The Council
also acknowledges the two guarantors of the
peace process, Cuba and Norway, and the two
accompanying countries, Chile and Venezuela.
"The Security Council notes the equally
important work still ahead to implement the
specific security, political and socioeconomic
provisions of the Final Peace Agreement and
reaffirms the need for both parties to fulfil their
commitments to achieve a lasting peace. In that
regard, the Council recalls resolutions 2366 (2017)
and 2377(2017) which established and mandated
the United Nations Verification Mission to verify
implementation by the Government of Colombia and
the FARC-EP of the process of political, economic
and social reincorporation of the FARC-EP and the
implementation of personal and collective security
guarantees. The Council trusts that the work of
the Verification Mission will be a strong source of
support and encouragement for Colombia's peace
process."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/20l7/18.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2017/837, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland.

The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.

A vote was taken by Show ofhands.

In favour:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China, Egypt,
Ethiopia, France, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Russian
Federation, Senegal, Sweden, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Uruguay

The President (spoke in French): The draft
resolution received 15 votes in favour. The draft
resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution
2381 (2017).

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements following the
voting.


