Mr. Prasad (Fiji): I thank the United Kingdom
for organizing today's debate of crucial importance
to the United Nations in responding to more complex,
multifaceted and multi-layered conflicts across the
world. I also thank The Most Reverend and Right
Honourable Justin Welby, Archbishop of Canterbury,
and Ms. Qadeem for their thoughtful and incisive
comments this morning.

The United Nations needs to become better at
understanding, interpreting and responding to the
new drivers of conflict and insecurity. I shall draw
the attention of the Security Council to three of
those drivers.

Fiji and many small island States find themselves on
the front lines of climate change. The impacts of climate
change are well understood; less well understood are its
consequences for conflict. As crops fail, coastal lands
become less fertile, excessive and frequent rains wash
away livelihoods, the competition for land and resources
become more intense and families and communities
are forced to relocate. That trend and the intensifying
competition for resources associated with it is fuelling
conflict across many countries. In turn, those conflicts
are becoming more intense and, as they do so, they are
becoming more complex.

There is a similar dynamic arising with regard
to oceans, which are facing great distress. Warming
waters, acidification and the illegal extraction of marine
resources are creating severe pressures on coastal
communities. As marine resources become scarce,
conflicts among coastal communities and between
coastal communities and non-coastal communities,
the private sector and Governments are intensifying
and becoming more prevalent. Some of those have the
potential to spill over into inter-State conflicts.

Climate change and rising sea levels are inducing
serious water stress across many islands. Many
countries across the Pacific now find themselves in
the midst of a serious drought. Competition for water,
managing water distribution and managing recovery
from drought also fuel conflict. Women and children
are especially impacted by conflicts that arise from
water stress.

I have highlighted those three interlinking
drivers of conflict for a special reason. First, with
current trends, those are likely to turn into full-blown
intercommunity conflicts. Secondly, they have the
potential to spill over into inter-State conflicts. And,
thirdly, the cost of managing them can potentially wipe
away the progress that small island States on the front
lines of climate change are making in achieving the
Sustainable Development Goals.

There are three "asks" today. The first is to
acknowledge that climate and ocean stress have already
become conflict drivers. The scond is that the United
Nations development system reforms need to position
the Organization in a way that enables it to bring about
systematic understanding of those conflict drivers and
the conflicts themselves in the United Nations. The
third, and most important, is to reposition the United
Nations to play a proactive, preventive role in conflict
resolution, while supporting communities in mediating
climate and ocean stress-induced conflicts and therefore
stopping them from spilling over into open intra- and
inter-State conflicts.

Business as usual cannot be an option. Reframing the
Organization's mediation perspectives, strengthening
United Nations capabilities and skills and building
an institutional architecture to support mediation
capabilities for these newer types of conflict is overdue.
Fiji is overstressed in responding to the adverse
development impacts of climate change, managing
our recovery from persistent cyclones flooding and
drought. In spite of that, we stand ready to support the
Secretary-General's efforts in this area.

