Mr. Chretien (Canada): I will begin by
expressing Canada' 5 outrage at the murder of
innocent, unarmed humanitarian personnel in West
Timor. Those who attack United Nations staff attack
this Organization and undermine the purposes and
principles we have all come here to reaffirm. It is
incumbent on the Indonesian Government to bring the
perpetrators to justice.

It is fitting that the Security Council is meeting
during the Millennium Assembly of the United
Nations, an occasion when Member States have come
together at the highest level to reaffirm their
commitment to our shared principles and purposes.
More importantly, it is an opportunity for us to affirm
our common resolve to make the United Nations work
better, to be partners in its renewal and reform.

Nowhere is this more critical than in the Security
Council, the body mandated to preserve and protect
international peace and security. Canada joined the
Council with precisely that goal in mind.

(spoke in French)
In the brief time given an elected member, we
have worked to make the Council more responsive to
the security challenges and political imperatives we
face at the turn of the century. We have tried to make
the Council a more effective instrument for ensuring
human security and more open and democratic. We
have pressed it to demonstrate leadership in building a
world of peace. In order to exercise that leadership, we
must restore the effectiveness of peacekeeping
operations. The Brahimi report reminds us that
peacekeeping mandates must be consistent with
realities on the ground and that adequate resources
must be provided. In Srebrenica and Rwanda, we failed
these tests. It is our duty to do better.

In the twenty-first century, peace depends no
longer solely on securing borders, but also on securing
people. They must be protected from diverse threats:
armed conflict, gross human rights violations, breaches
of international humanitarian law and terrorism. The
security of States is certainly essential, but it is not
sufficient to ensure the safety and well-being of people.
Indeed, as we have seen to our dismay in recent years,
the security of a given State has been invoked in the
name of ethnic nationalism as a justification for the
worst kind of atrocities.

(spoke in English)

Canada has worked to broaden the Council' s
definition of security to encompass new human
security challenges. We have argued that humanitarian
principles and human rights must be given greater
weight when the Council decides when to act. We will
continue to make this case because, if the Security
Council is unable to adapt, that will seriously
undermine its credibility as a guarantor of peace-
credibility that is essential to maintaining the moral
authority of the United Nations as a whole.

I have no doubt that we are up to this task. The
world is watching. People everywhere are counting on
us.

