Mr. Amorim (Brazil): The draft resolution we are
about to vote on clearly condemns the decision of the
Government of Iraq to stop its cooperation with the United
Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM). It also refers to
the continued restrictions imposed by Iraq on the work of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).

Since 5 August, when these restrictions first came
about, Brazil has joined other members of the Security
Council in stressing that the lack of full cooperation with
both agencies was totally unacceptable and constituted a
Violation of Security Council resolutions. We have also
supported the Secretary-General in his efforts to seek Iraq's
cooperation in accordance with the Memorandum of
Understanding he signed with the Deputy Prime Minister of
Iraq in February 1998.

The decision of 31 October came at a moment when
the Security Council had just been seriously engaged in
discussing the concept of a comprehensive review of Iraq's
compliance with Security Council resolutions, as presented
by the Secretary-General. Brazil considers that the
Secretary-General's possible concept of a comprehensive
review constitutes a thoughtful and balanced approach
which could allow for progress in the implementation of
resolution 687 (1991).

As conceived by the Secretary-General and supported
by the Council, the review shall consist of two distinct and
equally important phases, the first dedicated to
disarmament-related issues and the second encompassing
the other requirements arising from relevant resolutions,
including those relating to Kuwaiti missing persons and
Kuwaiti property.

However, and as the Secretary-General himself
stressed, a condition sine qua non for the Council to
proceed with the review is the rescission by Iraq of its
decision to stop cooperation with UNSCOM. and restrict the
activities of the IAEA. Complete and unconditional
cooperation with the Special Commission and the IAEA is
the only way to achieve our goal of addressing fully the
disarmament-related requirements of section C of
resolution 687 (1991). Only with such cooperation can we
envisage the moment in which the disarmament phase
would be concluded and the ongoing monitoring and
verification phase would be fully in place with the effects
stipulated in paragraph 22 of resolution 687 (1991).

Precisely on the day before the Iraqi decision to halt
its cooperation with UNSCOM, the members of the
Security Council had agreed on a letter, which was sent
by the President of the Security Council to the Secretary-
General, in which the Council offered its initial Views on
how to hold a comprehensive review. The letter was
forward-looking and in our opinion provided a reasonable
blueprint for the review. It reflected the consensus of the
Council that this comprehensive assessment of Iraq's
compliance should be designed so as to lead to the
definition of an agreed course of action and timetable
which, if followed, would enable the Council to fulfil its
intention to act in accordance with the relevant provisions
of resolution 687 (1991) on the duration of the
prohibitions referred to in that resolution.
It was thus with a deep sense of dismay that the
Brazilian Government learned of the Iraqi decision of 31
October. That decision makes it much more difficult for
all of us to proceed in our work with a View to ensuring
Iraq's compliance with its obligations, thus making it
possible to reintegrate Iraq into the international
community. With that objective in mind, we urge Iraq to
rescind both its decisions, of 5 August and of 31 October,
and to resume full and unconditional cooperation with
UNSCOM. and the IAEA.

Finally, from the point of View of my delegation, it
is of special importance that operative paragraph 6 of our
draft resolution stresses that the Security Council will
continue to be seized of this issue, in accordance with its
primary responsibility under the Charter for the
maintenance of international peace and security. It is our
View that this principle should continue to guide our
consideration of this matter. Bearing these facts in mind,
my delegation decided to join the group of sponsors of
this draft resolution.

