Mr. Mutaboba: In my presentation today, I will
focus mainly on the most recent political and security
developments, as well as on efforts by the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-
Bissau (UNIOGBIS) and partners to help materialize
ongoing plans by the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) and the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP), in addition to
bilateral and other multilateral partners, in support of
the nationally-owned holistic approach to security
sector reform and efforts to protect and stabilize key
State institutions and sustain a genuine and inclusive
political dialogue among and within the leadership and
opposition in Guinea-Bissau.

Following the seventh working session of the
International Contact Group on Guinea-Bissau, held on
24 September in New York, and the subsequent
10-62182
publication of the letter addressed by President Malam
Bacai Sanha to the Chairman of ECOWAS, President
Goodluck Jonathan of Nigeria, intensive consultations
have taken place in the subregion with a view to
reaching consensus on the scope, modalities and timing
for the finalization and implementation of the joint
CPLP-ECOWAS partnership. The Secretary of State
for External Relations of Angola, Mr. George Chikoti,
undertook a visit to Abuja, Nigeria, in mid-October for
consultations with the ECOWAS Commission on the
way forward. He subsequently visited several capitals
in the subregion to further discuss practical
arrangements for assisting the Government of Guinea-
Bissau within the framework of the joint CPLP-
ECOWAS partnership.

In that context, I met last week in Luanda with
President Jose Eduardo dos Santos of Angola, who
informed me of his support for the activation of a joint
technical security sector reform task force, comprising
ECOWAS, CPLP, the African Union and the United
Nations, in order to enhance coordination and facilitate
resource mobilization efforts for priority security
sector reform activities. The work of such an
inter-agency task force would fit naturally within
ongoing initiatives, such as the continuous and
multidimensional support that UNIOGBIS is providing
to the nationally-owned security sector reform
coordination mechanisms. That move is consistent with
the recommendations made in the last communique of
the International Contact Group on Guinea-Bissau and
with the views expressed by the national authorities of
Guinea-Bissau, who insist that the proposed
partnership between CPLP and ECOWAS should be
closely coordinated and supported by the United
Nations.

Under current plans, the proposed road map put
together in August by the Chiefs of Defence Staff of
ECOWAS and Angola - in the name of CPLP - is
aligned with the existing national strategic framework
for security sector reform of Guinea-Bissau and
provides for the protection of members of key national
institutions, as well for training and mentoring of
defence forces and members of police institutions. It
should be recalled that police institutions are already
supported bilaterally by partners such as Portugal and
Brazil, as well as by UNIOGBIS. Angola has, for its
part, prepared plans to also assist with further training
activities and the rehabilitation of some of the
infrastructure of the defence forces and security
10-62182
institutions, including the training academy of Cumere,
where the training of the elements to be retained in the
armed forces will be carried out.

Once the endorsement of the joint CPLP-
ECOWAS framework of assistance to Guinea-Bissau is
finalized by national and regional partners, UNIOGBIS
will be prepared to present a comprehensive briefing to
the Security Council detailing the proposed modalities,
timing and resources related to the implementation of
the framework. The national authorities of Guinea-
Bissau are of the view that formal support from the
Security Council for that initiative would be crucial.
That position is shared by the leadership of CPLP,
ECOWAS and the African Union. However, it is
crucial to ensure that the political, technical and
financial support extended by regional partners and the
United Nations to Guinea-Bissau authorities produces
tangible results within a defined timeline and is not
perceived as an open-ended commitment. In other
words, such support should be based on clear
benchmarks to measure progress. In addition, the
authorities should show clear signs of commitment to
restructuring the armed forces and revitalizing their
leadership.

In that context, support for the security sector
reform priorities, including the pension fund and
capacity-building initiatives, is urgent. I therefore
strongly encourage all interested partners to boost their
support to security sector reform priorities in Guinea-
Bissau within a multilateral and/or bilateral framework,
as an urgent means to help consolidate peace and
stability in the country and promote good governance
and sustainable development.

The non-implementation of the recent decision by
the Supreme Military Court to release from detention
the former Chief of Defense Staff, Vice Admiral
Zamora Induta, demonstrates the continued
predominance of the military leadership over the
judiciary, and to some extent the executive. It will
undoubtedly increase the reluctance of some
international partners to engage with the authorities of
Guinea-Bissau, as it underlines the lack of civilian
oversight over the armed forces and the existing
environment of impunity in the country. Urgent actions
should therefore be taken by the national authorities of
Guinea-Bissau to demonstrate their resolve to fight
impunity and promote national reconciliation.
3

With regard to the establishment of a genuine
political dialogue within the leadership of Guinea-
Bissau, I am pleased to report that, on 14 October,
President Malam Bacai Sanha and Prime Minister
Carlos Gomes Junior met with the diplomatic
community in Bissau as part of our efforts on the
ground to engage the two leaders on issues of crucial
interest for the stability of the country and to help them
overcome alleged mistrust between them. Furthermore,
in recent weeks, divisions within the ruling African
Party for the Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde
have continued to deepen. Against that background, I
will continue to use my good offices, with the support
of international partners in Bissau, to ensure that the
two leaders stay the course in fulfilling their
commitment to the stabilization of the country.

Meanwhile, with regard to the investigations into
the March and June 2009 political assassinations,
UNIOGBIS has continued to insist, along with the
Office of the Prosecutor General, that any assistance
from international partners to complete the
investigations had to be linked to a commitment by
national institutions to jointly assess the credibility and
transparency of the investigation process conducted so
far.

Let me now turn to the issue of the fight against
drug trafficking and organized crime. The Council will
recall that in recent months I strongly advocated for a
holistic response, involving not only transit countries
like Guinea-Bissau but also countries of origin and
destination. I am encouraged to note that in recent
weeks, and in particular during a visit I undertook to
Europe in September, a number of partners have
demonstrated interest in engaging in more robust
strategies to tackle illicit drug trafficking and
organized crime.

We are also exploring with the national
authorities a memorandum of understanding that would
allow vessels from international partners to conduct
policing activities in the territorial waters of Guinea-
Bissau - similar to those conducted in Cape Verde and
Senegal - with the collaboration of trained police
officers and including the strengthening and
enhancement of national structures to counter
transnational crime, notably drug trafficking and
organized crime.

Lastly, I continue to advocate for interested
partners to extend their assistance to Guinea-Bissau in
terms of equipment for airports, ports and borders, to
enhance control and deterrence in the fight against
drug trafficking and organized crime. Let me stress,
however, that regional actors face significant
difficulties in collecting reliable statistics and evidence
of drug trafficking activities. Hopefully, with the
establishment of transnational crime units in support of
ECOWAS plans to curb drug trafficking, the
implementation of the West Africa Coast Initiative will
help improve such a situation.

I am pleased to confirm that in Guinea-Bissau the
legal, political and operational conditions for the
establishment of a transnational crime unit have been
met. UNIOGBIS has the capacity to follow up on this
process, in close collaboration with international and
national partners. However, more robust action from
the international community is still needed - for
example, to name and shame entities involved in those
activities and to pass legislation to allow the freeze or
confiscation of assets and bank accounts, which could
help deter and combat such destabilizing phenomena.
Other mechanisms to further enhance data collection
and information-sharing at regional and international
levels could possibly be considered.

Although Guinea-Bissau has seen a series of
setbacks, which have contributed to the increased
feeling of frustration among some international
partners, there have nevertheless been some positive
steps and developments that are worth mentioning
without going into detail. The national authorities were
able to flush out ghost civil servants by adopting a new
salary payment method. Salaries are paid regularly.
The national reconciliation and dialogue conference
process was launched on 19 August. The national
justice system policy was adopted. The national
Security Sector Reform Steering Committee has
resumed its work. And our offices have co-located with
the Secretariat, which is a boost.

An understanding between the President and the
Prime Minister led to an official request for assistance
in the fight against drug trafficking in a letter that the
Secretary-General has received and that I trust will be
forwarded to the Council. The pension fund legislative
framework has been finalized and security sector
reform legislative packages approved. Progress has
been made on police reform, including the vetting of
police officers and the construction of a model police
station. And the African Union has established a
permanent presence in Bissau, whose representative is
here today.

In closing, and as stated in the report before the
Council, if endorsed, the CPLP-ECOWAS road map,
together with the pledges already made by CPLP
member States for assistance in the areas of holistic
security sector reform, should contribute to enhancing
the protection of State institutions and increased
civilian oversight over military structures. This
partnership should also help create conditions for the
implementation of critical aspects of the security sector
reform programme, including the retirement,
reinsertion and reintegration of military personnel,
including former combatants, and the fight against
impunity, drug trafficking and organized crime.
Hopefully, if well articulated and coordinated, it should
create conditions for the renewed commitment of
donors and other key partners to continue to support
the economic reforms and debt relief programmes for
Guinea-Bissau.

This emerging momentum has reopened a
window of opportunity for enhanced collaboration
between the international community and the
leadership of Guinea-Bissau following months of
impasse. UNIOGBIS, under my leadership, will
continue to ensure that this opportunity is not missed.

