Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the convening of this briefing on
the implementation of the provisions of the Stockholm
Agreement, concluded on 13 December 2018 between
the Yemeni parties. We would like to thank Mr. Martin
Griffiths and Mr. Mark Lowcock, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Yemen and Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, respectively, whose briefings update the
Security Council on the status of implementation of the

Agreement, which it endorsed through resolution 2451
(2018).

C6te d'Ivoire would once again like to congratulate
the Secretary-General on his tireless efforts that led
to the conclusion of a ceasefire - a prerequisite to
the establishment of an inclusive dialogue towards
a lasting solution to the crisis in Yemen. My country
also welcomes the spirit of compromise of the parties
to the conflict and urges them to work harder so that the
hope for peace generated by the Agreement becomes a
reality. In that way, the Yemeni people, devastated by
several years of war, will at last be able to find peace,
stability and prosperity.

Cote d'Ivoire strongly hopes that the unity of
the Council, embodied in the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2451 (2018), will be further strengthened
at this crucial stage in the implementation of the
Stockholm Agreement. To achieve that, each actor will
have to demonstrate his goodwill and commitment to
building on that significant gain in terms of resolving
the Yemeni crisis. In that regard, my country calls on
all parties to fully cooperate with the United Nations
in the diligent implementation of the Agreement, the
three main points of which, it should be recalled,
concern the ceasefire in the city of Al-Hudaydah,
which came into force on 18 December 2018, followed
by the mutual redeployment of the belligerent forces
outside the ports of Al-Hudaydah, Saleef and Ras Issa;
the mechanism for implementing the agreement on the
exchange of nearly 15,000 prisoners; and the statement
of understanding on the city of Taiz, with a View to the
opening of humanitarian corridors.

Given the serious humanitarian crisis affecting
more than 20 million Yemenis, 4 million of whom face
the risk of famine, the international community must
provide urgent and appropriate responses that meet
the needs. Cote d'Ivoire believes that the removal of
administrative obstacles and the adoption of measures
to relaunch port activities will facilitate the transport
and delivery of humanitarian assistance and the
resumption of economic and commercial activities.
We also recall that any impediment of the provision of
humanitarian assistance is a violation of international
humanitarian law and human rights. My country
therefore urges the Yemeni parties to work with the
United Nations specialized agencies to protect and
deliver humanitarian assistance to the affected areas
and populations. To that end, we welcome the statement
made by the Houthi leader following the request of the
World Food Programme to investigate the diversion of
nearly 12,000 tons of humanitarian aid in the Yemeni
capital in August and September 2018.

Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the positive momentum
generated by the Stockholm Agreement and the
operationalization of the Redeployment Coordination
Committee. We therefore call on Yemeni stakeholders
to refrain from any action likely to lead to a resumption
of hostilities and to continue their cooperation with
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General in order to
consolidate the gains made in Stockholm.

My country notes with satisfaction that, in
accordance with resolution 2451 (2018), the United
Nations monitoring team, headed by retired Major
General Patrick Cammaert and responsible for
consolidating the ceasefire, is operational. We welcome
the holding in Al-Hudaydah of the firstjoint meeting of
the Redeployment Coordination Committee, which is
responsible for overseeing the ceasefire. The meeting
led to constructive discussions on the mandate of the
Committee and on the main priorities in terms of
maintaining the ceasefire, humanitarian access and the
redeployment of military forces. Cote d'Ivoire therefore
notes with satisfaction the commitment of the warring
parties to implementing the Stockholm Agreement.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire reiterates its support
to Mr. Martin Griffiths and Mr. Mark Lowcock, as well
as Major General Patrick Cammaert and his monitoring
team, whose rapid deployment, particularly in the
cities of Aden, Sana'a and Al-Hudaydah, illustrates the
international community's commitment to resolving
the crisis. We reiterate our appeal to the parties to
the conflict to exercise restraint and calls on them to
respect their commitment to the implementation of
the Stockholm Agreement in order to give peace and
stability in Yemen a chance.

