Mr. Magierowski (Poland): I would first like to
express my gratitude to the Netherlands and to Prime
Minister Mark Rutte personally for holding today's
debate, and to the Secretary-General for his valuable
remarks. I would also like to thank Mr. Moussa
Faki Mahamat and Ms. Fatimata Toure for their
comprehensive, informative and passionate briefings.

I would like to recall the Secretary-General's words
from last April, when he said in this very Chamber that
the objective of every peacekeeping mission is "to set
the stage for stability and sustainable peace" (S/PV. 7918, p. 2). In the light of this, we must act together to make
the process of improving peacekeeping operations
more coherent and effective, which will enable us to
lay solid and inclusive foundations for sustainable
peace in the whole world. Poland has always been
a strong supporter of United Nations peacekeeping
operations. We regard them as an important tool of the
international community for preserving global peace
and security. However, today's security challenges
require an all-of-United Nations approach and the use
of all available means. I want to reiterate at this point
that Poland supports all efforts aimed at strengthening
mediation and preventive diplomacy, resolving disputes
peacefully and addressing the root causes of conflicts. I
would now like to concentrate on four issues that should
guide us in our work in the Security Council this year.

First, we are now witnessing changes in the global
geopolitical architecture that significantly affect the
nature of conflicts and consequently that of United
Nations peacekeeping missions. It should therefore be
obvious that United Nations peacekeeping operations
evolve and that new missions need mandates that are
considerably different from those of decades ago. We
need to respond to new challenges by encouraging
ourselves, as Security Council members, to formulate
realistic, tailor-made and context-specific mandates
based on deep and comprehensive needs analysis on
the ground. That should include constant monitoring
of human rights as well as security situations. Mission
mandates therefore have to recognize the primacy of
politics in the entire peace process and provide a vision
of the desired final outcome of a mission. The role of
the Security Council in that process is essential.

Secondly, the role of peacekeeping in the protection
of civilians is crucial. Poland attaches enormous
importance to this issue. The report of the High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446)
rightly pointed out that the principles of peacekeeping
should never be used as an excuse for failure to protect
civilians. We have already heard too many excuses
for inaction, and they were in fact inexcusable. The
protection of civilians remains a very high priority issue
for Poland, which is why we have acceded to the Kigali
Principles and why we call on Member States, including
all the troop- and police-contributing countries, to
endorse them. In that regard, we would like to stress
the importance of full respect for international law and
international humanitarian law, which is a fundamental
priority for my country. Impunity is unacceptable,
and we must therefore reiterate that every perpetrator
should be brought to justice. We also call for strict
implementation of the zero-tolerance policy on acts of
sexual exploitation and abuse and condemn any such
acts committed by peacekeeping personnel.

Thirdly, Poland considers peacekeepers' security
crucial. That includes not only troops but all
humanitarian and support personnel in missions. The
report by Lieutenant General Carlos Alberto dos Santos
Cruz has triggered a long-awaited discussion on the
current state of play with regard to the security of United
Nations peacekeepers. The effective implementation
of the post-report recommendations will require the
full cooperation and unwavering efforts of all parties
involved, including the Secretariat, the troop- and
police-contributing countries and the Security Council.

Finally, insufficient and ineffective training of
peacekeepers directly affects their performance in
protecting civilians and the security of a mission's
personnel. There can be no proper response without
an adequate preparedness process. Peacekeepers'
training cycles should equip the Blue Helmets with a
clear vision of a given mission's priorities. Poland is
committed to ensuring support in that area. We offer
our training capacities and are open to cooperation
with other States Members of the United Nations in
enhancing peacekeepers" skills.
We should not forget the regional dimension of
the security environment in which United Nations
peacekeepers operate. They are deployed within living
communities and troubled societies. If they are to even
stand a chance of protecting endangered civilians, they
need strong partnerships with host nations and local
and regional actors in the area.

The Security Council should undertake all possible
efforts and make the most of its mandate to improve the
effectiveness of peace operations, as they play a crucial
role in building the foundations for sustainable peace.
I would like to conclude by quoting the Secretary-
General once again.

"Peace operations are at a crossroads. Our task
is to keep them relevant with clear and achievable
mandates, and the right strategies and support.
Success depends on our collective efforts." (ibid., 
p. 4)

