Ms. Pillay: I am very grateful for the opportunity
to address the Security Council on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict and other situations of
violence.

Since the Council last debated the subject in May
(see S/PV.653l), a people's spring has continued to
thaw the global landscape. A few days after the May
debate, we saw the inauguration of a new Government
in C6te d'lvoire. Two months later, a new nation was
born in South Sudan. The end of violent upheaval
promises the beginning of a new era in Libya that, I
hope, will embrace human rights. In all of those cases,
progress has been made in responding to people's
aspirations for peace, justice, human rights and
democracy. It is critical to consolidate those gains by
ensuring accountability and respect for the rule of law.

In Cote d'Ivoire, I have called on the Government
to investigate and prosecute serious violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law
committed by all sides. My Office supported the
Commission of Inquiry established by the Human
Rights Council earlier this year. Its findings, and those
of previous commissions, provide a point of departure
to end impunity, including with respect to elements in
the new armed forces who continue to commit
summary executions, rape and torture. Accountability,
reconciliation and comprehensive security sector
reform, including the vetting of officers, must be
priorities at this juncture.

In South Sudan, violent clashes between heavily
armed communities and the related resurgence of
armed activity by rebel factions are undermining the
stability of our newest Member State and pose a
serious threat to civilians. In order to stop the cycle of
violent reprisals, the Government needs more support
to better control small arms, prosecute perpetrators of
serious violations and ensure reparations to victimized
communities who have lost their livelihoods.
In Libya, my Office has held initial discussions
on transitional justice and will continue its engagement

through the United Nations Support Mission in Libya.
Given the seriousness and extent of the crimes
committed in the past, the needs are colossal and
pressing. With the full support of my Office, the
International Commission of Inquiry on Libya will
continue to investigate alleged violations by all sides
until presenting its final report to the Human Rights
Council in March. An advance team began work in
Libya at the end of October, and the Commission itself
will be in Libya in early December.

Where basic human rights are trampled and
peaceful demands for change are met by brutal force,
people are eventually compelled to have recourse to
rebellion against tyranny and oppression. It happened
in Libya; it may happen in Syria. More and more
soldiers refuse to become complicit in international
crimes and are changing sides. There is a serious risk
of Syria descending into armed struggle.

Since I briefed the Council in August on the
findings of the fact-finding mission I established
pursuant to Human Rights Council resolution S-l6/l,
Government military and security forces have
continued to commit serious violations. Well over
3,500 people have been killed since March. Tens of
thousands of people, including doctors, nurses and
wounded patients, have been arbitrarily arrested, and
many remain detained incommunicado, placing them at
serious risk of torture. However, in today's world, facts
cannot be incarcerated, thanks not least to local human
rights defenders reporting through social media.

While I welcome the commitments Syria most
recently made to the League of Arab States, I am
concerned that the killing of civilians has not stopped.
We have to see actual progress on the ground. A human
rights monitoring presence can help to ensure that. The
international community must insist that the
Government end the killing of civilians, release all
those arbitrarily detained for their peaceful protest and
finally provide full and unimpeded access to the
International Commission of Inquiry, which was
established by the Human Rights Council in August
and will report before the end of the month. At the
same time, a credible spectre of criminal accountability
may lead individual military commanders and political
decision-makers to pause, reflect and change course.

An assessment mission to Yemen carried out by
my Office in June found that civilians were at risk due
to the lethal intersection of two separate struggles -
the Government's suppression of peaceful protesters,
on the one hand, and its conflict with armed opponents,
on the other. Government security forces have
continued to deploy excessive and lethal force against
civilians, using live ammunition and even snipers. The
situation is exacerbated by armed opponents bringing
weapons to otherwise peaceful demonstrations.

The Government has not initiated the type of
credible independent investigations referred to in
resolution 2014 (2011). I remain convinced that we
need an international investigation and a human rights
presence on the ground to lay the groundwork for
accountability - rather than amnesty - for
international crimes. In the meantime, I intend to seek
the agreement of Yemeni authorities for the
deployment of a follow-up mission. I will report to the
Human Rights Council next March.

I am concerned that the number of civilians killed
in Afghanistan is increasing, in a climate characterized
by a lack of accountability for serious violations of
international law. In the first half of 2011, the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
Human Rights Unit tracked a 15 per cent increase in
conflict-related civilian deaths. Among the 1,462
civilian deaths recorded, 80 per cent could be
attributed to anti-Government forces. Civilian deaths
for which the Afghan army and other pro-Government
forces are responsible have declined to 14 per cent, due
to improved safeguards. I draw the Council's attention
to the systematic torture of suspected insurgents in
many National Security Directorate and police
detention facilities, which has been documented in a
comprehensive report prepared by the UNAMA Human
Rights Unit.

In Iraq and Somalia, our human rights
components in the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq and the United Nations Political Office for
Somalia continue to observe patterns of indiscriminate
bombings and targeted killings of civilians.

I strongly condemn indiscriminate rocket attacks
from Gaza, which flagrantly violate international law. I
am also concerned that Israeli raids in Gaza are placing
civilians at grave risk. In recent months, my office in
the occupied Palestinian territory has observed an
increase in the frequency and severity of violence
perpetrated by Israeli settlers against Palestinian
civilians in the West Bank. I urge Israeli authorities to
do more to prevent such attacks and to hold
perpetrators accountable.

A little more than a year ago, my Office released
a mapping report on serious violations that were
committed in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
between 1993 and 2003. Actors flagged in the mapping
report, including in the army and intelligence services,
continue to be implicated in serious violations up to
this day. The Government's initiative to send a bill to
Parliament that would establish special chambers to try
the most serious crimes is encouraging. My Office
provided recommendations on amendments aimed at
guaranteeing international standards and the
participation of international judges and prosecutors. I
am very pleased to note that the Government has
accepted my Office's proposal to hold a national
conference on transitional justice.

Today the Joint Human Rights Office published a
report on police and intelligence services' arresting,
assaulting and threatening opposition activists,
journalists and human rights defenders in the run-up to
the elections to be held at the end of this month in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. It is urgent that the
Government ensure that the electoral process is not
tainted by violence and that it lives up to the standards
set by resolution 1991 (2011).

In June, the Council charged the Secretary-
General with ensuring effective human-rights
monitoring of the situation in Abyei (resolution 1990 (2011), para. 10), following massive displacement of
people and the burning and looting of Abyei town in
May. Effective monitoring requires monitors on the
ground. Given that my Office's repeated requests for
access to Abyei have been denied, the United Nations
Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) should
include a civilian human rights component to carry out
the Council's mandate. Since my briefing to the
Council last summer, I have continued to receive
disturbing reports from credible sources on the ground
about serious violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law in Southern Kordofan
and Blue Nile state. As the Council is aware, the
United Nations no longer has a human-rights
monitoring presence, and even temporary access is
refused. In the absence of any credible national
investigations, I reiterate my call for a thorough and
independent international investigation into violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law.

Where national authorities fail to investigate
credible allegations of the most serious violations, it is
incumbent on the international community to
rigorously establish the facts. Over the last two
decades, my Office has supported more than 30
commissions of inquiry and similar mechanisms set up
by the Security Council, the Human Rights Council,
the Secretary-General and by myself under my own
mandate. We have strengthened our capacity to support
such mechanisms. They provide a solid basis for
informing international action and national processes
on justice, truth and reconciliation. I would therefore
encourage the Council to play a more active role in
securing follow-up to the recommendations of these
mechanisms.

My Office participated in last week's workshop
convened by Portugal and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs on enhancing the
role of the Security Council in ensuring accountability
for violations. The Council has an important role to
play in ensuring practical arrangements to secure
accountability: the establishment of facts, the
identification and prosecution of perpetrators, and,
importantly, the right to reparation for gross violations
of human rights. Without it, impunity emboldens
perpetrators and breeds more violations that undermine
peace and progress. My Office stands ready to assist
this Council in its efforts to protect civilians.

