Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): Ijoin others in
thanking Mr. Mladenov for his briefing and dedicated
work. Mr. Mladenov's statement was accurate and
clear, yet not encouraging - recent developments are
reason for concern.

I align myself with the statement to be delivered
later by the observer of the European Union (EU).

The Kingdom of the Netherlands remains firmly
committed to the two-State solution, based on known
parameters. This also applies to the status of Jerusalem.
A two-State solution is the only viable way of fulfilling
the aspirations of Israelis and Palestinians alike, to
live in peace, security and dignity. We welcome the
initiatives taken by the EU High Representative. This
includes receiving Prime Minister Netanyahu and
President Abbas and convoking an additional meeting of
the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the Coordination of
International Assistance to Palestinians on 31 January
in Brussels, together with Norway.
Allow me to focus on three main aspects of
the issue at hand: negative developments on the
ground, the need for positive steps and the role of the
international community.

First of all, the Kingdom of the Netherlands is
concerned about developments on the ground that
continue to undermine the prospect of a two-State
solution. Tensions have increased over the past two
months. We condemn all acts of violence, including the
firing of rockets from Gaza, the killing of an Israeli
citizen in the West Bank on 9 January and the cynical
use by militants of the crossing at Kerem Shalom/Karm
Abu Salem as a cover for building a tunnel. There is no
justification for terrorism.

At the same time, we are concerned by the high
number of Palestinian casualties in protests and
confrontations in the past months. The response to
violence should be proportionate. Both sides must
work to prevent further escalation. The Kingdom of
the Netherlands strongly opposes the recent Israeli
announcements on settlement expansion. Settlements
are illegal under international law and constitute an
obstacle to peace. Furthermore, we are concerned that
the amendment made by the Knesset to the Basic Law:
Jerusalem, Capital of Israel, on 2 January will make an
agreement on Jerusalem as shared capital ofboth States
more difficult.

Secondly, both parties should urgently take significant
positive steps to build confidence and improve the
situation on the ground. This is hard work; it requires
leadership and political will, but it needs to be done. We
call upon Israel to freeze its expansion of settlements
and to enable the strengthening of the Palestinian
Authority. We urge Palestinian leaders to condemn
terrorist attacks, to continue security cooperation and
to proceed on the challenging path of intra-Palestinian
reconciliation. Both sides should refrain from unhelpful
and inciting statements, as witnessed over the past
couple of weeks.

Thirdly, apolitical horizon for the two-State solution
is needed, in line with relevant Council resolutions,
including resolutions 2334 (2016) and 478 (1980). To
that end, cooperation among Quartet partners as well
as regional partners is crucial. Unilateral steps are
unhelpful. Instead, we have to work together in order
to prevent the irreversible loss of the two-State solution
and to help parties to find a path back to the negotiation
table. In this regard, the Kingdom of the Netherlands
looks forward to the meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee for the Coordination of International
Assistance to Palestinians to address the situation in
Gaza. My country will continue to use its good relations
with both sides to play a constructive role. That includes
facilitating practical steps in the field of energy, water
and crossings. As an example, Dutch-funded container
scanners are facilitating Palestinian trade, while Israeli
security concerns are taken into account.

Let me also underline the importance of the work
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). We
should not politicize humanitarian aid. The Kingdom of
the Netherlands has been a strong supporter of UNRWA
over the years and will remain so, especially in view
of the current difficulties. We firmly believe UNRWA
plays a key role as a United Nations humanitarian
organization to provide basic health care, education and
emergency relief to Palestine refugees. Especially in
the Palestinian territories, its role is indispensable, as
UNRWA provides 50 per cent of all humanitarian aid.
UNRWA's work is also indispensable in the challenging
environment of Lebanon, Jordan and Syria. With these
activities, UNRWA is critical to stability in the region.
In view of our concerns regarding UNRWA's financial
situation, my country has decided to frontload its
contribution to UNRWA for 2018. We encourage others
to join us in supporting UNRWA and to contribute as
soon as possible.

Let me also draw attention to another regional issue
of majorconcernto us-the negative impact of Hizbullah
interfering in regional conflicts. Hizbullah poses a real
risk of further destabilizing that already volatile region.
It should disarm, in compliance with resolution 1701
(2006), and cease its destabilizing behaviour.

Let me add a final point concerning the situation
in Yemen, which is also an issue of major concern for
the Kingdom of the Netherlands. This issue will be a
priority for us during our tenure in the Council this year.
All parties in Yemen should comply with international
humanitarian law and should at all times distinguish
between the civilian population and combatants. I would
like to repeat the call ofthe Council in its press statement
of 22 December for the parties to allow the safe, rapid
and unhindered access for humanitarian supplies,
personnel and other essential imports. We welcome
the announced improvements to infrastructure, which
are crucial for the adequate delivery of international
assistance. Al-Hudaydah is key in that regard; we
reiterate the need for its permanent and unconditional
opening. At the same time, all parties to the conflict
should constructively engage with the Special Envoy
to create opportunities for dialogue. That is what the
people of Yemen deserve.

In conclusion, the Kingdom of the Netherlands
will continue to be a partner for peace, justice and
development for the region, with a particular focus on
its people.

