Mr. Olguin Cigarroa (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We would like to thank the Malaysian presidency for
its successful leadership of the Council and for this
wrap-up session, which is of imperative importance
to the elected members of the Council in promoting
transparent working methods for the benefit of all
States Members of the United Nations.

Looking back at the past month, we would stress
the importance of the open debate on children and
armed conflict (S/PV.7466) and the support ofmembers
for including kidnapping as an element to trigger the
inclusion of perpetrators in the annexes of the reports
of the Secretary-General. We appreciate the fact that
numerous participants, including Chile, supported
the Lucens Guidelines and the Oslo Declaration on
protecting schools and universities from military use
during armed conflict, in accordance with Council
resolution 2143 (2014).

We would also highlight yesterday's meeting on
the situation in Darfur (S/PV.7478) and stress that all
referrals to the International Criminal Court (ICC),
whether past or future, must be accompanied by
consistent action on the part of the Council. Putting
an end to impunity requires improved cooperation in
communications with the ICC and its Prosecutor.

We have mourned numerous deaths this past month,
deaths resulting from terrorist attacks. We reiterate that
the fight against terrorism must also include a holistic
approach so as to address the deep-seated causes and
destabilizing factors that serve as a breeding ground
for extremism.

We appreciate the various meeting formats,
including informal interactive dialogues and meetings
held under the Arria Formula. The interactive
informal dialogue with the Peacebuilding Commission
(S/PV.7472) enabled us to discuss the complementarity
between that body and the Council and to interact
directly with the countries concerned and Chairs of
the country-specific configurations. We appreciate
the promotion of dialogue between the countries
concerned and the subsidiary bodies. In that regard, the
Chilean Chair of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2206 (2015) concerning South Sudan
held a formal meeting on 19 June this year with South
Sudan and neighbouring States in order to promote
dialogue aimed at contributing to a greater and better
understanding of the challenges facing States, and also
at achieving a better implementation of the sanctions
established by the Council. Another example is the
meeting of the Ad hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa, where, together
with some countries from that continent, we were able
to play a preventive role, especially with regard to
Burundi.

Finally, we are convinced that the wrap-up sessions
must be continued and held monthly, particularly given
the upcoming priority issues falling under the mandate
of the United Nations system, including the mandate
of the Council, such as the anniversary of resolution
1325 (2000) and the process for electing the Secretary-
General. In that regard, we hope that the Council will
promote openness and transparency over the next few
months, in harmony with the progress of that item
through the General Assembly.

In conclusion, I extend my best wishes to New
Zealand for their upcoming presidency.

