Mr. Bertoux (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassador Quinlan and his team for the quarterly
activity report that has just been presented to us.

For over 10 years now, the Iranian nuclear
programme and the uncertainties about its exclusively
peaceful purposes have been a matter of concern to
the international community and a threat to peace
and international security. For 10 years, the Council
has in vain called on Iran to negotiate. Each time,
we have been confronted with their refusal to engage
in dialogue and a jump forward in their nuclear and
missile programmes. That led the Council to establish
a sanctions regime while continuing to call on Iran to
negotiate. That so-called dual approach and the new
attitude of the authorities in Tehran finally brought
about a substantive discussion with Iran on the nuclear
issue.

The adoption of the j oint action plan on 24 November
2013, the implementation of which began in January,
was a step forward for peace and security. For the first
time, the E3+3 got Iran to suspend the most sensitive
activities of its nuclear programme for six months. The
negotiations were thus given more time. The dialogue is
just beginning. The joint action plan is only an interim
agreement. The mandate that was given to the P5+l
by the Council is to find a long-term solution to the
Iranian nuclear programme with a view to restoring
confidence in its exclusively peaceful purpose. That is
the direction and purpose of talks between Iran and the
P5+1 that were just held in Vienna and will continue at
the beginning oprril. We approach them with an open
mind, but also with vigilance.

Progress has finally been made in the dialogue
between Iran and the International Atomic Energy
Agency. The Director General has stated, in his report
of 20 February and in the report published just today
in Vienna, that Iran has met its commitments under the
joint action plan with the P5+l. He also stated that Iran
has implemented the confidence-building measures
contained in the former agreement with the Agency
on 11 November. That is a positive development, but
not all the issues have been resolved - far from it. To
achieve a long-term solution, it remains essential that
Iran clarify all outstanding issues related to the possible
military dimensions of Iran's nuclear programme. Iran
knows that and will need to provide answers.

Finally, I would recall that the joint action plan
does not in any way do away with the sanctions
regime against Iran imposed by the Security Council,
which must be fully implemented while awaiting a
comprehensive settlement of the crisis. It is therefore
with concern that we read the reports that, on 5 March,
the Israeli navy intercepted a large shipment of arms,
probably of Iranian origin, destined for Gaza. The
Panel will have to confirm the origin of those weapons,
but if that is indeed the case, it would be a violation
of the arms embargo imposed under resolution 1747
(2007), which might call into question Iran's good faith
in its stated willingness to address the concerns of the
Security Council. We hope that the Committee's Panel
of Experts will be able to quickly engage in a dialogue
with Israel and Iran in order to shed light on this matter.

On the work of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), which
Ambassador Quinlan has just briefed us on, I regret
that the experts' recommendations that are contained
in last year's final report (S/2013/331, annex) have not
been fully implemented. They are nonetheless simple
and operational recommendations aimed at making
the sanctions system more effective. We will have
to redouble our efforts so that, by our next meeting,
progress can made in this area.

