Mr. Salim (Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity): I am very pleased that this important
meeting of the Security Council devoted to Africa is
being held under the presidency of Sweden. We
appreciate deeply the contribution that Sweden has made
since the period of our continent's struggle against
colonialism and apartheid, and its efforts to promote
development and improve the welfare of our people.
Throughout this period, Sweden has stood firmly in
support of Africa's quest for freedom, justice, dignity and
development.

On a personal note, let me say how happy I am to
see you, Madam President, presiding over the
deliberations of the Council. Having known you for many
years and having had the pleasure of working with you in
different areas of mutual concern, I am very conscious of
your personal commitment to the causes which are so
dear to our continent.

Tomorrow, 25 September 1998, it will be exactly
one year since we met here in an unprecedented meeting
of the Security Council at ministerial level, held at the
initiative of the United States Government, to review the
state of the African continent and to assess how we had
collectively fared in dealing with the myriad challenges
that confront the continent. Since then, we have received
the report of the Secretary-General of the United Nations
on the causes of conflict and the promotion of durable
peace and sustainable development in Africa. I wish to
pay a deserved tribute to the Secretary-General for his
focused and comprehensive report, which deserves serious
consideration, and for the strong commitment and keen

 

interest that he continues to show in matters affecting the
continent and its people.

Let me also express my gratitude to all the members
of the Security Council for their continued interest in
Africa. It is indeed encouraging that the Security Council
continues to demonstrate special interest in and concern
about developments in our continent. I hope that this will
lead to a more active involvement of the United Nations in
support of our efforts towards a more peaceful, stable and
progress-oriented continent.

Since the last special ministerial meeting on Africa,
our continent has continued to be confronted by severe
problems of a socio-economic and political nature. On the
political front, despite some encouraging developments,
such as those in Sierra Leone and the Central African
Republic, the progress in the peace process in Burundi, and
the positive steps towards democracy in some African
countries, the continent has not been spared conflicts, with
the attendant consequences in terms of loss of lives,
destruction of infrastructure and property and immense
suffering to our people. At the same time, Africa as a
whole has continued to experience a difficult economic
situation. These difficulties are further compounded by the
severe problems and tensions resulting from the socio-
economic reform and transformation programmes being
carried out by most of our countries.

In spite of these daunting problems, it is a matter of
record that one of the remarkable features of the state of
affairs of our continent has been our demonstrable
determination to seek solutions that can improve our
situation. African leaders have left no stone unturned in
taking initiatives to promote a peaceful resolution of the
various conflicts afflicting the continent. The sustained
efforts deployed by African countries in attempts to contain
the crises which erupted between Ethiopia and Eritrea, in
the Comoros, in Guinea-Bissau and, most recently, in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, are a clear testimony to
Africa's commitment to address its problems, particularly
those affecting peace, security and stability.

In all those efforts, the Organization of African Unity
(OAU) has endeavoured to assume its continental
responsibility in a spirit of cooperation, solidarity and
complementarity between the continental body and African
subregional organizations. Indeed, we believe in African
solutions to African problems within the framework of
regional and subregional initiatives. Increasingly, such
approaches are offering real prospects for conflict
containment and conflict resolution in Africa. These
initiatives need, however, to be strengthened and
supported at the continental level and internationally in a
spirit of true partnership for peace.

We have also worked closely with the United
Nations in bringing the collective weight of our two
Organizations to bear in promoting peaceful solutions to
conflicts in the continent. In doing so we have been
guided by the Cairo Summit Declaration establishing the
Mechanism for Conflict Prevention, Management and
Resolution, which underlines the importance of the
cooperation between the Organization of African Unity,
African subregional organizations and the United Nations.

It is in this context that we, at the OAU, attach the
greatest importance to the strengthening of relations and
cooperation between the OAU and the United Nations.
We value the role and contribution that the United
Nations, as the world body, can make in support of the
peace efforts and initiatives in the continent.

I wish, in this respect, to put on record my highest
appreciation for the commitment and disposition
demonstrated by the United Nations Secretary-General,
with whom I have been working very closely. Our most
recent joint endeavour in Durban, on the margins of the
summit of the Non-Aligned Movement, where we worked
hard and hand in hand in promoting conditions for a
peaceful resolution of the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, is an example of cooperation that
we need to pursue.

As African leaders, working together with their
continental Organization, continue to deploy their efforts
to seek a peaceful solution to the conflict in that country,
the Security Council should extend its strong support to
these efforts. In View of the magnitude of the crisis and
its far-reaching implications for the region and the
continent as a whole, and as the principal body for the
maintenance of international peace and security, the
Security Council should stand ready not only in providing
concrete support and assistance to regional and
continental efforts but also, if and when the need arises,
to set up a peacekeeping mechanism to consolidate peace
and understanding in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and in the region. I need hardly emphasize that
peace, stability and security in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo with its sovereignty and territorial integrity
intact is in our collective interest. Conversely, chaos and
anarchy in that Vital African country will not only be a
nightmare for the Congolese people and the people of the
region, but will also affect Africa as a whole.

 

The unfortunate crisis between Ethiopia and Eritrea is
also of the utmost concern. The Organization of African
Unity, through its high level delegation of heads of State,
under the leadership of the current Chairman, President
Blaise Compaore, has been deploying efforts aimed at
promoting an early peaceful solution to the conflict. Indeed,
we believe that everything has to be done to avert a further
escalation of tension and to avoid a military confrontation
between the two countries, which could only bring about
suffering and destruction to their people and would also
undermine the prospects for lasting peace, security and
stability in the region. The international community should
therefore continue to urge the parties to seek a peaceful
solution based on United Nations and OAU principles and
taking into account the long-term interests of the two
countries.
As we meet today, the pursuit of the peace process in
Angola is fraught with serious difficulties and obstacles.
Indeed, the continued and flagrant violation of the Lusaka
Protocol and Security Council resolutions by UNITA is a
matter of serious concern. The international community
and, particularly, the Security Council should exert the
necessary pressure on Mr. Savimbi to live up to his
commitments, according to the Lusaka Protocol and the
relevant Security Council resolutions, and to avoid plunging
that country again into fratricidal and senseless conflict.

The dispute between the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and
the United States and Great Britain is a matter of concern
to the Security Council, as it is to the Organization of
African Unity. Last September in our addresses to the
Security Council both the current Chairman of the OAU
and I specifically referred to this issue. I therefore welcome
the decision of the Governments of the United States and
Great Britain to accept the proposal for the suspects to be
tried in The Hague by Scottish judges under Scottish law.
This decision is consistent with the position supported by
the OAU and other organizations, and it provides the
conditions for a peaceful resolution of the dispute. Now that
this important breakthrough has been achieved, after so
many years of misunderstanding and suffering for both the
people of the Jamahiriya, who have been experiencing
hardships and difficulties caused by the embargo imposed
on their country, and for the families of the victims, who
have been waiting for so long for justice to be done, the
same spirit of accommodation should prevail in the efforts
to bring about a just and fair trial for the suspects. In this
respect, the concerns expressed by the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya need to be addressed in the setting up of
modalities for the trial.

An issue of grave concern to us all today is the
scourge of terrorism, which is undoubtedly becoming a
serious threat to international peace and security. Africa
has increasingly become a victim of this scourge. The
dastardly terrorist bombings that were perpetrated recently
in Kenya and Tanzania, with considerable loss of human
lives and massive destruction of infrastructure and
property, come to us as a reminder that this threat is real
and that no one is safe from these heinous and horrendous
acts. It was yet another lesson that the international
community should come together in a coordinated and
concerted manner in combating terrorism. But, beyond the
condemnation of terrorism in all its forms and
manifestation, the international community should provide
itself with the legal framework and the means to
effectively address this scourge.

While our efforts should continue to focus on
achieving peace, security and stability, which are so vital,
we should not ignore the magnitude of the socio-
economic problems confronting our continent, which are
real and are also at the core of the issue of peace in
Africa.

This is certainly not the time and the place to
discuss all the issues that are at the heart of the current
debate and negotiations on sustainable growth and
development. However, I believe that it is appropriate, in
this forum, to reflect on the issues that continue to
frustrate Africa's search for pragmatic and forward-
looking options to redress the past imbalances.
Symptomatic of these imbalances is the thorny issue of
external indebtedness of our continent. We believe that
the attainment of sustainable development will also hinge
on the effective elimination of the bottleneck of external
indebtedness.

I also believe that, as we strive to tackle the
interrelated problems of peace and development in our
continent, we also need to address the current imbalances,
both within our countries and between Africa and the
developed world. Within our countries, issues such as
poverty, exclusion, access to opportunities and resources,
corruption, rule of law, good governance, respect for
human rights and tolerance are at the centre of the debate
on national development and cohesion. Internationally, we
cannot do without a minimum solidarity in this global
village, which cannot accommodate on a sustained basis
a healthy and wealthy developed world on the one hand
and a poor and unstable Africa on the other.

 

That is why we should take this opportunity to send a
strong signal for a new departure in international economic
relations based on a true partnership and a shared vision for
a common destiny.

