Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): Let me begin by
thanking Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for the
second time today for his update on the humanitarian
situation in Syria. His briefing serves to remind
us - if a reminder were needed - of the scale of the
humanitarian crisis facing Syria and the humanitarian
community. Over 12 million people, half of Syria's
population, are now displaced inside and outside the
country. The 700,000 people who fled their homes
since just the beginning of this year as a result of the
unremitting and horrific violence join this mass of
humankind seeking shelter and protection.

Resolution 2401 (2018), unanimously adopted on
24 February, sought to provide relief for those inside
Syria by ensuring a durable humanitarian pause in
the conflict. We deplore the lack of implementation of
resolution 2401 (2018) to date. It is imperative that we
all increase our efforts to ensure its full and immediate
implementation across Syria. In that regard, the Astana
guarantors must live up to their commitments, as
articulated in the joint statement by their Presidents on
4 April.

We reiterate the Council's demand in resolution
2401 (2018) for unimpeded and sustained access for
weekly humanitarian convoys - I repeat, weekly
humanitarian convoys - including with medical
items. We remind all parties of their obligations under
international humanitarian law and international human
rights law and call for an immediate end to all attacks
on civilians, civilian objects and medical facilities, as
demanded in resolution 2401 (2018).

We are gravely concerned for the civilians remaining
in Douma, who have been subject to intensive violence,
leading to the deaths of civilians and the destruction of
civilian infrastructure. We call on the Syrian authorities
to grant facilitation letters for humanitarian convoys to
Douma immediately.

We are also concerned about the increased obstacles
facing the United Nations in gaining access to civilians
who have fled eastern Ghouta. We call on the Syrian
authorities to immediately facilitate sustained access
for United Nations personnel to internally displaced
persons' camps. In addition, the Syrian authorities
must immediately grant the visa requests for staff of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs as
part of the much-needed humanitarian surge currently
under way.

We reiterate that any evacuation, from eastern
Ghouta or elsewhere, must be voluntary and in line with
international law. Those who decide to leave should do
so to a safe place of their choice, and with the right to
return. An increased United Nations presence is vital to
respond to the needs, not least the protection needs, of
both those remaining in eastern Ghouta and for those
arriving at reception sites.

Turning to Raqqa, we thank Under-Secretary-
General Lowcock for his timely update, which
comes following the recent humanitarian assessment
mission. We welcome the planning now under way
for assistance to these areas. Improvised explosive
devices (IEDs) represent a hidden and deadly threat to
the people returning to Raqqa. We are deeply troubled
by the high number of victims of these devices cited
in latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/243).
The clearing of mines and IEDs will be essential for
the safe return of internally displaced persons and
the rehabilitation of communities. We call on all to
contribute to the implementation of this provision of
resolution 2401 (2018).

We are gravely concerned about the situation of
civilians in Rukban, many of whom are women and
children. Sustained humanitarian access is essential, as
is the need to find longer-term and durable solutions
to the situation there. We call on the United Nations
and its partners to undertake the planned humanitarian
delivery to Rukban as soon as possible.

The humanitarian situation in Idlib is also
extremely worrying, given the rapid increase in
internally displaced persons fleeing to the governorate
and months of attacks on health-care facilities. The
cross-border deliveries of humanitarian aid continue to
constitute a lifeline for Syrians in acute need in Idlib.

We are also concerned about the situation of
the almost 140,000 people displaced from Afrin.
We welcome the scaled-up humanitarian response,
including deliveries to areas hosting internally
displaced persons. We call on the Syrian authorities to
ensure freedom of movement for internally displaced
persons to access medical services, and on Turkey to
enable the safe, voluntary and dignified return of those
who have been forced to flee.

The scale ofthe crisis in Syria and the humanitarian
response needed remains immense. The humanitarian
community is undertaking a herculean task, and we
commend all those working in extremely challenging
conditions. We must stand with them and the people
of Syria. In that regard, we are deeply troubled by the
acute lack of financing for United Nations humanitarian
operations in Syria. We call on all Member States
to make substantial commitments at the Brussels
conference next week and to disburse those pledges
as early as possible. Sweden can be counted upon to
continue contributing generously to the humanitarian
response in Syria.

Finally, let me reiterate what has been said in
this Chamber numerous times before, as it deserves
to be repeated: the only sustainable way to solve the
humanitarian crisis in Syria is through a political
solution to the conflict. At this critical time, we must
seek to revitalize the United Nations-led political
process, try to put our differences aside and shoulder
the responsibility entrusted to the Council.

