Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, we join in condemning the terrorist
attacks in Burkina Faso and express our solidarity
with the families of the victims and the people and the
Government of Burkina Faso.

We would also like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his comprehensive briefing.

I wish to begin by paying tribute to the men and
women who have given their lives to the cause of peace
over the past year. In particular, I would like to honour
the memory of the Peruvian non-commissioned officer,
Edwin Augusto Chira Reyes, whose legacy will live on
in the Central African Republic.

The dedicated work of officers, police personnel
and civilians in peacekeeping operations constitutes,
in practice, a source of hope for thousands of people
across the world, in particular those most vulnerable.
We therefore welcome the initiatives by the Secretariat
and troop-contributing countries designed to raise
their effectiveness and performance standards. In that
connection, the holding of the Peacekeeping Ministerial
and the third Chiefs of Defence Conference in March
and July, respectively, was particularly important. I
wish to highlight in particular the efforts of the Security
Council over the past year to adopt consensus documents
on this issue and to organize informative briefings
and substantive debates. That work complements and
provides fresh impetus to the efforts promoted by the
Secretary-General to make peace operations more
efficient, which is in the interests of all Members. The
fact that more than 150 countries have to date joined the
Declaration of Shared Commitments on United Nations
Peacekeeping Operations illustrates this point.

In that connection, I wish to enumerate some
of the elements that we have focused on during our
participation in the Council and which are in line with
the main themes of the Peruvian approach to issues
related to international peace and security.

First, we emphasize the crucial importance
of implementing policies aimed at verifying and
enhancing the performance of the various components
of peace operations. That begins with the establishment
of minimum compliance targets, which should include,
inter alia, full respect for human rights and a gradual
increase in female personnel. In that connection,
we note the positive impact of strategic reviews of
certain missions, which make it possible to identify the
strengths and weaknesses and, where appropriate, to
redirect priorities.

Secondly, we underscore the need for troop-
contributing countries to have up-to-date, precise
information on the expectations, challenges and
specific requirements of a specific operation and, in
exchange, for those countries to provide duly trained,
qualified personnel so that they can properly integrate
into the host society.

Thirdly, there is a need to continue promoting
synergies between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations so as to harness their
individual comparative advantages. The auspicious
results of the joint visits carried out by officials of
the Secretariat and the African Union speak to the
potential of such a joint approach. We should further
stress the need to strengthen dialogue and cooperation
among the Security Council, the Secretariat and
troop-contributing countries in order to deploy peace
operations with more precise objectives, consistent
strategies and innovative responses. We stress the
importance of giving new momentum to triangular
cooperation, which, among other things, requires having
more interaction during formal meetings, convening
them with due notification and defined goals, and being
more systematic in the various stages of operations. We
believe that the Security Council Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations has a critical role to play in
the institutionalization of triangular cooperation.

We also welcome the major political support that
the zero-tolerance policy provides in countering all
forms of sexual exploitation and abuse. Peru also fully
endorses the use of that policy in the adequate training
of troops and in combating impunity.

In conclusion, Peru reaffirms its commitment to
United Nations peacekeeping operations and reiterates
its readiness to continue to provide duly trained and
disciplined contingents that respect host countries and
include ever-increasing numbers of women.

