Mr. Barbalie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, I should like to express my thanks to the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
(S/2010/463), as well as to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. De Mistura, for his
valuable briefing. I should also like to thank His
Excellency Mr. Zalmai Rassoul, Foreign Minister of
the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan, for his valuable
contribution to today's debate.

Bosnia and Herzegovina commends the
Independent Electoral Commission (IEC) and the
Electoral Complaints Commission (ECC) for their
committed efforts in organizing inclusive, transparent
and credible elections despite the difficult security
environment and logistical challenges. We encourage

the ECC to continue investigating complaints in a fully
independent manner in order to eliminate any
assumption of fraud. Furthermore, we note the
important role of the Afghan Security Forces in
ensuring a safe environment for the electorate.
However, we are saddened to learn that, despite their
efforts, human casualties have been reported from
attacks on polling stations. While welcoming the
participation of the 397 women candidates, we firmly
condemn the intimidation of and violence against
certain female candidates and their campaign workers.

We welcomed the holding of the Kabul
Conference on 20 July, co-chaired by the Afghan
Government and the United Nations. That Conference
was of critical importance for advancing the Kabul
process, which emphasizes the need for Afghan
ownership in the fields of security, governance and
social development as a necessary precondition for a
sustainable Afghanistan. In this light, we fully support
the designed strategy for a transfer of lead
responsibility for security matters on a province-by-
province basis.

The Afghan peace and reintegration programme
represents a promising way forward towards the
establishment of a peaceful security environment. We
command the creation of its committees and we
encourage the efforts of Special Representative De
Mistura to assure broad representation of religious,
ethnic and civil society groups, including women, in
the High Peace Council of the programme.

With respect to the Consolidated List of
individuals and entities subject to sanction measures,
we support the de-listing of individuals and entities in
accordance with the guidelines of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to the resolution 1267
(1999), which provide clear procedures for placing
individuals and entities on the consolidated list and for
removing them. At the same time, Bosnia and
Herzegovina reiterates the importance of ending
impunity and bringing all alleged perpetrators of
crimes to justice. That is an important condition for
building sustainable peace and reconciliation of the
society.

Bilateral and multilateral dialogue and
cooperation are essential to addressing security
concerns and increasing economic cooperation, thereby
enhancing peaceful relations. In this respect, we
welcome and encourage the ongoing bilateral talks
between the Afghan and Pakistani Governments as well
as President Karzai's participation in the fourth
trilateral summit meeting, held in Tehran on 5 August,
and the meeting in Sochi, Russia, on 18 August.

Bosnia and Herzegovina remains particularly
concerned about the rising human cost of the ongoing
conflict. The findings of the report on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict in Afghanistan, released by
UNAMA, are in fact extremely alarming. We learn
with the deepest concern that casualties among Afghan
children and women have substantially increased over
the past year. Therefore, we demand that effective
measures to protect Afghan civilians are urgently given
high priority. Needless to say, we give full support to
initiatives aimed at fostering the observance of human
rights.

We are also deeply concerned about increasing
drug dependence among the Afghan population and
about the findings presented in the Afghanistan Drug
Use Survey 2009. We call upon all relevant
governmental, international and civil society actors to
increase their efforts in the area of drug prevention and
dependence treatment as an important component of
health care and development programmes.

Finally, Bosnia and Herzegovina congratulates
UNAMA staff and Special Representative De Mistura
on their tireless work and dedication. We also express
our full support for the establishment of a support
office and a disaster recovery and business continuity
centre and the planned upgrading of existing offices,
which will strengthen the Mission's activities in
support of the Afghan peace process and of
improvement of the everyday lives of the Afghan
people.

