Mr. Patriota (Brazil): Let me start by expressing
my satisfaction at seeing you, Sir, presiding over the
Security Council and by conveying President Dilma
Rousseff's regret at being unable to attend today's
debate. She asked that I transmit her respectful
greetings and congratulations for having chosen this
important topic for our high-level meeting.

The subject of this meeting allows us to call
attention to the diplomatic instruments available for the
promotion of peace in a world where we often witness
a tendency to hasten towards coercion, sanctions and
military intervention. Today's debate helps us to
underline the priority role that the peaceful settlement
of disputes must have in achieving the central goal of
the United Nations, which is the promotion of
international peace on the legal basis provided by the
Charter.

Brazil has inscribed the principle of the peaceful
resolution of controversies in its Constitution. We
believe that peace results from collective efforts in
favour of building just societies. We have underscored
the interdependence between peace, security and
development. We know from experience that stability
and security are seldom achieved where there is social
exclusion. I was particularly pleased to hear Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon's comment yesterday, when he
said that "development is ultimately the best prevention"
(A/66/PV.]Z). The promotion of socio-economic
development and the creation of political opportunities
to allow every country to fulfil its potential are
indispensable elements in any agenda for preventive

diplomacy - and, by extension, in any agenda for
peace.

In Brazil, we are committed to fighting poverty
and improving governance. In our region, the Union of
South American Nations is consolidating itself as a
zone of peace, cooperation and democracy. We know,
however, that irrespective of how developed regional
cooperation becomes, we will always need a functional
and effective multilateral system. It cannot be repeated
too often that the Security Council has the primary
responsibility for promoting international peace and
security.

It behoves the Security Council to find solutions
that can both resolve the challenges posed by specific
situations of crisis and, at the same time, strengthen the
multilateral system itself. Recent episodes have shown
us the limits of military action as a means for
promoting stability, as well as the inappropriateness of
using force preventively or pre-emptively. Yesterday,
we took note of President Obama's statement that "the
tide of war is receding" (A/66/PV.]]). We might
emphatically add that we must usher in a tide of
diplomacy, dialogue and prevention.

The prevention of conflict and preventing its
escalation can be strengthened through many different
tools. Peacekeeping operations are valuable
instruments. The Peacebuilding Commission can play
an important role in staving off the recurrence of
conflict. I agree with the Prime Minister of Portugal
when he speaks of the mutually reinforcing triad of
prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding. But let us
not forget that disarmament and the elimination of
weapons of mass destruction will also greatly enhance
our capacity to avoid conflict. While we would not
disagree with those who associate poverty with conflict
and tension, let us not forget that, historically, it is the
very powerful militarily that have wrought destruction
on the widest scale.

As many have pointed out today, in order to fully
discharge its role in the field of peace and security, the
United Nations must support and promote women's
participation in national and international political
processes. President Dilma Rousseff stressed our
commitment to that goal in her speech to the General
Assembly yesterday. Unfortunately, however, women
are still underrepresented in the different stages and
activities of the diplomatic agenda for peace.

We live in a time marked by mass demonstrations
in the Arab world, where a young generation demands
effective participation in the political future of their
countries and societies. From the beginning, Brazil has
not only stood with those who call for freedom of
expression and institutional progress, but has also
steadfastly promoted peaceful means to address the
tensions brought about by those processes. At the same
time, we have called for respect for international law
and underlined the need to fully respect the decisions
of the Security Council, in particular when Chapter VII
has been invoked.

Fulfilling our responsibility in the realm of
prevention involves favouring mediation, the good
offices of the Secretary-General and, at all times,
giving priority to the full range of instruments to
peacefully resolve differences, including giving due
consideration to regional organizations and refraining
from loose interpretations of Security Council
mandates. I think that the Council needs to take careful
note of the statement of President Zuma of South
Africa when he mentioned that the African Union was
widely sidelined in recent situations that have been
brought to the attention of the Council.

The wave of change that has swept the Middle
East and Northern Africa lends an even greater sense of
urgency to the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian
people for a State of their own. Defusing this enormous
focus of tension and instability through a two-State
solution and through due respect for Israel's right to
live in peace and security can indeed, and should, be
portrayed as a way of advancing the concept of
preventive diplomacy.

The exercise of preventive diplomacy requires
that the Council participate effectively in defusing
tensions of varying degrees of intensity. In other
words, the Council will not be fulfilling its role if it
avoids the potentially most destabilizing situations. Let
us not forget that resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973) were consensus decisions of this body. They
remain inescapable references for the future of peace in
the Middle East.

Brazil expresses its expectation that the Security
Council will show greater leadership in helping to
bring about, through dialogue and diplomacy, a just
and lasting peace to the Middle East. As President
Sarkozy stated yesterday,

(spoke in French)
"we must stop thinking that a single country, even
the biggest one, or even a small group of
countries, can alone resolve a problem of such
complexity. Such an approach sidelines too many
major players" (A/66/PVJJ).

(spoke in English)

Updating the composition of the Security Council
in order to better reflect the realities of the world today
will greatly contribute to the strengthening of our
preventive capacity. Meanwhile, dialogue, persuasion,
diplomacy and the peaceful resolution of conflicts will
continue to be the guiding principles of my country's
conduct in the Council and the Organization, where our
collective responsibility will require that additional and
more sustained efforts be invested in prevention as a
broad approach towards lasting peace.

