Mr. Shaanika (Namibia): I will be brief. My
delegation joins other representatives, Mr. President,
in congratulating you on assuming the presidency of
the Council. We also commend you for scheduling this
important debate on United Nations peacekeeping. The
concept paper you circulated, on the theme "United
Nations peacekeeping: a multidimensional approach"
(S/2013/4, annex), has been very helpful in guiding
our deliberations today. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his insightful statement on this
important subject.

While my delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered by Ambassador Mootaz Ahmadein Khalil,
Permanent Representative of Egypt, on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement, I would like to make some
additional comments in my national capacity.

The nature and scope of United Nations
peacekeeping operations have evolved over the years
since the first deployment, in 1948. That evolution has
come with challenges and complexities. In order to
overcome challenges and meet the changing demands,
the creation of conditions enabling the success of
missions is essential at an early stage. Similarly, the
international community, in particular the Security
Council, must at all times muster the necessary political
will to a send clear message expressing its resolve to
act.

It is our conviction that peace is a cornerstone to the
foundation of sustainable development. It is therefore
essential that it be promoted and that, whenever it is
in danger, efforts be made to maintain and preserve it.
While each operation is unique, hard lessons from past
experiences can serve as guides in new operations to
avoid repeating past mistakes.

While peacekeeping continues to be an essential
means of assisting people in conflict areas suffering
from the scourge of war, strong emphasis should be
placed on prevention and peacebuilding. Once conflict
is resolved, the task of peacebuilding is equally
challenging. It often requires a number of corrective
measures by weighing reconciliation on the scales of
justice. Such efforts require well-trained, disciplined
and motivated personnel.

Regional and subregional organizations are equally
important partners in solving conflicts throughout
the world, as provided for under Chapter VI of the
Charter of the United Nations. It is therefore important
to strengthen the early-warning capacity of regional
organizations to monitor and detect potential conflicts
and contain them before they become full-blown.

The contribution of women in peacekeeping
operations requires special acknowledgement. Often,
women in peacekeeping missions serve as a source
of inspiration to women and girls in conflict-ridden
parts of the world. On its part, Namibia has heeded the
Secretary- General's call by nominating women to serve
in various United Nations peacekeeping missions.

While many conflicts today are between local
actors, external actors must refrain from fuelling
conflicts and instead use their influence to assist in
finding amicable solutions to conflicts. That is why
Namibia believes in respect for the sovereign equality
of all States. That principle constitutes a pillar of
international law, and indeed serves as the bedrock of
peaceful relations among nations.

Namibia was a beneficiary of a United Nations
peacekeeping mission between April 1989 and March
1990, when the United Nations Transitional Assistance
Group (UNTAG), composed of peacekeepers and
monitors from many parts of the world, assisted in
its transition to independence. Our experience has
demonstrated the importance of national ownership of
peacebuilding and the responsibility to guard it. The
success of UNTAG's mission also stimulated a sense of
responsibility for Namibia to play its modest role in the
maintenance of international peace and security.

My delegation wishes to highlight the importance
of enhancing cooperation among troop-contributing
countries, the Security Council and the Secretariat.
We believe that that will contribute to an inclusive and
informed decision-making process that could positively
impact ongoing peacekeeping operations.

In conclusion, let me also take this opportunity to
pay special tribute to the men and women from many
nations, including your own country of Pakistan,
Mr. President, who sacrificed their lives in the line
of duty while trying to bring peace to conflict-ridden
parts of the world. As we speak today, there are still
many peacekeepers on various missions trying their
best to make the world a better and more secure place
for us to live in. It is not an easy task. Yet, in the face
of multiple challenges, they always show an enduring
determination to bring hope to people in despair and
to put a smile on the faces of children in conflict areas.

