Mrs. Ratsifandrihamanana (spoke in French):
Through this message on behalf of the Chair of its
Commission, His Excellency Mr. Alpha Oumar
Konare', the African Union welcomes the convening of
this meeting. Its relevance is unanimously recognized
and we appreciate the initiative. The question for
consideration today has in recent years been given
significant attention, in particular by the Security
Council. That can be seen in the thematic debates to
which the Council has always invited us and which
have reflected the trust placed in regional organizations
with respect to the maintenance of international peace
and security.

Of course, before speaking of the role of regional
organizations in that area, recognition of the primary
responsibility of the Security Council is fundamental.
Regional organizations for their part, intervene to help
the United Nations and assume their share of the
burden as part of the legitimate framework of the
Charter of the Organization. They must act quickly in
order to immediately stabilize a given situation. They
then help to create conditions that are favourable for
the deployment by the United Nations of a
peacekeeping or peacebuilding operation, as part of a
shared role based on complementarity and solidarity.

The increased cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union and its subregional
organizations in the area of peacekeeping in Africa is
an achievement that should be built upon. We have
seen many positive experiences, such as the current
deployment of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur, the Security Council-
authorized deployment of the African Union Mission in
Somalia and the predominant role of the Economic
Community of West African States in crisis resolution
in Cote d'Ivoire and elsewhere in West Africa.

Because of the concrete concerted action by the
United Nations and the African Union in the area of
peacekeeping and peacebuilding, important milestones
have been put in place in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, the Comoros, Burundi, Liberia and Sierra
Leone. The majority of Security Council resolutions on
crises in Africa have been adopted on the basis of
recommendations made by the African Union. Finally,
the leadership of the African Union is increasingly
asserting its role in the coordination of political
dialogues and peace talks in crisis situations
throughout Africa.

All of those experiences display innovation,
flexibility and, above all, the mobilization of the
international community. Lessons of course are being
learned in order to bring about more effective conflict
management and to better coordination among the
various levels of the global peace and security
architecture.

It is time to implement the commitments already
undertaken in various legal instruments in the area of
the maintenance of international peace and security, in
particular with regard to the United Nations Ten-Year
Capacity-Building Programme for the African Union.
We must coordinate our initiatives in order to avoid
overlapping and duplication of efforts. The African
Union-United Nations partnership must be coherent -
which requires the harmonization of decision-making
procedures, joint strategic analysis and systematic
exchanges of information.

(spoke in English)

The realization of a peaceful, integrated and
progressive Africa is at the very heart of the African
Union, as provided for in its Constitutive Act. In order
to fully assume that responsibility, the African Union
has taken concrete steps to establish a comprehensive
continental architecture for the maintenance of peace
and security, including the Peace and Security Council
itself, the African Union common defence mechanism,
the African Stand-by Force, the African continental
early warning system and the Panel of the Wise.
The African Union, as members are aware, has
fully demonstrated its readiness to assume its share of
responsibility in the maintenance of international peace
and security through its efforts in various situations.
These were duly authorized by the Security Council
and were conducted with the material, logistical and
financial support of international partners. African
Union member States have shown enthusiasm in
responding to calls for troops and other personnel, as a
strong mark of their own commitment to international
peace and security. Using various mechanisms and
working in close cooperation with its subregional
organizations, the African Union continues to devote
significant efforts and leadership to address crises
around the continent.

One of the realities that have emerged from the
field experience of the African Union is the crucial
need for a sustainable mechanism for funding
peacekeeping operations conducted by regional
organizations on behalf of the Security Council. Our
shared aspiration - the establishment of a United
Nations mechanism, under Chapter VIII of the
Charter- reflects the constant desire of the Council
itself to strengthen regional organizations as key
partners in the effective discharge of its
responsibilities.

The absence of a predictable mechanism to
support peacekeeping efforts of regional organizations
may create an atmosphere conducive to the escalation
of hostilities. Also, delays in responding to a crisis
often result in the dislocation of the social fabric of
communities. This means that the most credible and
immediate opportunities for early peacemaking may be
lost, necessitating long, complex and expensive peace
processes at a later stage, as we have seen the cases of
Somalia and the Sudan. The Rwandan genocide
remains an indelible mark on our collective memory
concerning the lack of an early and effective response
to a crisis situation.

In that light, we therefore wish to reiterate our
call to the Security Council to take all necessary
measures to give greater impetus to the effective
establishment of a United Nations mechanism for
funding peacekeeping operations conducted on its
behalf by regional organizations. The Council is very
familiar with the strengths which regional
organizations bring. Our ability to fully leverage them
will be crucial for the effectiveness of the emerging
partnership in the maintenance of international peace
and security.

(spoke in French)

In conclusion, the debate that the Council has
begun accords with our aspiration to cooperate
resolutely with the United Nations, and in particular
with the Security Council, in the maintenance of
international peace and security. The Council's
initiative, above all, parallels the aspirations of all
African men and women to live in a world of harmony
and well-being.

