Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): I would first like
to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of November. I would also like to thank the Permanent
Representative of Guatemala and his delegation for the
manner in which they steered the work of the Council
in October.

Allow me to begin by expressing a warm welcome
to the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
(ICC), Ms. Fatou Bensouda, to congratulate her on her
assumption of her post and to thank her for her report
and the statement she made this morning.

South Africa supported and sponsored resolution
1970 (2011), which referred the situation in Libya to
the International Criminal Court, because we were
concerned that crimes against civilians were being
committed in the midst of the conflict in Libya and
wanted to see that the perpetrators would be held
accountable for their crimes. Our support for the referral
was based on our belief that the fight against impunity
and the promotion ofjustice are objectives that must be
pursued in our collective efforts to find enduring peace.
The referral was made in February 2011; the decision
to initiate prosecutions was made within weeks of
the referral. By June 2011 the Pre-Trial Chamber had
issued arrest warrants against Muammar Al-Qadhafi,
Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi. To
date, however, actual justice remains elusive. Indeed,
while there was a flurry ofjustice-related activities in
the early days, it appears that the wheels of justice began
to grind more slowly with the end of the conflict. For
us, the need for justice does not end with the cessation
of hostilities. If that were so, justice would not be an
end in itself but only a means to an end.

We have taken note of the admissibility challenge
initiated by Libya before the Court. South Africa,
as a focal point on complementarity, encourages
domestic prosecution as the first option for ensuring
justice. In particular, as a court of last resort, the
ICC should intervene only where a national system
is genuinely unable or unwilling to prosecute. In that
context, we would be grateful if the Prosecutor could
share with us what the general attitude of her Office
is to the admissibility challenge initiated by Libya.
Does the Office of the Prosecutor believe that the
complementarity test has been met? Was the submission
filed by the Office of the Prosecutor supportive of the
admissibility challenge, or did it challenge the claims of
inadmissibility? In her answers to those questions, we
would be grateful, in the light of the inactivity test of
the Court, if the Prosecutor could share whether, to her
knowledge, prosecutions of Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi
have been initiated in Libya, particularly as concerns
Law 38, to which she referred this morning.

My delegation has stressed, since the first report
presented by the Prosecutor, that we should call for
investigations by the Office of the Prosecutor to cover
all criminal acts committed by all participants in the
conflict. We have noted that the Office ofthe Prosecutor
continues to analyse information relating to atrocities
allegedly committed by the rebel forces, as outlined in,
among other things, the report of the United Nations
International Commission of Inquiry in Libya. We hope
that the analysis will be speedily completed, and we
applaud the Prosecutor's comments to the effect that a
decision will be made in the near future.

