Mr. Buallay (B ahrain)(spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
my delegation would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing this Security Council meeting, as part of the
remarkable efforts being made presently by your delegation.

My delegation would also like to welcome the
personal presence of the Members of the Presidency of
Bosnia and Herzegovina in the Security Council. Indeed,
this is a golden opportunity for Council members, an
opportunity we could not even have dreamed of in the
past. Their presence here today is a clear indication of the
progress made in the peace process in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. It is also indicative of the recognition of the
efforts of the Security Council in particular, and of the
United Nations in general, as the Members of the
Presidency have just expressed, in facing a complicated
situation in a war-torn country attempting repeatedly to
obtain peace. Through difficult negotiations, the signing
of the Dayton Agreement was finally achieved in 1995.

The United Nations efforts did have a cost - a very
high cost, at times - such as the loss of life. We express
our sincere condolences to the families of World Food
Programme personnel who met their death in the recent
airplane accident over Kosovo.

Since the signing of the Dayton Peace Agreement,
concrete progress has been made in the area of refugee
return, in institution-building, judicial reform, economic
regeneration and in other areas. However, more progress
must be made for life to be normal again. This requires
cooperation and concerted efforts on the part of all, the
closing of the dark past, the opening of a new page - a
new era - of understanding and a true desire to live in
peace in a multi-ethnic, multi-cultural society. This is
what the Security Council expects from the Presidency of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

For international support to continue for peace
efforts in Bosnia, the Bosnians themselves must redouble
their efforts to settle their own differences. We urge the
Bosnian Presidency to cooperate fully with the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
Office of the High Representative to implement the Peace
Accords in Bosnia and Herzegovina and to coordinate
efforts in order to overcome the current difficulties.
As for refugee return, my delegation believes that
much has to be done to ensure the full return of refugees
of all ethnic backgrounds to their homes. This requires
the protection of returnees, the provision of a secure
environment and opportunities for work. We believe that
progress achieved in the area of property law will help in
this regard.

As for the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, for prosecution of war criminals, the issue
was raised today by the Bosnian Presidency. It is an issue
that we have raised, too, in this Council on a number of
occasions, including just last week during the statement
made by Ms. Carla Del Ponte, the Prosecutor of the

 

Tribunal. The principal indictees remain at large. They
perpetrated their crimes in Bosnia and Herzegovina, then
they moved on to Kosovo. Where is justice to be found
here? We are fully in favour of just forgiveness that would
lead to stability in Bosnia. However, the magnitude and
barbarity of those crimes require that the perpetrators be
prosecuted.

We reaffirm the need to support the Tribunal and to
assist it in arresting the perpetrators of crimes against
humanity in Bosnia and Herzegovina. They must be
prosecuted, especially the big fish among them. My
delegation agrees with the Chair of the Presidency of
Bosnia and Herzegovina regarding local criminal courts.
We also believe that these local courts do not have the
capacity to undertake such a difficult task. In addition, we
believe that these tasks fall within the jurisdiction of the
International Tribunal.

The border police, economic reform, the fight against
corruption, the settlement of the problem of mines - all
these are issues that require further efforts. The
international community can help the Bosnians to resolve
these problems.

On the other hand, the Dayton Peace Agreement is the
only alternative, that is, the best means currently available
to resolve the problems of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Therefore, we call on all parties concerned in Bosnia and
Herzegovina to hold fast to that Agreement. We call upon
them to make all possible efforts to ensure that all the
provisions of the Agreement are implemented in all
sincerity and in good faith.

This meeting today is indicative of a collective will to
overcome the current problems in order to ensure full
implementation of the Dayton Agreement, followed by
concrete steps that would enable Bosnia and Herzegovina
to regain its material and moral force to live in peace - a
peace necessary for economic and social development in
the country.

Finally, we welcome the New York Declaration agreed
upon by the Bosnian Presidency last night.

