Mr. Apakan (Turkey): Finding a comprehensive
and just solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is a
requirement for stability, security and endurable peace
in the Middle East. The status quo is not viable. At a
time when the whole region is undergoing a structural
reformation, the conflict cannot remain at a standstill.

During the past three months, when the focus has
remained mainly on developments in Syria, settlement
activities in the occupied Palestinian territories have
continued unabated. Such activities obstruct the
revitalization of the peace process and seriously
endanger the vision of a two-State solution, thus
destroying the basis of the prospects for peace.

The efforts of the Israeli authorities to legitimize
the settlements in the context of Israeli law do not alter
that fact. Moreover, at its most recent meeting on
11 April, the Quartet called not only for an end to
settlement activities and settler violence but also for
the reunification of Gaza and the West Bank. In any
case, resort to violence by any party can in no way be
tolerated as a way to overcome existing disputes.

The situation of Palestinian prisoners inside
Israeli prisons also needs urgent attention. The keeping
under arrest of elected members of the Palestinian
Legislative Council remains of significant concern.
Such policies of Israel raise further doubts regarding
its sincerity towards the peace process.

We deplore the dangerous escalation of violence
in the Gaza Strip in recent months due to Israel's
attacks. Israel's disproportionate and indiscriminate
retaliatory moves, causing civilian casualties and
injuries, cannot be accepted. I also recall the grave
situation of housing, health and other primary services
in Gaza, and reiterate our call for the lifting of the
illegal embargo.

The international community must ensure that
there is accountability, both for the blockade and for
Israel's attack on the international humanitarian aid
flotilla on the high seas. In such circumstances, we
hope that the letter sent last week by President Abbas
to Prime Minister Netanyahu can pave the way for
sincere progress in the Middle East process. We hope
that Israel will seize the opportunity and contribute to
building a constructive atmosphere.

Concurrently, Turkey will continue to promote
efforts towards achieving unity in Palestine. Palestinian
national reconciliation is of critical importance in
terms of ensuring comprehensive and sustainable peace
and stability. For that reason, the reconciliation to be
concluded by and the holding of free, fair and
transparent elections in Palestine should be supported
without prejudice by all members of the international
community.

I would also like to refer to the grave situation in
Syria, which is yet another factor of instability in the
region. We attribute the utmost importance to the
immediate, visible, verifiable and indisputable
implementation of resolutions 2042 (2012) and 2043
(2012), including all aspects of the six-point plan of
the Joint Special Envoy, Mr. Kofi Annan, which has
offered a promising window of opportunity. We hope
that the Syrian Government shall immediately take all
the necessary steps. We call for an immediate end to
the violence. In this respect, the primary responsibility
rests with the Syrian Government. Turkey, together
with other members of the international community,
will continue to follow closely the developments in
Syria.

Turkey has, from the beginning, taken sides with
the democratic aspirations of the peoples of the Middle
East in their struggle for a better life and to live in
societies where human rights receive due respect, the
rule of law prevails, and the people take part in the
shaping of their destiny. It is our view that this same
principle must apply to the aspirations of the
Palestinians, which should not go unanswered any
longer. The Palestinian people must, as soon as
possible, be able to fully exercise their inalienable
rights in accordance with the numerous United Nations
resolutions, the Madrid principles, the Road Map and
the Arab Peace Initiative. Palestinians must attain their
goal of an independent State based on the 1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, living side
by side with Israel in peace.

Turkey welcomes and strongly supports the
Palestinian application for full-fledged United Nations
membership submitted by President Mahmoud Abbas
on 23 September 2011, and believes that it is high time
for Palestine to take its rightful place in the
international arena among the community of nations.

