Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the Secretary-General for his
briefing on peacebuilding in the aftermath of conflict.
We have carefully considered the relevant report
(S/20l2/746). We would specifically like to thank the
Permanent Representative of Bangladesh, Mr. Momen,
for his productive chairing of the Peacebuilding
Commission in 2012.

There is no doubt that, in order to be effective,
peacebuilding support must be provided in a timely and
adequate fashion and must be focused on addressing
those tasks that are directly related to eradicating the
root causes of the conflict. An absolute priority in
this sense must be compliance with the principles of
respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
post-conflict countries, as well as the identification of
national peacebuilding responsibilities and priorities.
A lead role in meeting those responsibilities must be
played by the Government of the country concerned.

An important priority in peacebuilding is assistance
in restoring security in countries where national armies
or police are not able to fully carry out their functions.
In such cases, assisting in the reform of the security
sector, programmes of demobilization, reintegration
and disarmament as well as demining are crucial.
Closely related to that is the need to restore the rule
of law in post-conflict countries. Core responsibilities
for addressing those tasks rest with the national judicial
mechanisms. However, United Nations support can be
provided in building the requisite capacities.

The end of the critical phase of a crisis that was
rooted in a conflict between political forces or national
or sectarian groups does not yet mean that the process
of national reconciliation is on track. Consolidating
achieved outcomes can take many years and require the
international community to take additional efforts by
providing mediation services or assisting in electoral
processes. In the post-conflict phase, it is important to
take into account more than just political aspects, in
that assistance in economic development, addressing
urgent social challenges and job creation are critical
factors in mitigating political contradictions. A
particular role here must be played by United Nations
funds and programmes. Many factors in conflicts are
regional in dimension. They include organized crime,
inter-ethnic or inter-tribal frictions, drug trafficking,
and the transboundary spread of weapons, which
call for appropriate reactions from the international
community.

Peacebuilding assistance is not limited only to the
activities that I have mentioned. The nature of conflict
is diverse, and therefore assistance in eradicating the
causes, so that measures can be more effective, must be
tailored to each country, taking into account the unique
nature of each.

In the United Nations, through peacekeeping
operations,thePeacebuildingCommission(PBC) offices
and the PBC country configurations, a great amount of
peacebuilding effort is under way. Those activities come
with considerable challenges and complexities and call
for the coordinated efforts of States, United Nations
funds and programmes, regional organizations, the
United Nations Secretariat and international financial
institutions. To date, however, international assistance
has, for the most part, been fragmented. Clearly, there
is a need to improve coordination and the division of
labour between the participants in those processes and
a need to systematize the peacebuilding processes,
including enhancing the efforts of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture.

The compilation of the United Nations experience
and analysing it would be extremely useful for the
adoption of decisions in the area of peacebuilding and
for enhancing its effectiveness. We are convinced that
identifying new priorities or areas of peacebuilding
should be based on specific results in the field.
Attempts to agree on common or general approaches
in peacebuilding are being undertaken. For example,
in September a contact group on the rule of law was
established between the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and United Nations Development
Programme. We hope that the United Nations Secretariat
will inform us on the activities of the mechanism. The
idea of transition pacts also needs some preliminary
analysis.

A particular role in the coordination of
peacebuilding support for post-conflict countries lies
with the United Nations Peacebuilding Commission.
It has considerable experience in direct dialogue with
national Governments, bolstered by instruments for
mutual oversight over the implementation of obligations
and the coordination of efforts by international players
in achieving the priorities identified by post-conflict
countries. Here too, we are certain that, beyond the
activities of the country configurations, the PBC
could be more actively involved in the discussion
of system-wide issues, such as the transition from
peacekeeping to peacebuilding and the leveraging of
national and international civilian capacities in post-
conflict periods. The sending of skilled civilian experts
to post-conflict areas is an important instrument in
peacebuilding activities. However, the establishment
of new mechanisms in the United Nations to make
use of such expertsor to change existing mechanisms
needs to be carried out with the oversight and consent
of Member States. The mandates must be made clear
and there must be clarity in the rules of selection so
as to ensure the high qualifications of such experts.
For our part, we will be ready to take an active part in
peacebuilding activities in the United Nations and in
constructive discussions of the issues of international
assistance in the post-conflict restoration of countries
and regions that are affected by armed conflicts.

