Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to welcome His Excellency Mr. Riek
Machar Teny-Dhurgon, Vice-President of the Republic
of South Sudan, and to thank him and Ambassador Ali
Osman for their statements and Mr. Le Roy for his
briefing.

The transition period ended several days ago,
thereby completing the implementation of most
provisions of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement
after more than 20 years of war, destruction and
suffering that led to the deaths of 2 million people.

In Juba last Saturday, the entire world witnessed
the great celebration at which the creation of the
Republic of South Sudan was declared, in accordance
with the outcome of the referendum of 9 January. The
President of the Sudan, Mr. Omar Al-Bashir, was
present, with all of the great symbolism that that
entails. The positive atmosphere was due to the fact
that the parties to the Comprehensive Peace Agreement
fulfilled their commitments and that there was careful
follow-up from many regional and international
organizations, including the United Nations, the
African Union and the League of Arab States.

We commend the efforts and great sacrifices
made by all the parties. Today more than ever before,
we would like to stress that dialogue should continue,
as should negotiations on all outstanding issues,
including the final settlement of the issue of Abyei, the
sharing of oil wealth, the delineation of the border and
the situation in Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile.

Cooperation in the relationship between North
and South is a crucial issue, given the bonds and the
deep common interests that unite both peoples.
Therefore, there needs to be an ongoing commitment to
working together, which will have a positive impact on
stability in the region.

We would also like to commend the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan for the important role it
played over the past six years. In this respect, we
welcome the efforts of Mr. Menkerios and express our
thanks and gratitude to former President Mbeki and all
those who took part in good offices missions in the
Sudan.

We would also highlight at this time the
importance of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur and the efforts of
Mr. Gambari and Mr. Bassole. We thank the State of
Qatar for the efforts it has undertaken with respect to
the peace talks on Darfur. We call on all parties to sign
the document from the Doha meeting and ensure that
the ceasefire is implemented and that Darfur-related
issues are addressed. This will contribute to
establishing peace and stability not only in the Sudan,
but also in South Sudan.

We congratulate South Sudan today, here in this
United Nations forum, on having created an
independent State through the exercise of their right to
self-determination, as stipulated in the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement and in Article 1, paragraph 2 of the
United Nations Charter and enshrined in common
article 1 of the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights and the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.

On that basis, we hope to see the brotherly
Palestinian people, with the support of the international
community, achieve their right to self-determination
and exercise this inalienable right on their national
territory. Palestinians would thus be able to achieve
their aspiration to enjoy peace and security in an
independent State, with Jerusalem as its capital. We
would like to be able to welcome that State, too, among
us as a sovereign State Member of the United Nations.

