Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): Before I make our
general statement, allow me to present Indonesia's
position on the resolution that the Council has just
adopted. My delegation voted in favour of resolution
1851 (2008) as a reflection of its recognition of the
gravity of the threat of piracy in the waters off
Somalia. In doing so, however, we do not lose sight of
the fact that, in the final analysis, the solution to that
threat lies with Somalia itself. Thus we wish to
underscore once again the need to promote conditions
conducive to the promotion of the political process in
that country.

In that connection, we would like to underline the
need to ensure that the measures foreseen in paragraph
6 of the resolution do not inadvertently complicate the
search for such a political solution to the crisis in
Somalia. We also wish to underline the need to ensure
that the measures foreseen in the same paragraph do
not exacerbate the humanitarian situation in the
country and are taken in full compliance with
applicable international humanitarian and human rights
law.

Furthermore, we wish to emphasize that there
exists a range of measures to address the threat of
piracy in Somalia. In other words, the resolution is not
exclusively about the use of forcible measures. We
wish to highlight in particular the importance of legal
enforcement measures.

My delegation commends the recognition in the
resolution of the need to promote coordination between
States and regional organizations fighting the threat of
piracy in Somalia, as well as the recognition of the
importance of building Somalia's national capacity to
deal with that menace.

My delegation wishes to underscore that, first and
foremost, the measures contemplated under the
resolution, as with other previous resolutions, stem
from the request of the State concerned, namely,
Somalia.

Finally, our support for the resolution is based on
the fact that it is focused on Somalia and spells out
clearly that its provisions shall not affect the rights,
obligations or responsibilities of Member States under
international law, including under the 1982 United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, and shall
not be considered as establishing customary
international law.

