Mr. Onanga-Anyanga: I thank you, Madam President, for this opportunity to brief the Security Council on progress in the implementation of resolution 2046 (2012), which concerns outstanding bilateral issues between the Sudan and South Sudan and the situation in South Kordofan and Blue Nile states. The global coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has continued to impact health and human and socioeconomic developments in Sudan and South Sudan. With the closure of airspaces and land borders and the continuous enforcement of other restrictive measures to contain the spread of the virus, even our in-person engagements with the authorities were severely limited. Nevertheless, thanks to virtual communication, I was able to engage substantively with a significant number of high-level officials in the two countries and the region. The drastic preventive measures applied by countries of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development at the start of the pandemic appear to have been successful in weakening the spread of COVID-19 in the region. The focus of the response has now shifted to economic recovery and restoring people's livelihoods. With the reopening of airports, I was able to visit the Sudan from 13 to 16 October. I held very fruitful consultations with Government officials, including Prime Minister Abdalla Hamdok; the Chairperson of the Sovereign Council, General Abdel Fattah Abdelrahman AlI-Burhan; and with the Ministers for Foreign Affairs, of Defence and of Irrigation; the Chairman of the opposition National Unionist Party; the Deputy Chairman of the Sudan People's Liberation Army/Movement -North; the chief negotiator of the Justice and Equality Movement; and the Peace Commissioner. A projected visit to South Sudan could not take place before this briefing. I was nevertheless able to speak with Minister Deng Alor, who is responsible for the Abyei file, in South Sudan. I am happy to report that the relationship between the Sudan and South Sudan continues to strengthen. It is in that context that at the beginning of September, the Sudan and South Sudan agreed to review all their 2012 cooperation agreements with immediate effect. Following a 2 September meeting, South Sudan dispatched a high-level mission to Khartoum on 6 September to initiate bilateral discussions, including on Abyei. While neither party disclosed the outcomes, there was an understanding that further talks on Abyei would take place alternately in both countries. I would like to take this opportunity to recognize the pivotal role that the Interim Security Force for Abyei continues to play in maintaining stability in Abyei under very challenging circumstances. The flagship event during the reporting period was the signing in Juba of a peace agreement on 3 October between the Government of the Sudan, the Sudanese Revolutionary Front alliance and the Sudan Liberation Army-Minni Minawi faction. The agreement was the culmination of a peace process launched in Juba in October 2019 under the auspices of President Kiir, who is also its guarantor, alongside President Idriss Deby Itno of Chad. Among other things, the agreement covers key region-specific and national issues related to governance, security arrangements, land ownership, transitional justice and the return of displaced persons. During my visit to Khartoum, I gathered that there is a strong will to make the Juba agreement a real success. There is commitment and clear political will to accelerate the implementation process and demonstrate to the non-signatory movements of Abdel Aziz Al-Hilu and Abdel Wahid Al-Nur that peace is the only way forward for a prosperous, stable and just Sudan that caters for all its people. While in Khartoum, I was also able to meet with the deputy chief mediator for the Juba process, Mr. Dhieu Mathok of South Sudan. He expressed optimism that the core demands of the Sudan People's Liberation Movement-North faction under Abdel Aziz Al-Hilu are being considered for resolution. Building on Prime Minister Hamdok's peace efforts and the signing in Addis Ababa with Al-Hilu of a joint declaration subsequently endorsed by the High Council of Peace in the Sudan, informal workshops to flesh out the details of the issues of secularism, the status of the Sudanese People's Liberation Army during the transition, self- determination in case the peace agreement is not honoured and terms for a national constitutional conference to endorse those provisions will start soon in Juba, I am told next week, between the Government of the Sudan and Al-Hilu. Furthermore, during my meetings in Khartoum, the Chair of the Sovereign Council, the Prime Minister, members of the negotiation team, the Peace Commissioner, the leadership of the Forces for Freedom and Change, and the South Sudanese mediators all vowed to spare no effort to bring onboard the Sudan Liberation Movement faction led by Abdel Wahid Al-Nur, so as to ensure a fully comprehensive agreement. One immediate effect of the Juba agreement will be the reactivation of the four freedoms between the Sudan and South Sudan, namely, freedom of residence, freedom of movement, freedom to undertake an economic activity and freedom to own and dispose of property. That will enable citizens to move, conduct business, settle and transfer or own assets in either country freely or with minimal transaction costs. The Sudanese Minister of Defence pledged that the Sudan would meet its commitment to open the border crossing points on 27 October. I am told, as we speak, that the two Ministers of Defence are currently meeting in Khartoum. Measures taken to open the dry port in Kosti and to relaunch commercial river transport operations and other crossing points would allow for the free movement of goods and services between the two countries. They would also enable the Sudan to accelerate trade with South Sudan and compete in this market with other neighbouring countries. In the meantime, the African Union has indicated its intention to convene the Joint Border Commission soon and has encouraged both countries to resume high-level meetings such as the Joint Security Committee and the Joint Political and Security Mechanism. In his address at the agreement-signing ceremony on 3 October, President Kiir reiterated that he agreed to mediate the conflict also because he was aware that peace in the Sudan would have a positive bearing on South Sudan's security. As the countries are now strengthening their relationship, they are no longer likely to pursue activities that undermine each other's stability. On the contrary, I am aware that, building on the Rome peace efforts led by the Sant'Egidio community, the Sudan is currently embarking on an attempt to mediate between General Thomas Cirillo of the National Salvation Front and the Government of South Sudan. Authorities in both countries are confident that all outstanding bilateral issues between their countries, including Abyei and the resolution of the situation in South Kordofan and Blue Nile states, will benefit from the friendly relationships and the mutual trust they are now enjoying. Meanwhile, the two countries have continued to develop fruitful cooperation in the area of oil. On 28 September, they signed a protocol to resume oil production in the Unity and Toma South fields, with 15,000 barrels per day expected to be produced very soon. The deal includes details on the transfer of crude oil to the Sudan for its domestic use. In return, the Sudan will provide technical support. Before the agreement, South Sudan was providing 30,000 barrels per day of crude oil to the Sudan. The deal is in line with South Sudan's plan to return to its pre-conflict production level of 350,000 barrels per day from its current 150,000 per day. To conclude, the warm relations that I have outlined between the Sudan and South Sudan also provide an opportunity for the international community to strengthen further its engagements with both countries as they continue to grapple with their internal challenges, which have always constrained their bilateral relations. In South Sudan, the implementation of the peace agreement remains deadlocked on several substantive issues on which the parties may need some support to move forward. For its part, the Sudan has embarked on the right path and demonstrated the political will to resolve its multiple conflicts. Now more than ever before, it also needs our collective support to overcome some of the obstacles that are likely to hinder a smooth transition and the implementation of the peace process. It is in that context that we welcome the announcement by the United States Government on 20 October to initiate the removal of the Sudan from the States sponsors of terrorism list. Nowhere is such support more vital than on the economic front, in order both to advance much-needed reforms and meet the basic needs of the population. I left Khartoum last Friday with mixed feelings - hopeful about the unprecedented drive for peace and deeply concerned about the sight of endless fuel and bread queues. Without concrete peace dividends, the legitimate aspirations for freedom and shared prosperity of the Sudanese people may be in jeopardy. My Office will continue to engage with the authorities of both countries and, as appropriate, with key regional actors, including the African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, to encourage further progress on the implementation of all cooperation agreements and the peace processes in both countries.
