Mr. Sotirov (Bulgaria): I would like to welcome
the substantive contribution to this Security Council
meeting of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), Mr.
Hans Haekkerup. I wish him every success in the
fulfilment of his difficult tasks.

As Bulgaria has aligned itself with the statement
made by the Permanent Representative of Sweden on
behalf of the European Union, I would like to make
only brief comments as representative of a country
neighbouring both the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
and the Republic of Macedonia.

Bulgaria welcomes the report of the Secretary-
General on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo, contained in document S/2001/218.
We commend the continued implementation by
UNMIK of Security Council resolution 1244 (1999)
and would like especially to point out that the Mission
began to shift the focus away from rehabilitation
efforts to political and economic reconstruction.
However, the Bulgarian Government is deeply
concerned over the ongoing ethnically motivated
violence in Kosovo. There will be no substantive
results in political and economic capacity-building
without inter-ethnic tolerance and dialogue.

Being concerned with the security situation in the
ground safety zone in southern Serbia, we welcome the
ceasefire agreement signed on 12 March 2001 as a
positive step in the right direction.

Bulgaria has already had the opportunity to
express its solidarity with the Republic of Macedonia
at a moment when its territorial integrity and security
are at stake. We consider that the stability of that State
is vital for security in the region. It is of key
importance that the territorial integrity of the Republic
of Macedonia, within its internationally recognized
borders, be preserved and strengthened. We commend
the Macedonian Government for its restraint and for its
search for political and diplomatic means to face the
existing threats. It is encouraging that all responsible
political actors in the Republic of Macedonia have
supported the constructive approach of the Government
and the President in tackling the situation.

The recent provocative terrorist events, including
the acts in Tetovo, however, aim to disturb the inter-
ethnic relations in the Republic of Macedonia.
Therefore, we share the view of the Macedonian
Government that urgent measures to stop the escalation
of violence and to calm the situation are necessary.

In this regard, the Bulgarian Government
reconfirms its position that the political and material
isolation of the extremists is of utmost importance in
order to bring the conflict to an end. Moreover, in our
view, the solution of the problems in the conflict zones
along the border between the Republic of Macedonia
and the Kosovo section of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia is to be found in the active involvement of
the Kosovo Force (KFOR), which should take all
appropriate measures to disrupt the supply sources of
the extremists and prevent the smuggling of weapons
and military equipment over the border.

The international community, including the
countries from the region, should assume its high
responsibilities for the stability of the Republic of
Macedonia and should prevent further destabilization
emanating from Kosovo. Bulgaria is actively
contributing to peace and security in south-eastern
Europe. In this context we are rendering military and
technical assistance to the Republic of Macedonia.
I would like to assure the Council that the
Bulgarian Government will further support any
concrete steps for the full implementation of Security
council resolution 1244 (1999), including the
endeavours undertaken by Mr. Haekkerup and his staff,
and will spare no effort in continuing and developing
its active role in promoting regional stability and
cooperation.

