Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank
all of today's briefers - Under-Secretary-General
Rosemary DiCarlo; Ambassador Joao Vale de Almeida;
and Ambassador Karel van Oosterom, in his capacity
as Security Council Facilitator for the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015) - for their respective reports.

We believe that it is in our common interest to
stabilize the situation in the Middle East, reduce
tension in the region and, most important, prevent the
further proliferation of nuclear weapons. In our view,
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) is
an important step towards achieving the objective
of a nuclear non-proliferation, as it provides the
international community with verification mechanisms
to monitor the Iranian nuclear programme. Moreover,
it has become an important element of the global
non-proliferation architecture.

Poland welcomes the fifth semi-annual report
(S/20l8/602) of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015). We note
that the International Atomic Energy Agency has
reported that Iran is implementing its nuclear-related
commitments under the JCPOA and the fact that the
Agency itself continues to verify the non-diversion of
declared nuclear material and the absence of undeclared
nuclear material and activities in Iran.

We call on Iran to continue to implement the
Additional Protocols to its Safeguards Agreement.
It is important for Iran to continue to abide by the
terms of the JCPOA. The recent declaration by Iran
about increasing its capacity to produce uranium
hexafluoride does not constitute a violation of the
agreement, but neither does it contribute to building
confidence. At the same time, Poland shares concerns
about Iranian activities undertaken that run contrary
to the provisions of annex B contained in resolution
2231 (2015), as accurately reported by the Secretary-
General. The JCPOA does not explicitly prohibit
the development of delivery systems, or address the
question ofIranian influence in the region, which some
countries perceive as negative. In that connection, Iran
should refrain from actions that are not in spirit of the
JCPOA and could undermine the implementation of
commitments under the Plan. The series of short- and
medium-range ballistic missile tests conducted by Iran
and reported missile transfers, as well as some of Iran's
other activities in the region, are a source of concern for
us. They risk deepening mistrust and are inconsistent
with the spirit of resolution 2231 (2015).

We recognize the procurement channel and the
Procurement Working Group as essential parts of the
JCPOA and a significant transparency measure under
the Plan. Poland supports the procurement channel and
believes that its proper functioning ensures conformity
of the relevant transfers in connection with the JCPOA
and resolution 2231 (2015) and contributes to supporting
the non-proliferation regime.

Last but not least, I would like to thank Ambassador
Karel van Oosterom for his balanced and scrupulous
report. I would like to recognize his diligent efforts in
facilitating the important, yet challenging, format ofthe
Security Council by - as he described - promoting
talks, transparency and trade in order to fully implement
resolution 2231 (2015).

