Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Foreign Minister Ndiaye for presiding over
the Security Council's open debate on water, peace and
security. My thanks also go to Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his briefing. China listened carefully to the
briefings by Mr. Tiirk, Chair of the Global High-Level
Panel on Water and Peace; Ms. Beerli, Vice-President
of the International Committee of the Red Cross; and
Mr. Waslekar, President of Strategic Foresight Group.

Water is indispensable to human survival and
to sustainable economic and social development.
In recent years, climate change and environmental
degradation have led to frequent natural disasters. In
some countries there is a severe shortage of drinking
water. The problem of water scarcity is increasingly
acute and prominent. That is not only a development
issue, it also has a bearing on peace and security. The
international community should approach the issue by
making efforts in three areas.

First, it must strengthen the preservation,
development and management of water resources in
order to remove the root causes of conflicts driven
by water scarcity. All countries should prioritize
the safeguarding of peace and security, strengthen
cooperation with others, improve scientific development
of water resources and allocate water resources
reasonably and conserve and efficiently use them.
They should comprehensively upgrade their water-
security-related capabilities so that the sharing of water
resources can actually enhance mutually beneficial
cooperation. In that way, we can also avoid friction and
conflicts caused by water scarcity.

Secondly, we must engage in in-depth international
cooperation on water resources. The international
community should, via cooperation platforms such as
the World Water Forum, conscientiously implement
international consensus on water and sustainable
development. Support should be given to the Global
High-Level Panel on Water and Peace and the United
Nations and World Bank High-Level Panel on Water
and other, similar mechanisms in their efforts to
actively promote international cooperation in that area.

The international community should provide further
assistance to African countries, including by helping
regional organizations such as the Senegal River Basin
Development Organization and the Gambia River Basin
Development Organization to comprehensively proceed
with the preservation, development and utilization
of transboundary water resources. African countries
should be assisted in enhancing the development
of water conservation infrastructure to benefit the
African people. Fundamentally speaking, ensuring
that everyone has access to safe water is an important
safeguard for peace and security. The relevant United
Nations bodies should strengthen their coordination
and fully carry out their respective responsibilities
and duties.

Thirdly, dialogue and cooperation must be
strengthened in order to appropriately address issues
relatedto transboundarywaterresources. Transboundary
water resources affect the common well-being of
countries on the lower and upper reaches of river basins.
Parties should start by safeguarding regional peace
and stability and regional common development and
should be committed to strengthening coordination and
communication so as to promote mutually beneficial
cooperation. The relevant United Nations bodies and
regional and subregional organizations should, at the
request of the countries concerned, play a positive
and active role in transboundary water resources
cooperation by facilitating dialogue, cooperation and
concerted actions among countries so as to contribute
to the well-being of people living in river basins.

China places great emphasis on helping African
countries and peoples to resolve water shortage
problems. Within the framework of the Forum on
China-Africa Cooperation, we have implemented
dozens of well-drilling projects in Africa to supply
water, including 100 clean energy projects, so as to
help African countries to enhance their capacity-
building in meteorological infrastructure and improve
the preservation and management of their forests.
China has also engaged in technical dialogue with
other relevant countries to strengthen the exchange
of experiences and help those countries develop plans
regarding the use of water resources, flood control and
disaster reduction, while helping them to upgrade their
abilities to manage and develop water resources.

China stands ready to work together with the rest of
the international community to promote the sustainable
development and utilization of water resources and to
promote peace and security in a bid to realize peace,
stability, development and the prosperity of humankind.

