Mrs. Hoppe: Today's Security Council debate
demonstrates the Council's continued determination,
and that of those who took the floor during the open
debate, to address the problem of illicit small arms and
light weapons, as those weapons play a central role in
fuelling conflict and spreading instability.

I would like to thank everyone who welcomed the
report of the Secretary-General on initiatives taken to
implement the 12 recommendations contained in his
earlier report (S/2002/1053).

With the review conference on the Programme of
Action on Small Arms and Light Weapons taking place
in a few months, this debate was very timely. All the
statements delivered underlined the support of Member
States for, and the importance of, full implementation
of the Programme of Action on the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons.

In that connection, the Secretariat is encouraged
by the Council's commitment to strengthen interaction
between the Council and the General Assembly in
order to contribute to developing a coherent and
comprehensive United Nations policy on small arms
and light weapons.

The Secretariat also welcomes the Council's
recognition of the importance of addressing the issues
of ammunition and end-user certificates, as well as the
link between illicit weapons and the illegal exploitation
of natural resources.

I would like to note the Council's resolve to
strengthen the monitoring mechanism for arms
embargoes as a means of contributing to curbing the
proliferation of small arms and light weapons. I have
taken note of the various specific proposals made in
that regard.

I would also like to underscore that the steps
being taken to enhance international cooperation to
prevent, combat and eradicate illicit brokering in small
arms and light weapons should be complemented by
measures to control brokering at the national level,
including by adopting adequate national legislation on
brokering.

The Secretariat looks forward to the outcome of this There are no further speakers inscribed on my
debate, and in particularloyourefforts,Mr. President. list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
k present stage of its consideration of the item on its

The Prestdent (spoke in Spanish): 1 than agenda.

Mrs. Hoppe for the clarifications she has provided.
The meeting rose at 4 15p.m.
