Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): We thank the Moroccan
delegation for organizing and presiding over today's
important debate on the situation in the Sahel region.
Mr. Othmani's presence here today demonstrates the
seriousness that the Kingdom of Morocco attaches to
long-term peace and stability of that region. We would
also like to thank the Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for the Sahel, Mr. Romano Prodi, and the High
Commissioner for Refugees, Mr. Antonio Guterres, for
their briefings and welcome the Secretary-General for
his participation here today.

At the same time, South Africa commends ongoing
efforts by regional leaders in the Sahel, in particular the
African Union and its Special Envoy, President Buyoya,
and the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), aimed at addressing the situation in the
region.

The situation in the Sahel constitutes a serious
threat to security and stability on the African
continent, as well as to international peace and
security. That region has, over the last few months,
endured enormous and complex challenges, including
continued instability in some countries, increased
terrorist activities, transnational criminal activities,
a worsening humanitarian situation and a persistent
food crisis. In that context, my delegation recognizes
the interconnectedness of the challenges that the region
is facing; they are complex in nature. My delegation
continues to be concerned by the growing threat posed
by terrorist groups and criminal elements in the region,
as well as drugs, weapons and human trafficking,
which are providing the financial wherewithal for their
activities.

The African Union Peace and Security Council
noted that those challenges had been aggravated by
developments in the Maghreb region, especially the
crisis in Libya, the influx of internally displaced
persons and the increase in transnational organized
crimes and the proliferation of weapons. It is for that
reason that the international community should work
closely with the African Union, countries of the Sahel
region and ECOWAS in addressing the situation.

We are also concerned about the deteriorating
humanitarian situation in the region. It is reported
that humanitarian agencies will require more than
$800 million to respond effectively to the food security
and nutrition crisis facing the region. The situation is
further exacerbated by the presence of terrorist groups
in northern Mali, which has prompted massive internal
displacement of the population and has created over
400,000 refugees. In March, during the Peace and
Security Council meeting held in Bamako, our Minister
for Foreign Affairs, Ms. Maite Nkoana-Mashabane,
committed South Africa to assisting the Governments
of the Niger, Mauritania, Mali and Chad to overcome
the current drought and food insecurity. So far, between
September and October, South Africa has delivered
more 100 tons of maize power boosts - nutrition for
children. South Africa's shipments to Mali, a part ofthe
full humanitarian support package, will be taking place
within the next few weeks.

The challenges that the Sahel region is facing
require a holistic and comprehensive approach from all
of us. It is imperative that the international community,
in collaboration with regional organizations, in
particular the African Union and ECOWAS, as well
as countries of the region, should work together to
address the root causes of the challenges that the region
is facing. However, we must remain cognizant of the
reality that while the challenges the Sahel is facing
demand our urgent response, they also require a long-
term sustainable involvement from all of us.

Therefore, our commitment must remain
unwavering. The appointment of Mr. Romano Prodi and
the African Union High Representative for Mali, former
President Buyoyo, provides a unique opportunity for the
international community to coordinate its efforts in a
manner that avoids duplication and promotes efficiency
by coordinating the collective response. The meeting
convened by Mr. Prodi in Rome on 7 December is
most important in that regard. In is important for the
Special Envoy to urgently finalize the United Nations
integrated strategy for the Sahel, encompassing
development, humanitarian and security dimensions.
That will ensure that the United Nations is focusing on
the challenges facing the region.

Allow me to turn to the situation in Mali, which is the
most urgent matter requiring our immediate attention.
South Africa strongly believes that the challenges
facing Mali are related to the overall situation in the
Sahel region. We are particularly concerned about the
ongoing insecurity in the north of Mali and the threat
that the situation poses to the security of neighbouring
countries and beyond.

The situation in Mali requires an urgent response
from the international community and the Council. In
that regard, South Africa fully supports the request by
the African Union and ECOWAS for the deployment
of the African-led international support mission in
Mali to assist the Malian forces to regain control of
the north. The Security Council should authorize the
deployment of that mission under Chapter VII, as well
as provide a United Nations logistical support package.
That is urgent. The Council must be seen as united in
supporting Malian forces to recapture the north.

To conclude, South Africa wishes to reiterate that if
the situation is left unattended, it will lead to a further
deterioration of the humanitarian situation and further
human rights violations. If left unchecked, the situation
in the Sahel threatens to spread and affect other countries
in the region and beyond, as well as to undermine
international peace and security. Today's discussion and
presidential statement (S/PRST/2012/26) are important
for highlighting those challenges. Our discussion
should be followed by concrete action. We welcome the
words of Mr. Prodi in that regard - including support
for regional initiatives such as speedily authorizing the
deployment of the African-led international support
mission.

