Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Ms. Zerrougui, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and
Mr. Djinnit, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for the Great Lakes Region, for their briefings today.
We deeply appreciate their updates, especially in these
final two months before elections in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

Following the Security Council's trip to Kinshasa,
our focus remains on the state of elections preparations
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We are
particularly glad that the Security Council met with
the President of the Independent National Electoral
Commission, who had not been able to join us for the
August Council briefing (see S/PV.8331). We agree
with the Electoral Commission officials that another
electoral delay is not acceptable and appreciate their
focus on maintaining the 23 December date. The
Congolese people have already waited two years to cast
their votes.

With that in mind, we will continue to support the
efforts ofthe United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO)to establishcontingencyplansto distribute
voting materials if the Congolese Government makes a
last-minute request. We encourage MONUSCO to be
transparent with the Congolese Government regarding
deadlines for requesting that assistance. However,
we recall that it is not MONUSCO's responsibility to
organize Congolese elections, it is the responsibility
of the Independent National Electoral Commission of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Although the
Commission has had an extra two years to organize
this election, we remain deeply concerned about the
specific choices that it has made, in that they are likely
to lead to widespread problems on election day.

We believe that Congolese officials intend to hold
elections on 23 December, but we are not the people
who need to be convinced. The Congolese people need
to know that they will have the chance to exercise their
vote in a credible election. Now is the time to build that
confidence. End the detention of political prisoners and
implement fully the December 2016 agreement. Develop
a logistics plan to deliver elections materials in time.
Release the voter registry in an electronic, searchable
format. Build consensus around the electronic voting
machines and develop a back-up procedure to ensure
voters can still vote even ifthe machines malfunction or
fail to be delivered to all voting stations. Train sufficient
poll workers on voting equipment and processes. Those
are actions that the Congolese Government, and the
Commission in particular, could take today to address
the concerns of Congolese voters.

The goal for 23 December 2018 is free, fair and
credible elections. One way to safeguard that is through
elections observers. We encourage the Independent
National Electoral Commission to speedily begin to
welcome and accredit election observers in coordination
with the African Union, the Southern African
Development Community and Congolese civil society.

Two weeks ago, on the floor of the General
Assembly, President Kabila Kabange called for the end
of MONUSCO (see A/73/PV.7). We share that goal,
but our focus is on the execution and on the timing.
As the report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/882)
documents, MONUSCO is essential for civilian
protection in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Armed groups continue their attacks and human rights
violations, especially against civilians in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We recognize the
efforts of the United Nations to repatriate or relocate
former combatants from Rwanda and South Sudan,
even as we remain deeply concerned about attacks
by the Allied Democratic Forces, which appear to be
increasing in frequency and lethality. In North Kivu
and Ituri, MONUSCO is providing life-saving logistic
support to the Ebola response, protecting convoys and
ensuring that humanitarian workers can operate safely
in difficult conditions. That health crisis will require
our full attention and ingenuity to halt Ebola's spread.

When the time is right, we will be the first to
celebrate MONUSCO's closure, as called for by
President Kabila Kabange in his address, but today it is
too soon to celebrate.

Finally, we note that Congolese authorities have
started the trial on the murder of two United Nations
experts, Michael Sharp and Zaida Catalan, who were
killed while investigating human rights violations in the
Kasais. We want to remind the Congolese authorities
of the importance of a thorough investigation and fair
trial without the pressure of artificial timelines. No one
wants to see innocent people convicted for a murder
they did not commit or those guilty walk free. We
encourage the Secretary-General to renew the Follow-
up Mechanism to accompany Congolese authorities in
seeking justice for Michael and Zaida.

