Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): Allow
me, first of all, to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, for
his briefing and, through him, to pay tribute again
to United Nations personnel working in difficult
conditions in Afghanistan. I also warmly welcome
the presence of Mr. Salahuddin Rabbani, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan, and I thank him for
his intervention.

France associates itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union. I shall
confine myself to four main points.
First, the continued increase in the level of violence
and the resulting deterioration of the security and
humanitarian situation in Afghanistan remain a major
concern for France. As the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2017/783) unfortunately reminds us, and
as others have recalled here, the Afghan population
remains the first victim of the conflict and women
and children continue to pay the highest price. Afghan
forces, whose commitment and courage I commend,
are continuing with their operations and they have
been making significant progress. However, armed
confrontations and repeated terrorist attacks continue to
destabilize the country as a whole. In that regard, France
takes very seriously the establishment and proliferation
of armed and terrorist groups in Afghanistan and
in the region. France shares the determination of the
Afghan authorities and our allies to fight terrorism and
welcomes any decision that contributes to achieving that
objective, in compliance with international law, such as
the new strategy of the United States for Afghanistan
and South-East Asia. In order to succeed, that counter-
terrorism effort must also be supported by all countries
in the region.

The humanitarian situation, which is already
particularly fragile, has been aggravated by the
conflict and the collapse of the economy. The massive
return of refugees from Pakistan and Iran is a serious
challenge for Afghan authorities. In that regard, France
encourages the Government of Afghanistan to continue
its efforts to ensure equal treatment of all refugees
and displaced persons and welcomes the remarkable
actions taken by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees.

Secondly, the extremely volatile security and
humanitarian environment makes the unity of the
Afghan Government and its perseverance in reforms
more important than ever. There is no alternative
to Afghan cohesion and collective determination
to deepen and consolidate Afghan democracy. The
pursuit of ongoing reforms aimed at achieving a more
effective Government that is more capable of serving
the population must remain a priority. In particular,
that applies in particular to electoral reform, where
progress has been made. France particularly welcomes
the announcement of the holding of legislative
elections on 7 July 2018. Preparations undertaken by
the Independent Election Commission must continue,
along with the support of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), in order to enable
free and transparent elections as scheduled. Reforms
in the fight against corruption and drug trafficking,
which continue to fuel the Taliban's insurgency, must
also be pursued with determination. In terms of human
rights, the situation of women and children is still very
precarious. It is essential that the Afghan authorities
continue to mobilize efforts to fully implement their
commitments to women's rights and the protection
of children.

Thirdly, the stabilization of Afghanistan will
require a negotiated political solution and national
reconciliation. France hopes that the peace process
can be resumed by Afghan actors as soon as possible,
with the support of countries of the region and the
international community. The sincere commitment and
unambiguous support for peace by all Afghanistan's
neighbours is essential. We call for renewed efforts and
concrete commitments in that domain.

Against that backdrop - and this will be my fourth
point - it is reassuring that we have the support of
the United Nations and particularly of UNAMA,
which has never been stronger. France thanks the
Secretary-General and his team for their very serious
work carried out in the context of UNAMA's strategic
review. We support the recommendations made in the
report (S/2017/696), which should make it possible
to streamline its work. The proposal to refocus the
work of the Mission is particularly welcome. Such
refocusing will allow it to distribute its effort across
four pillars: contributing to the establishment of peace
in Afghanistan; facilitating the engagement of the
countries of the region, moderating and supporting the
dialogue between the Government and Afghan political
forces; and coordinating among international donors.

Allow me to conclude by reiterating my country's
full support for the Afghan Government and the work
carried out by the United Nations in Afghanistan in the
quest for lasting peace and safe and dignified lives for
all people of the country.

