Mr. Barbalic' (Bosnia and Herzegovina): On
behalf of the delegation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, I
would like to express our appreciation to the Secretary-
General for his comprehensive report (S/2010/5) on the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). I would also like to thank
Mr. Lamberto Zannier, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Kosovo, for introducing the
report. We welcome the participation in today's
meeting of the President of Serbia, Mr. Boris Tadie, as
well as Mr. Skender Hyseni.

We note with appreciation that UNMIK,
operating within the framework of Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999), is successfully continuing the
implementation of its strategic goal: the promotion of
security, stability and respect for human rights in
Kosovo. We particularly welcome and commend
UNMIK's efforts to encourage the process of
reconciliation and to facilitate dialogue and regional
cooperation, as well as its focus on mediation between
the communities and its support for minority
communities.

In that context, we are of the view that efforts to
encourage inter-community dialogue and confidence-
building among the parties are of particular importance

in the area of returns. As stated by the Secretary-
General in his report, the number of returns remains
very low. While underlining the importance of returns,
we would like to encourage the increased number of
go-and-see visits, which would give the opportunity to
displaced persons to visit their properties and to make
first-hand assessments of conditions in the receiving
community.

Furthermore, during the reporting period,
UNMIK's role in assisting the activities of the
Reconstruction Implementation Commission, in close
coordination with the Council of Europe and the
European Commission, has been significant. The aim
of those efforts is to ensure the participation of the key
stakeholders in the process of reconstructing cultural
and religious heritage sites in Kosovo. Bosnia and
Herzegovina acknowledges those efforts, aimed at the
reconstruction and protection of cultural heritage. We
have also taken note that, at the municipal and mayoral
elections held during the reporting period, voting took
place without major incidents, as stated by the
Secretary-General in his report.

Bosnia and Herzegovina believes that
strengthening the rule of law in Kosovo is of great
importance. In that context, we note that the positive
relationship between UNMIK and the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), operating
within the status-neutral framework of the United
Nations, continued to be strengthened during the
reporting period, as stated by the Secretary-General in
his report. We also support the existing practice of
cooperation and coordination among UNMIK, EULEX,
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe and NATO, the latter present through the troops
of the Kosovo Force, and we hope that that practice
will continue.

In conclusion, Bosnia and Herzegovina would
like to reiterate that stability and security in Kosovo
are significant to achieving lasting peace and
prosperity in our region. The international community
should continue to play an important role in supporting
the aspirations of the countries of the region to
integration into European and Euro-Atlantic structures.
At the same time, we believe that the countries of the
region should continue to cooperate with the
international community in order to reach those goals.
Finally, fostering good relations and cooperation with
the neighbouring countries is of the utmost importance
for Bosnia and Herzegovina.

