Mr. Kerry (United States of America): Five
weeks ago, the world saw rows upon rows of murdered
children lying on a hospital floor alone or beside their
slain parents, all wrapped in unbloodied burial shrouds,
and the world's conscience was shocked. But our
collective resolve hardened. Tonight, with a strong and
forcible precedent-setting resolution requiring Syria to
give up its chemical weapons, the Security Council has
demonstrated that diplomacy can be so powerful that it
can peacefully defuse the worst weapons of war.

So tonight we are declaring together, for the first
time, that the use of chemical weapons, which the
world long ago determined to be beyond the bounds
of acceptable human behaviour, is also a threat to
international peace and security, anywhere they
might be used, any time they might used, under any
circumstances.

As a community of nations, we reaffirm our
responsibility to defend the defenceless, those whose
lives remain at risk every day that anyone believes
that they can use weapons of mass destruction with
impunity. Together the world, with a single voice, is
imposing for the first time binding obligations on the
Al-Assad regime requiring it to get rid of weapons that
have been used to devastating effect as tools of terror.
This important resolution reflects what President
Obama and President Putin and colleagues around the
world set out to do.

I want to thank Foreign Minister Lavrov for his
personal efforts and cooperation beginning before
Geneva and continuing through this week so that we
could find common ground. I also want to thank my
good friends and counterparts, Foreign Secretary
Hague and Foreign Minister Fabius, who have been
partners every step of the way.

Our original objective was to degrade and deter
Syria's chemical-weapons capability. The option of
military force that President Obama has kept on the
table could have achieved that, but tonight's resolution
in fact accomplishes even more. Through peaceful
means, it will for the first time seek to eliminate
entirely the nation's chemical-weapons capability and,
in this case, specifically Syria's. On-site inspections of
the places where those weapons are stored will begin by
November, and under the terms of this agreement those
weapons will be removed and destroyed by the middle
of next year.

Our aim was also to hold the Al-Assad regime
publicly accountable for its horrific use of chemical
weapons against its own people on 21 August, and this
resolution makes clear that those responsible for that
heinous act must be held accountable. In the resolution
just adopted, the Council has, importantly, endorsed
the Geneva communique (S/2012/523, annex), which
calls for a transfer of power to a transitional governing
body, paving the way for democratic elections and a
Government that can be chosen by the people of Syria
to represent the people of Syria.

We sought a legally binding resolution, and that
is what the Security Council has adopted. For the
first time since Syria's civil war began, the Security
Council is spelling out in detail what Syria must do to
comply with its legal obligations. Syria cannot select or
reject the inspectors. Syria must give those inspectors
unfettered access to any and all sites and to any and
all people. We also wanted a resolution that would be
enforced, and, again, that is what the Security Council
has adopted.

We are here because actions have consequences,
and now, should the regime fail to act, there will be
consequences. Progress will be reported back to
the Security Council frequently, and, in the event of
non-compliance, the Council will impose measures
under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations.

Just two weeks ago, when the Syrian regime would
not even acknowledge the vast supply of chemical
weapons and say that they existed, this outcome,
frankly, would have been utterly unimaginable. But
thanks to the cooperation within the five permanent
members of the Security Council, and thanks to our
friends and partners around the world, many of whom
are here in this Chamber, the Council has shown that
when we put aside politics for the common good, we are
still capable of doing big things. Provided the resolution
is fully implemented, we will have eliminated one of
the largest chemical weapons programmes on Earth
from one of the most volatile places on Earth.

The Al-Assad regime carries the burden of meeting
the terms of this agreement, and when it comes to those
who murder their own citizens, the world's patience
needs to be short. But make no mistake - the rest of
the world still carries the burden of doing what we must
do to end mass killing by other means. We must work
together with the same determination and the same
cooperation that have brought us here tonight in order
to end the conflict that continues to tear Syria apart,
even this very day.

We must continue to provide desperately needed
humanitarian aid, and neither Al-Assad nor anyone else
should stand between that aid and the people who need
it. Only when we do those things will we have fulfilled
our responsibility to the Syrian people and to ourselves.
Only then will we have advanced our own interests and
our own security and that of our allies in the region.
Only then will we have shown that the Security Council
is meeting its responsibility to enforce international
peace and security.

So we are here united tonight in support of our
belief that international institutions do matter; that
international norms matter. We say with one voice that
atrocities carried out with the world's most heinous
weapons will not be tolerated. And when institutions
like the Security Council stand up to defend the
principles and values that we all share, and when when
we put violent regimes on notice that the world will
unite against them, it will lead not only to a safer Syria,
but to a safer world.

