Mr. Owada (Japan): The recent history of Liberia can
only be described as tragic. After seven years of civil war
the national infrastructure is in ruins and the very fabric of
society has disintegrated. It is therefore gratifying to note
that since January this year there have been signs that the
situation in Liberia is beginning to stabilize. There have
been no reports of cease-fire violations in more than two
months now and some improvements are discernible in the
humanitarian situation. The recent seizure of a stockpile of
weapons at the residence of a retiring member of the
Council of State, however, is a clear signal that the
situation in Liberia is still fraught with danger.

Vigilance on the part of the international community
is particularly necessary at this time when preparations are
under way for the elections that are scheduled to be held on
30 May. The time-table for holding the elections is
extremely tight. It is essential for the Liberian parties to
redouble their efforts to ensure that free and fair elections
are held as scheduled as an essential phase of the peace
process in Liberia. The elections, if held on time and in
a free and fair manner, will provide the first opportunity
for the people of Liberia to express their views as to how
and by whom they wish to be governed, and thus
consolidate the ground for the establishment of a stable
foundation for national reconciliation.

The validity of any elections is enhanced when they
gain the fullest possible participation of the electorate.
The elections in Liberia are no exception. Their
legitimacy would be greatly enhanced by the participation
of those citizens who return from their place of refuge in
neighbouring countries. Therefore, it will be particularly
important for the situation on the ground to improve and
for the refugees to feel secure enough to return
voluntarily. This is important not only from the
humanitarian point of View, but also in terms of
consolidating the electoral process through enhanced
legitimacy.

Let me emphasize in this context the importance of
the continued presence of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) Monitoring Group
(ECOMOG) in maintaining a secure environment in
Liberia. Japan recognizes that the United Nations
Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL), which is
working closely with ECOMOG, is also playing an
essential role in the peace process, and believes that it can
expand its role to include the electoral process. My
delegation therefore welcomes the extension of
UNOMIL's mandate for an additional three months, until
30 June.

There is no doubt that the holding of free and fair
elections will be a milestone in the peace process. But the
elections are just a beginning, and the road ahead to true
and lasting peace will be an arduous one. The wounds
inflicted by the extended civil war are deep and not easily
healed, and the very socio-economic fabric of Liberia as
a nation must be restored. Achieving national
reconciliation and consolidating a framework for a true
political settlement are but two of the difficult tasks that
lie ahead.

As has been pointed out, the responsibility for
accomplishing these tasks lies chiefly with the Liberian
people themselves. But while the Liberian people must
take the lead, the international community, for its part,

 

should be ready to follow with assistance. I wish, on behalf
of my Government, to pledge that Japan is prepared to play
a meaningful role in such assistance efforts. In fact, Japan
has already been extending electoral assistance through a
contribution to the United Nations Trust Fund for Liberia.
As preparations for the elections proceed, Japan will further
consider a wide range of assistance to the people of Liberia,
including the possibility of funding the purchase of
elections-related equipment and of dispatching personnel to
serve as electoral observers. The international community
has to be prepared to make every effort to ensure that the
ongoing peace process, which has been showing
encouraging signs of progress in recent weeks, may be
successfully concluded.

