Mr. Choisuren (Mongolia): I would like to
express my deep appreciation to you, Sir, for
convening this timely open debate on the situation
between Iraq and Kuwait.

Mongolia's stance on the issue of the
disarmament of Iraq has from the very outset been
consistent and prudent. Mongolia has over the years
resolutely condemned the production of weapons of
mass destruction by the regime of Saddam Hussain, its
aggression against neighbouring States and genocide
against its own people, and supported all relevant
United Nations resolutions and activities. The
international community has exerted considerable
efforts aimed at resolving the Iraqi issue peacefully.
However, the Iraqi regime failed to fully meet its
obligations vis-a-vis the United Nations. It is the firm
belief of my Government that if the Iraqi leadership
had cooperated fully and faithfully and carried out its
obligations before the Security Council, the resort to
force would have been unnecessary. Thus, the
responsibility for the current situation lies with the
Iraqi regime.

My delegation shares the view that, at this stage,
when the hostilities are in full swing, the humanitarian
implications of the war should become the
preoccupation of the States Members of the United
Nations. With the withdrawal of United Nations
personnel from Iraq, the humanitarian oil for food
programme has been suspended. The war has further
exacerbated the sufferings and hardship of the Iraqi
people.

It is time for the international community to look
forward, to take immediate and resolute action and to
find a way of resuming humanitarian relief to help the
Iraqi people. Like many others, the Government and
people of Mongolia are deeply concerned by the
alarming humanitarian situation in Iraq. We are
informed that in the southern city of Basra, over 1.7
million residents have been without water supplies for
several days. It has also been stated that epidemics
could very soon spread rapidly because of the hot
weather conditions in the region.

Mongolia shares the concerns expressed about the
welfare of civilians caught in the conflict, especially
children. Urgent efforts should be made to meet the
humanitarian needs of the Iraqi people. It is quite
obvious that significant resources will be needed for
this purpose. We consider that relieving the suffering of
the Iraqi people in a speedy and efficient manner is the
immediate task facing the community of nations.

As we understand it, the United Nations has
prepared a major contingency plan and would be able
to start its implementation as soon as possible. Under
these circumstances, the Security Council should take
the lead and give to the Secretary-General the mandate
for whatever measures he may need to take in order to
prevent a humanitarian catastrophe from happening in
Iraq. We urge the members of the Security Council to
support the Secretary-General by providing him with
authority and flexibility to deal with the emerging
crisis. The single-mindedness and resolve of the
Security Council on this issue would, hopefully, be a
step towards restoring its effectiveness and unity.
