Mr. Tiirk (Slovenia): The delegation of Slovenia
supported the preparation of and voted for the resolution
adopted by the Security Council today. The resolution just
adopted is a result of many months of hard work and
difficult negotiations. We wish to pay tribute to you,
Mr. President, and to the delegation of the United
Kingdom for the work done. It was largely due to your
perseverance and skills that the resolution became
possible at this stage.

The resolution adopted today is comprehensive in
scope and addresses all the main aspects of the new
system for Iraq. This is important and calls for reflection
on the issues involved in a long-term perspective.

First, it is important that the resolution addressed all
the issues comprehensively. The programme established

 

includes, very importantly, the obligations of Iraq
concerning the repatriation of all Kuwaiti and third party
nationals, and it requires Iraq's cooperation in the
international mechanisms established for that purpose.
These are important obligations. About a decade after the
armed conflict, it is an absolute imperative to clarify the
fate of the missing, to repatriate all those who are awaiting
repatriation, to return Kuwaiti property and archives and to
close this sad chapter on the history of the Gulf War.

The detailed provisions on humanitarian issues offer
important improvements in the effort to address the
humanitarian needs of the Iraqi people. My delegation
welcomes these improvements, which will make the work
of the sanctions committee with respect to humanitarian
exemptions more effective. At the same time, we wish to
note that there are important tasks incumbent upon the Iraqi
Government, which remains responsible for the situation in
Iraq and the humanitarian situation of its people. It needs
to be emphasized that a responsible government cannot
justify its shortcomings by constant references to sanctions.

The most innovative parts of the resolution address the
future of arms inspections in Iraq and the question of
suspension and eventual termination of sanctions. Here
reflections related to the long-term context are particularly
necessary. The last few years of the efforts last to
implement resolution 687 (1991) demonstrated the inherent
limitations of the regime established by that resolution. The
regime was based on the expectation that the total abolition
of Iraqi weapons of mass destruction would be achieved
relatively soon, and that as a result the sanctions would be
lifted completely. However, experience has shown that such
a scheme does not suffice for the necessary transition to
disarmament, which requires a more gradual, phased
approach.

The present resolution recognizes the reality of the
need to make gradual progress. The key disarmament tasks
must be accomplished, and the system of ongoing
monitoring and verification must be made effective. It is
realistic to expect that such achievements can take place in
a process which will have to be carefully monitored by the
Security Council. Suspension of sanctions can help. The
decision to suspend sanctions would be taken when the
relevant conditions were fulfilled. The possibility of
suspension, which has not existed thus far, gives the
Security Council an important additional tool and the option
of using positive measures - namely, incentives - which
should motivate Iraq to cooperate in the process towards
the final objectives of the elimination of weapons of mass
destruction and the ultimate lifting of sanctions. This
promises dynamism, which has not been possible under
the earlier system.

Finally, the resolution establishes a new mechanism
for monitoring, verification and inspection in Iraq. The
mechanism and its institutional setting within the United
Nations system seem adequate and we welcome them. On
the other hand, we wish to note that the tasks to be
accomplished will not be without difficulties both in
terms of technical work and in terms of the need for the
Security Council to agree on various issues of
disarmament and ongoing monitoring and verification.
These issues are, naturally, not only technical. They relate
to the overall perception of the military and security
situation in the region, and are therefore likely to produce
new difficulties in the work of the Security Council. The
absence of unanimity today is an expression of the
difficulties inherent in the situation. The question
therefore is: Is there is a way to overcome these
difficulties? I believe that the answer is: "Yes" and that
it can be expressed in relatively simply terms. The
Security Council and all of its members should take very
seriously their responsibility to exert judgement on
various disarmament issues, with a sense of objectivity.
Any other approach may give rise again to the kind of
tensions that have characterized the last two or three
years.

In sum, we believe that the resolution adopted today
establishes important new arrangements and represents
considerable improvement and promise. It is now up to
the Government of Iraq to realize that the Security
Council is offering a genuine possibility to end the
present situation, and that such a possibility must be
seized. We hope that the Security Council, in its new
composition, will be able to make faster progress than
was the case in the past two years, and that all the issues
concerning Iraq will be resolved.

