Mr. Al Omoush (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I wish to congratulate Poland on its presidency
of the Security Council this month. I would also like to
thank you, Madam President, for holding this important
meeting relating to the challenges facing peace and
security in the Middle East. I would like as well to
thank the Chef de Cabinet of the Secretary-General for
her briefing.

The many challenges facing the world today call
for the international community to mobilize its efforts
to address them collectively and in a complete and
sustained manner. That would ensure dealing radically
with the circumstances and factors causing these
challenges, the most serious of threats to international
peace and security. There is broad agreement that
the Middle East is being hostage by these political,
economic, social and security challenges. The crises
are fuelled by political and social injustice and
sectarian clashes, which have unleashed the forces of
evil, bringing about death, destruction and terrorism.

As we gather here today, events in the Middle East
reflect a situation of increasing tension that is far from
stable. While the Palestinian question remains at the
centre of instability and the core issue in the Middle
East, no progress is being made in that regard. The
greatest challenge facing our region in particular that
concerns international peace and stability in general
is the continued Israeli occupation of Palestinian and
Arab territories. The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan
has met its responsibilities towards the Palestinian
question, which is central to us. This is in keeping with
the vision of our Palestinian and Arab brothers. We have
supported and will continue to support a peaceful, just
and lasting solution to the Palestinian question based on
the two-State solution, establishing an independent and
viable Palestinian State, with the borders of4 June 1967
and East Jerusalem as its capital, in accordance with
international terms of reference and the Arab Peace
Initiative, which reflects a unified Arab and Islamic
position for bringing about just, comprehensive and
lasting peace. That is the only way to ensure security
and stability in the Middle East region.

In that regard, we must recall that His Majesty
King Abdullah II bin Al-Hussein has repeatedly
cautioned that delaying efforts to bring about peace
risks imperilling the entire region. It is imperative that
all of us assume our responsibilities to ensure that we
bring about just and comprehensive solution as well as
lasting peace.

Jordan has always called for peace and brotherliness
among peoples despite their linguistic, religious and
cultural differences. The city ofpeace, Jerusalem, is the
top priority of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, given
our religious responsibility as the historic guarantors of
the Holy Muslim and Christian sites in Jerusalem. That
responsibility is also part of our duty to the Arab and
Muslim nations. Jordan therefore has no other choice
but to oppose all practices that will have a negative
effect on the future of the city, its existence and identity,
as well as peace and future stability.

On top of those practices is the continued Israeli
violation against the Al-Aqsa Mosque and Al-Haram
Al-Sharif. The most recent violation was perpetrated
by Israeli forces against worshipers and administrators
of the Waqf Al-Quds. We categorically reject those
senseless actions and all unilateral attempts to change
the historic and legal status of the city. We call on the
international community to take effective measures
and apply pressure to Israel to ensure that it stops
the violations and assumes responsibility in line with
international law and international humanitarian law.

The schools providing education to Palestinians and
centres providing them with health and social services
must remain open. The families of Palestinian refugees
and Palestinian communities need full and continuous
support until such a time as their status as refugees is
justly resolved. Funding for the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestinian Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA) must therefore be continuous so as to
ensure the Agency's ability to implement the mandate
accorded to it by the General Assembly. Moreover, we
reaffirm the need to pursue international, political and
financial support for UNRWA so that the Agency does
not find itself on the long list of victims of a lack of
collective action to bring peace to the Middle East.

Since the beginning of the crisis in Syria, the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan has worked with the
international community to bring about a peaceful
solution to the crisis so as to spare the country
and its people suffering further death, destruction,
displacement and other humanitarian consequences, in
accordance with resolutions 2139 (2014) and 2165 (2014).
The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan has consistently
called for a peaceful solution to the crisis through the
Geneva process and on the basis of resolution 2254
(2015), which is acceptable to the Syrian people and
preserves the unity and sovereignty of Syria.

Jordan was one of the leading States in the Middle
East welcoming refugees on behalf of the international
community. Jordan has had to deal with the effects of
those waves of refugees, which has meant that we in
turn have required assistance to alleviate the consequent
burden, particularly given our social and economic
situation as a receiving State alongside our hosting
local communities. In that regard, I would like to thank
our regional, international and United Nations partners
that have alleviated the burden of refugees on Jordan.

UNICEF recently reported that 15 million
children do not go to schools in the Middle East and
North Africa, which will lead them to illiteracy,
ignorance, hopelessness and a lack of opportunities for
development, which in turn could lead to despair and
provide fertile ground for recruitment to extremism.
This reality alone should make us think together in
order to address these challenges and ensure that we
can provide everyone with a bright future

The most importantpillarofcoexistenceis achieving
stability for the peoples of the world. We need to open
up new horizons, provide opportunities and offer hope
for achieving sustainable global development. We need
plans to improve infrastructure, provide education,
enable women and young people to develop, ensure
security, provide employment and energy supplies,
address the challenges posed by climate change and
support industrial and agricultural sectors. That would
necessarily lead to stability and social and economic
prosperity for the people.

In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm that Jordan
will continue to play its political and diplomatic role,
regionally and internationally, based on moderation
and mutual respect. Achieving peace in the Middle East
will remain the main focus of Jordanian diplomatic
efforts until all rights and Palestinian and Arab

territories have been restored and an independent
Palestinian State has been created, with cast Jerusalem
as its capital. It is high time to establish comprehensive,
lasting and just peace that opens up future horizons for
the coming generations.

