Mr. Gayama (Congo) (spoke in French): It is a
great pleasure and a great honour for my delegation to
welcome Her Excellency Mrs. Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf,
President of the Republic of Liberia. Today, the
Council has the privilege of honouring the first woman
democratically elected as a head of State in Africa.

Indeed, the election of Mrs. Johnson-Sirleaf is a
symbol that reflects the African continent's gradual and
solid rooting in modernity, which some have called
Africa's renaissance. This election represents a living
expression of the influence of African women on the
future of our societies. It is also a reflection of the end
of the l4-year-long civil war that completely destroyed
this country - a country that was one of the hopes of
our continent. Above all, the election confirms a
country's ability to emerge from war once there is
determination on the part of competent authorities,
steadfast involvement of the African community and
mobilization of international partners.

The success of the electoral process is due mainly
to the Liberian people, whose maturity we should
commend, as well as all those actors in political and
social life who have made a positive contribution to the
management of this process with a sense of
responsibility and loyalty to the Republic. I also wish
to pay tribute to Mr. Charles Gyude Bryant for the
effectiveness with which he led Liberia's National
Transitional Government.

The new President of Liberia was elected
primarily for her unanimously recognized merits and
for the hopes raised by her political agenda, which she
has just presented to us admirably. In fact, the
President is a competent individual who has held
senior ministerial posts in her country and senior posts
in several international institutions, including, inter
alia, the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank,
the United Nations Development Programme and the
United Nations Economic Commission for Africa. She
has known the agony of war and even of exile. For us,
this is an opportunity to express our admiration for her
exceptional journey and her ceaseless fight for justice
and dignity.

President Johnson-Sirleaf was elected not
because she is a woman, but for her political
commitment and her professional experience -
guarantees of success in a context of major challenges
following a long and terrible civil war. My delegation
is convinced that her great experience and the high
esteem in which she is held at the international level
will help her to fulfil her mission of leading the
Liberian nation towards long-term peace and stability.
The President also embodies the hope of aimless young
people, who for too long have been immersed in
violence, that they can now commit themselves to
turning away from armed groups and becoming
involved in the development process.

The events experienced by Liberia in recent years
shed light on the problems faced by developing
countries, particularly in Africa: those of promoting
peace and security, which are prerequisites for any kind

of development. It has been a tragic experience that
should challenge us all. First, it challenges all citizens,
particularly the political class, regarding their
contribution to the search for long-term solutions. Such
solutions can come only if people cooperate and listen
to one another, but in a calm atmosphere, refusing to
use violence, defy the laws of the Republic or become
consumed by partisan passions.

That is why we commend President Johnson-
Sirleaf's willingness to reach out to her former
opponents in order to work together and, above all, to
help give priority to the national reconciliation that is
essential to the stability and development of the
beautiful country of Liberia.

My delegation supports Mrs. Johnson-Sirleaf in
her plea to establish a truth and reconciliation
commission, as has been done in several other African
countries. Such an initiative would undoubtedly help to
heal the wounds of Liberians and to build national
unity, which is essential for the country's
reconstruction.

If it is to deal with the many challenges facing it,
the Liberian Government must, inter alia, restructure
the security sector; improve economic governance;
consolidate the rule of law, human rights protection
and State authority throughout the country; and re-
establish essential services. My delegation thus calls
upon the international community to provide greater
long-term assistance to the Liberian Government -
beginning with maintaining the United Nations
Mission in Liberia, as the President just requested -
so that it can consolidate its authority, begin the
necessary structural reforms and provide basic services
to its people.

I conclude by expressing once again to the
President of Liberia our warm congratulations and our
best wishes for success in carrying out her high
responsibilities as the head of her country. The vibrant
and warm tribute paid to her by her peers at the African
Union summit in Khartoum in January spoke
eloquently of the trust that she enjoys in Africa and of
the hopes placed in her to rehabilitate her country.

