Mr. Gahima (Rwanda): Allow me to thank
Council members for allowing my delegation to
participate in this important debate. I would like to take
this opportunity to thank the President and the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) for their reports and to assure them of
my Government's continued support for their work.

Allow me also to take this opportunity to thank
the Secretary-General and the Security Council for the
recent decision to appoint a separate Prosecutor for the
ICTR, a change in the structure of the ICTR that my
Government had long advocated. We believe that this
change will go a long way towards addressing some of
the concerns that my Government has raised about the
work of the Tribunal in the past.

The Government of Rwanda is committed to
seeking justice for the victims of the 1994 genocide,
particularly as far as the senior Government, military
and civil society leaders who planned and oversaw the
genocide are concerned. Promoting the rule of law, in
general, and accountability for genocide and other
violations of international humanitarian law that
occurred in Rwanda between 1990 and 1994, in
particular, has been one of the pillars of the programme
of the Transitional Government of National Unity.
Consequently, we attach very great importance indeed
to the work of the ICTR.

To assist the ICTR to achieve its mandate, the
Government of Rwanda has put in place mechanisms to
facilitate its work. We have provided facilitation and
hospitality to ICTR personnel in Rwanda for the last
nine years. All judicial, law enforcement, central
Government and local government organs in Rwanda
have standing instructions to assist ICTR personnel in
their work in our country.

We provide access to vital witnesses. We
undertake investigations for the Office of the
Prosecutor whenever we are requested to do so. We
have put all evidence in our possession relating to
cases in which the ICTR is interested at the disposal of
its trial attorneys and investigators. We facilitate the
travel of witnesses to testify before the ICTR. We
continue to actively assist and cooperate with the
Tribunal in locating fugitive genocide suspects with a
view to their apprehension.

We regret, however, that the invaluable assistance
that Government institutions and private citizens of
Rwanda have provided and continue to provide to the
ICTR, at considerable sacrifice and expense, often goes
unacknowledged and unappreciated.

As the ICTR focuses on its completion strategy, it
should be recognized that the people of Rwanda are
stakeholders in the institution's work, with a legitimate
right to express views on aspects of the institution's
performance that could be further improved. Not only
are we part of the international community, we are also
the victims to whom the Tribunal was established to
bring justice.

The following are some of the areas in respect of
which the Tribunal's performance has had shortcomings
that we feel require attention. The Tribunal is remote and
alienated from Rwandan society. Few of our people
know about its work. Still fewer care about it. The
Tribunal has failed to have any significant impact, as
was envisaged in Security Council resolution 955
(1994), which established the Tribunal.

The Tribunal's management organs have often
worked as unrelated institutions lacking cohesion,
instead of being complementary organs of the same
institutions working in close collaboration. The Office
of the Prosecutor has over the years failed to develop a
realistic and comprehensive prosecution strategy. The
Tribunal has failed to develop a credible and effective
witness protection programme and has neglected to
address other pertinent concerns and needs of victims
and witnesses.

The Tribunal has hired perpetrators of genocide
and close relatives and friends of suspects as defence
investigators and legal assistants, who threaten
genocide survivors who are prosecution witnesses.
There are fee-splitting arrangements between genocide
suspects in detention and defence lawyers, with the
result that financial contributions made by the
international community to bring to justice the
perpetrators of genocide are used instead to enrich the
criminals and their families and friends and to fuel
conflict in our region.

The Office of the Prosecutor has failed to indict
and apprehend large numbers of prominent genocide
suspects who remain at large in many countries. The
Office of the Prosecutor has also failed to develop a
credible and realistic completion strategy to date. The
perception in Rwanda, and indeed the world at large, is
that, in view of the vast resources at its disposal, the
ICTR has until now been slow, inefficient and
ineffective.

We would like to recognize that there has been
some progress in addressing some of the concerns,
which the Government and people of Rwanda have had
with regard to the performance of the Tribunal. In this
regard, I would cite the following examples: the
appointment of a separate Prosecutor; the appointment of
ad litem judges; and the initiatives taken by the new
President of the Tribunal to expedite the pace of trials and
to promote the effective functioning of the Tribunal.

Rwanda, like the rest of the international
community, believes and hopes that the new leadership
of the Tribunal offers a window of opportunity for
addressing the problems that have plagued the Tribunal
in the past and sets the institution on a course on which
it shall leave a legacy of which we can all be justly
proud in the years to come.

My Government reiterates its sincere
determination to continue to render full support to the
ICTR to enable it achieve its mandate. We also call
upon the Security Council to continue to explore ways
of making the ICTR more efficient and effective, and
we take this opportunity to make the following
recommendations for consideration by the Council.

As far as the proposed completion strategy is
concerned, we recommend that there should be greater
consultation between all the stakeholders concerned
than has hitherto been possible. We recommend that the
proposed completion strategy should urgently address
the problem of the large numbers of perpetrators of
genocide, whom the Office of the Prosecutor has not
indicted and who are still at large in many countries.
We also recommend that the completion strategy should
address the financial implications of the transfer of cases
to Rwanda and make provision as to how the financial
resources required to assist Rwanda will be raised.

On the remoteness and alienation of ICTR from
Rwandan society, we recommend that the Tribunal
undertake a credible and substantial outreach
programme to bridge the gap between it and Rwandan
society. We are of the view that the ICTR could have
very useful lessons to learn from the experience of the
Sierra Leone Tribunal in this regard. We would also
once again recommend that hearings of at least some of
the cases being heard by the Tribunal in Arusha be
conducted in Rwanda.

As regards the Tribunal's relationships with
survivors, we urge the ICTR to resolve its long-
standing misunderstandings with the survivors of the
genocide through dialogue with their chosen
representatives. Concerning the hiring of persons
suspected of having participated in genocide, we
recommend that the Government of Rwanda and ICTR
agree on mechanisms for vetting prospective
employees to ensure that persons responsible for
genocide are not employed by the Tribunal.

We would also recommend the appointment of an
independent commission to investigate and urgently to
report on the presence, among the personnel of the
Tribunal, of persons suspected of having committed
genocide, and that proposals be made and measures
undertaken to ensure that the perpetrators of the
genocide and their relatives and friends do not continue
to be unjustly enriched by money which the
international community pays to ensure that they are
brought to justice.

With regard to the treatment and protection of
witnesses, we call upon the ICTR to provide adequate
counselling and preparation to prosecution witnesses
prior to their appearance before the Tribunal. We call
also for the establishment of an effective witness-
protection programme agreed upon between the ICTR
and the Government.

As regards the mismanagement of the Tribunal in
general, which the United Nations itself, in several
reports, admitted has taken place, we urge greater
collaboration between the various organs of the ICTR,
so that they act as complementary organs of one
institution instead of perceiving themselves as separate,
distinct and competing organs.

We call upon the organs concerned to end
recruitment practices based on factors other than merit,
which have in the past had an adverse effect on the
competence of personnel.

Lastly, with regard to the relationship between the
ICTR and the Government of Rwanda, we believe that,
in order to address shortcomings in the investigation
and prosecution of cases, there should be closer
collaboration between ICTR personnel and Rwandan
prosecution and investigation authorities to ensure a
better preparation of cases.

We recommend greater use of Rwandan
professionals within the ICTR during the remaining
period of its mandate, because they are more familiar
with the facts and circumstances of the genocide, and
their experience would be beneficial to the domestic
courts of Rwanda as they begin to assume
responsibility for the cases which the ICTR proposes to
send to domestic courts.

Finally, we propose to enhance collaboration and
cooperation through the appointment of liaison officers
between the ICTR and the Government of Rwanda.

In conclusion, I would like to express my
Government's appreciation to the Security Council and
the Secretary-General for their continuing interest and
support to the Tribunal.

