Mr. Motomura (Japan): First of all, I would like
to thank both Ambassador Sinclair and Ambassador
Aisi for having given us a comprehensive briefing on
the current situation in Bougainville.

I would like to welcome the report submitted by
the United Nations Political Office in Bougainville
(UNPOB) to the Government of Papua New Guinea on
29 July, which confirms the completion of stage II of
the weapons disposal plan in Bougainville. The
completion of stage II is indeed a demonstration of the
commitment of the concerned parties to the attainment
of peace, in particular on the part of the people of
Bougainville and of the Papua New Guinea
Government. This achievement is all the more
important as it opens a new stage in the peace process
and accelerates the progress towards the establishment
of autonomy in Bougainville. We sincerely hope that
this process will proceed smoothly, so that an election
to establish an autonomous Bougainville Government
may take place as soon as possible, hopefully some
time next year. We also expect that UNPOB will make
every effort to support this process as fully as possible
until the conclusion of its mandate at the end of this
year

The Peace Monitoring Group (PMG), which
completed its activities in June, played a major role in
realizing the completion of stage II of the weapons
disposal plan. Following its establishment in 1998, the
Group also made a significant contribution by assisting
in the conclusion of the Bougainville Peace Agreement,
monitoring the peace and advancing the peace process.
Japan expresses its great appreciation for the activities
of the PMG and pays tribute to Australia, New
Zealand, Fiji and Vanuatu, which participated in this
operation. We hope that the Bougainville Transition
Team, which has succeeded the PMG, will contribute
actively to further promoting the peace process.

During the third Japan-Pacific Islands Forum
summit meeting, hosted by my Government in
Okinawa in May, Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi,
Sir Michael Somare, the Prime Minister of Papua New
Guinea, and other leaders participating in the meeting
set enhanced security in the Pacific region as one of the
priority policy targets in the document adopted by the
leaders entitled the Okinawa Initiative. Discussions
aimed at taking substantive action followed, based on
that document, and a joint action plan was also
formulated, which includes concrete measures to be
taken in order to enhance security in the region. On the
basis of that plan, my Government intends to support
promotion of the collection of small arms and light
weapons in Bougainville. In addition, we are now
considering extending specific assistance to
Bougainville in the areas of education, health, medical
services and infrastructure for the purposes of
improving education and human resources
development, stabilizing the life of Bougainvilleans
and strengthening their economy.

The Japanese Government continues to pay close
attention to developments related to peace in
Bougainville and reiterates its readiness to extend
assistance that it deems appropriate.

