Mr. Skau (Sweden): Let me first thank the Secretary-
General for the comprehensive report (S/2017/357)
before us today, and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for his detailed briefing to
the Security Council. We appreciate the work that
Mr. Kubis and his team are doing on the ground, often
in very challenging circumstances. We also welcomed
the recent visit by the Secretary-General to Iraq.

I would like to begin by expressing our strong
support for Prime Minister Al Abadi and the
Government and the people of Iraq at this critical
juncture for the country. The offensive against Da'esh
in and beyond Mosul is a fight not only to reclaim Iraqi
territory, but to defeat an enemy that is a threat to us all.
For that reason, Sweden is stepping up its contribution
to the global coalition against Da'esh.

In responding to an ideology that is devoid of any
decency or humanity, it is imperative that we uphold
the principles and values that we share and for which
we are fighting in this struggle. In the context of the
current offensive, that means ensuring that civilians are
protected. The humanitarian situation in the remaining
part of western Mosul is gravely concerning. We
commend the humanitarian response carried out to
date by the Iraqi authorities, the United Nations and its
partners. We emphasize the importance of continued
respect for international humanitarian law and the
protection of civilians during the final difficult phase
of the liberation of Mosul. We are also concerned by
the presence of armed actors in and around camps for
internally displaced persons and emergency shelters,
which compromise their civilian character.

As the Humanitarian Coordinator for Iraq has made
clear, significant additional humanitarian needs are
likely to arise before the end of the Mosul operation,
and the end of the operation will not be the end of
the road. Major stabilization efforts will be needed for
a long time to come. Sweden is contributing both to
the humanitarian response, as well as towards post-
Da'esh stabilization, through the funding facility of
the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP).
We call upon all States Members of the United Nations
and other partners to show solidarity with Iraq and
to contribute financially to the humanitarian and
stabilization efforts.

The period ahead will require strong leadership
from the Government, supported by the international
community and with the continued attention of the
Security Council. The United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) has the potential to continue
to contribute significantly to preventing a relapse
into conflict by strategically focusing its efforts and
resources. Let me therefore turn to some of the key
challenges to sustaining peace in Iraq after the Da'esh
offensive has been completed.

First, reconciliation will be critical to building a
stable Iraq and preventing future conflicts. Strong
Iraqi leadership will be required to help bring the many
initiatives currently under way together, within a joint
plan and with tangible proposals to build confidence
among the various parts of the Iraqi population.
We encourage UNAMI to continue to deepen its
reconciliation efforts and its coordination within the
United Nations family, with other initiatives and with
Iraqi stakeholders. Reconciliation must be inclusive
in order to be successful. In that context, the UNDP
initiative aimed at increasing the participation of
civil society in reconciliation deserves our strong
support. In addition, constructive engagement by
regional and international actors will be crucial to such
reconciliation efforts.

Building a new future for Iraq will require
recognition of the past, however difficult that may be.
Accountability will be critical to reconciliation. Sweden
is supportive of initiatives aimed at strengthening
accountability for violations of international law and
crimes committed throughout the conflict. It is also
essential to strengthen the Iraqi legal system, and we
encourage international partners to consider how they
can support such efforts. We also encourage UNAMI
to increase preventative diplomacy so as to facilitate
dialogue between Baghdad and Erbil. In that regard,
we echo the Secretary-General's encouragement to
political leaders in Baghdad and Erbil that they should
engage in constructive dialogue on outstanding issues.

Secondly, building institutions that are inclusive
and equitable must be a priority in the coming period.
UNAMI has an important role to play in advising and
assisting the Iraqi authorities in strengthening the
rule of law and respect for human rights, including
the rights of minorities. Freedom of expression is an
important element of a functioning democracy. We
are therefore concerned by the recent reports of the
disappearances of political activists and journalists.
Building a security sector that is at the service of the
whole of Iraqi society will also be critical to future
stability. The ongoing security-sector reform work is
encouraging, and we hope that the European Union can
enhance its engagement in support of long-term civilian
stabilization and strengthen its support for the security
sector in Iraq in the near future.

Thirdly, as the Secretary-General has made clear,
gender equality is central to efforts to recover from
conflict. We welcome the establishment ofthe Women's
Empowerment Directorate and urge the Government
to finance and implement the objectives set out in
the national action plan on resolution 1325 (2000).
More must be done by UNAMI to increase women's
participation in reconciliation and governance post-
Da'esh.

Finally, we call upon the Iraqi Parliament to
swiftly adopt electoral laws and hold provincial and
parliamentary elections. In that context, we emphasize
the importance of transparency in the work of the
Independent High Electoral Commission.

In conclusion, the Government and people of Iraq
now stand on the cusp of liberating the last parts of their
country from the tyrants ofDa'esh. After liberation, they
will then need to turn their attention to reconciliation
and to building an Iraqi State that represents all Iraqis.
That will take commitment and determination. It is
important that we in the international community
continue to support them in that endeavour.

