The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Angola, Argentina, Australia,
Austria, Canada, Colombia, Guatemala, Iceland, Israel,
Japan, Liechtenstein, Mexico, Nepal, New Zealand,
Nigeria, Norway, Portugal, Senegal, Switzerland and
Viet Nam, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite
those representatives to participate in the discussion,
without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. John Holmes,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator.

It is so decided.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, and in the absence of
objection, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Angelo
Gnaedinger, Director-General of the International
Committee of the Red Cross.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2007/643, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.

I welcome the participation of the Secretary-
General, His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, at this
meeting and invite him to take the floor.


