Ms. Tshabalala (South Africa): I thank Belgium for facilitating today's discussion on the letter from the Russian Federation dated 13 April 2014 (S/2014/264). We would also like to thank the briefers for their informative briefings. Five years have passed since the signing of the Minsk agreements. While there have recently been some encouraging developments, such as the meetings of the Normandy Four, the full implementation of all the provisions of the agreements has yet to be realized. My delegation commends the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) for its efforts in Ukraine as it diligently executes its mandate in monitoring the implementation of the 2015 Minsk agreements, endorsed by the Security Council in resolution 2202 (2015). The OSCE has also been successful in facilitating dialogue between the parties in seeking a resolution to the situation. In that regard, it is important that the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine be allowed unhindered access to monitor and verify compliance with the Minsk agreements, in line with its mandate. It remains necessary for all parties to fully implement all their respective commitments under the Minsk agreements. We must stress that the Minsk agreements, including the package of measures, provide the most promising road map for peace in the long term. It is clear from the briefings that we heard this afternoon that there remains an urgent need for the immediate cessation of hostilities in eastern Ukraine. The continued violations of the ceasefire and the increased tensions due to the presence of heavy weapons and their use, in violation of the Minsk agreements, are of serious concern. The ongoing tensions and conflict have negatively impacted the humanitarian situation on the ground. We call for the urgent de-escalation of tensions to allow for a situation that is conducive to the alleviation of the humanitarian crisis and the delivery of aid to those most in need. We also encourage the parties to refrain from actions that could be viewed as provocative and aimed at exacerbating tensions. Such actions place obstacles in the path of meaningful dialogue and may further impede a peaceful resolution of the situation in line with the Minsk agreements. Let me conclude by reiterating my country's position on the need for compromise and dialogue. South Africa will continue to encourage the parties to strengthen all diplomatic efforts to produce a sustainable and peaceful solution. In that regard, we wish to re-emphasize the importance and welcome the recent and upcoming meetings of the Normandy Four countries. We encourage all efforts, including the increased role of the Normandy Four, to facilitate ongoing initiatives to build trust in seeking a long- term, peaceful and sustainable solution to the situation in Ukraine.
