Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French):
Let me at the outset thank Mr. Farid Zarif, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his very
exhaustive briefing and welcome him here today. We
also of course welcome Foreign Minister Ivan Mrkie
and Mr. Enver Hoxhaj,.

The positive trend in the relationship between the
Serbian and Kosovo parties over the past few months
has been given significant impetus in the wake of the
signing by the two sides in Brussels on 22 May of a
new agreement for an implementation plan for the first
agreement on principles governing the normalization
of relations of 19 April 2013. That latest agreement,
in particular, lays out concrete steps and timelines for
implementation, including the necessary adjustments
to the existing legal frameworks to accommodate
the establishment of an association or community
of Kosovo Serb municipalities, the integration of the
Serbian police and judicial structures, and preparation
for local elections.

More encouraging still, the parties have maintained
and strengthenedtheir commitments through the holding
of high-level and expert-level meetings to consolidate
and accelerate implementation of the agreements.
In that regard, the parties agreed on 20 June on the
composition of the management team representing
the four northern Kosovo municipalities, which will
draft the statute of the association or community of the
Kosovo Serb municipalities and exercise some of its
powers on an ad interim basis.

All of the those developments would not have been
possible without the firm commitment of both parties
and good offices, specifically those of the European
Union. In that regard, I would like to commend the
commitment of the European Union, specifically that
of the High Representative for Foreign Affairs and
Security Policy, Ms. Catherine Ashton. We commend
her leadership, determination and perseverance to
overcome difficulties and work with the parties
in negotiations aimed at bringing about specific
outcomes. We are optimistic about the positive impacts
of her efforts and commitment to assist the populations
involved with regard to regional stability and the
prospects for integration within the European Union.

Given the dynamism initiated and sustained by
the Kosovo and Serbian parties, one could expect
some resistance to emerge and stand in the way of
the implementation of the 19 April agreement and the
subsequent agreements. In that respect, we praise the
responsible attitude of the Serbian leaders to plead the
case with the leaders in northern Kosovo to implement
the agreements. We are counting on the involvement
of local authorities and the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) to
promote dialogue and restore confidence.

The momentum towards rapprochement and
consolidation gradually taking hold between the
two sides has seen a number of initiatives related to
protecting religious and cultural heritage. The measures
are symbolic but they are fundamental in terms of
promoting and building mutual respect between the
different components of society. We praise those efforts,
particularly those of UNMIK and UNESCO and other
partners. We are pleased to note the completion of
the recruitment of police officers to protect cultural
heritage.

With respect to security issues, the situation
continues to be calm overall. However, there are some
multi-ethnic areas where tensions persist and incidents
affecting minorities have occurred. We call on the
parties to work together to continue to control those
tensions.

We would particularly like to applaud the
cooperation between UNMIK and the international and
regional organizations present on the ground in such
varied areas as the rule of law, human rights, security
and returns. As the Secretary-General says in his report
(S/2013/444), cooperation and coordination among the
various international presences are key in helping the
parties move forward on the implementation of the
19 April agreement.

The historic agreements that the parties were able
to reach are a milestone that we hope is irreversible as
far as the process of normalization of the relationship is
concerned. The European Union, first and foremost, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
NATO and UNMIK are called upon to continue playing
their valuable roles in facilitating the achievement of
the goals of peace, stability and reconciliation in that
important part of the Balkans. But above all, it is up
to the Serbian and Kosovo parties to move forward
with the same momentum, sense of responsibility and
spirit of compromise that they have shown to date
with respect to the full effective implementation of
their commitments and the settling of pending issues
in order to bring about a political, comprehensive and
inclusive solution in accordance with the provisions of
resolution 1244 (1999), adopted by consensus by the
Security Council.

