Judge Pocar: I wish to thank all the members of
the Security Council for the support shown for the
activities of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY). I have taken due note of all
their comments and will take them into account in our
deliberations in The Hague.

Let me reiterate our commitment to concluding
the work of the ICTY as speedily as possible,
respecting, of course, at the same time, the principle of
fair trial and due process, without which international
justice would be meaningless. Council members'
concerns on the completion of the work have been
taken into account and we will be guided by those
concerns in our actions.

I would like, however, to clarify one issue that
has been raised concerning the referral of cases. While
we agree that referring cases is an important tool to
conclude our work, I wish to stress that that is
constantly the object of careful judicial decisions. We
must take into account various factors, including
respect for the principles of due process and fair trial
when the cases are dealt with in the region, and also
the decisions made by the Security Council when
authorizing the referral of cases to the region. The
Tribunal has been authorized to refer to the region only
intermediate and low-rank accused, and we stick to that
decision of our parent body. Now, we have very few
cases that have not started yet, including those of the
fugitives, and it is my understanding that it is the
position of the Security Council that those fugitives
should, when they come, be tried by our Tribunal and
not be referred to domestic jurisdictions.

Referrals are also connected with capacity-
building for national judiciaries, and I appreciate the
positive comments that have been made on our efforts
to establish a strong partnership with domestic
judiciaries in order that the legacy of the Tribunal be
preserved through continued domestic prosecution of
the crimes. We are encouraged by those positive
comments, and we will continue to work in that
direction together with the relevant international
organizations.

Allow me to conclude on a more personal note.
Today may be, most likely, my last appearance before
the Security Council in my capacity as President of the
ICTY. I wish to express my deep gratitude to the
Security Council and its member States for the support
they have always provided to the Tribunal and to me
personally during the term of my presidency, which will
expire before the next meeting of the Council on this
matter. It was indeed an honour and a fascinating
experience for me to participate in the Council's
meetings dealing with its endeavours to establish and
foster international criminal justice. Be assured that I
will keep in mind everything that I learned from my
participation in the activities of this high-level body and
will continue to be guided by its wise comments in my
daily activities in the Tribunal and perhaps elsewhere.

