Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I thank Mr. Fall for
what he has had to say and for his efforts.

We very much welcome the continued support
of the United Nations Regional Office for Central
Africa (UNOCA) to tackle the underlying root causes
of conflict in the region, and we believe that national,
regional and international cooperation remains key to
resolving those challenges. With that in mind, I was
pleased to hear and read about the support that Special
Representative Fall has been giving to the States
members of the Economic Community of Central
African States (ECCAS) and to its secretariat as they
develop their own action plan for reform. I and my
colleagues certainly look forward to being updated on
that as it approaches finalization and implementation
over the rest of the year. I thank Mr. Fall for what he has
done in that regard.

The Political Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in the Central African Republic is an
example of how the United Nations, African Union and
national efforts can deliver progress towards peace.
In that context, the meeting of the Central African
Republic-Cameroon bilateral joint commission in
Bangui on 6 and 7 May was very welcome. We encourage
neighbouring Governments to support implementation
of the agreement.

The United Kingdom is a long-standing friend
and partner of Cameroon. We very much appreciate
Cameroon's generosity towards refugees from the Lake

Chad Basin and the Central African Republic. We work
with Cameroon on tackling the threat from Boko Haram
and the Islamic State in West Africa. Nevertheless,
we very much share the concerns expressed by the
Secretary-General in his report (S/2019/430) and we all
discussed those concerns at our Arria Formula meeting
on 13 May, when we heard testimony from those on the
ground, the humanitarian agencies and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs on the worsening
humanitarian situation in Cameroon, which is rapidly
reaching a crisis point. I recall that the Anglophone crisis
has driven more than 560,000 Cameroonians from their
homes, including 32,000 refugees into Nigeria. Some
4.3 million people, including some 2.3 million children,
are in need of humanitarian assistance. It is the trend
that is particularly concerning. As we learned from our
humanitarian briefers on 13 May, there has been a huge
increase in those numbers over the past year. We are
dealing with a situation that is deteriorating rapidly.

There are also reports of human rights violations
and abuses by both the security forces of Cameroon
and armed separatists and the denial of humanitarian
access, which are cause for real concern. We are deeply
troubled by reports of the targeting of health facilities
and health-care workers, which must stop. We remind all
parties that any deliberate targeting of health facilities
or health-care workers is a violation of international
humanitarian law. We very much welcome the visit
by Michele Bachelet, High Commissioner for Human
Rights. It is now important that access be achieved for
her human rights officials to the affected regions.

There is a real risk of a long-term, intractable
conflict in Cameroon, which could have a negative
impact on fragile regional stability, with implications
for wider international peace and security. We
underline the importance of Cameroon's unity and
territorial integrity and we believe that our African
partners have an important role to play in supporting
a sustainable solution to the crisis, including through
ECCAS and African Union leadership. We continue
to urge the Government of Cameroon to establish a
credible, inclusive and purposeful political dialogue.
There has been a number of welcome announcements
by the Government of Cameroon, but we have to see
those turn into reality on the ground. The Peacebuilding
Fund provides a real opportunity for the Government
of Cameroon to get expert support for its proposals
and initiatives.

As the Secretary-General's report makes clear,
the shrinking space for political opposition, civil
society and free and independent media is a concern
with respect not only to Cameroon but also to Chad,
the Central African Republic and the Republic of the
Congo. We urge the Governments of those countries to
take constructive steps to ensure the protection of civil
space and civil and political rights, given that they are
the fundamental building blocks of long-term stability.

The United Kingdom also remains deeply concerned
about the humanitarian and security situation in the
wider Lake Chad basin, caused by the conflict with and
actions of Boko Haram and the Islamic State in West
Africa. We utterly condemn the violence wreaked by
those groups on civilian populations and recognize the
sacrifices made by the armed forces of the countries of
the Lake Chad basin in the fight against terrorism. The
United Kingdom remains committed to its support for
efforts to tackle that crisis. It is right that a coordinated,
coherent response should be led first and foremost by
the Governments of the affected countries themselves,
but with support from regional partners, the United
Nations and the international community, including, of
course, the United Kingdom.

I very much welcome the joint visits that Special
Representative Fall has been undertaking with the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for West Africa and the Sahel, Mr. Chambas, to the
countries of the region. I very much look forward to the
Council receiving theirjoint report once they have been
to all those countries. I think that that would be a good
opportunity for us then to come back to the issue and
discuss it among ourselves.

Finally, let me say that we remain very concerned
about the current Ebola outbreak in north-eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. It is crucial that
the international community provide the necessary
technical and financial support to the response led by
the Congolese Government and the United Nations.
We very much welcome the recent appointment of a
senior United Nations Emergency Ebola Response
Coordinator, based in Butembo.

