Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I
thank President Michel Kafando, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Burundi, for his briefing. I thank
him especially for his work on this important dossier
while the situation remains volatile in a country that
has been deeply and negatively affected by the electoral
tensions of 2015, which created an environment of
distrust among political actors that unfortunately
continues to this day.

The persistent political stalemate and the human
rights situation in Burundi remain a source of deep
concern for France. Faced with the lack of real,
inclusive dialogue and the closing of political space,
the most radical opposition factions are tempted
by armed struggle. The heavy presence and role of
members of the Imbonerakure militia in carrying out
measures of intimidation and suppressing opposing
views are increasing. As Ambassador Delattre
underscored in May (see S/PV.8268), the risk of the
situation deteriorating cannot be ruled out, as was
shown by the killing of three soldiers - victims of an
ambush - near Bujumbura this past weekend. As we
know, the status quo is unsustainable. The situation is
a source of instability for the entire region. Reports of
clashes on Congolese territory fuelled by Burundian
armed groups are illustrative of the latter.

On behalf of France, I would like to take advantage
of the presence of the Permanent Representative of
Burundi today to appeal to the Burundian authorities
in the same spirit as President Kafando just now. It is
essential to complete the pacification of the country
and ensure the security of all against every form
Violence, regardless of its source. It is urgent to combat
impunity, including within the ranks of the security
forces. It is necessary to engage unconditionally in an
inclusive dialogue with all sectors of Burundian society,
especially with those who do not share the same political
convictions. Lastly, it is crucial, in the national interest,
to restore respect for fundamental freedoms, including
freedom of opinion and ofthe media. The Arusha Peace
and Reconciliation Agreement for Burundi, which is
the cornerstone of peace, as Mr. Kafando just pointed
out, provides the appropriate framework for that
reconciliation. It must be preserved at all costs.

President Nkurunziza's announcement that he will
not run in the 2020 elections is a positive development
that France welcomes. We hope that it will facilitate
the search for a lasting political solution to the crisis
experienced by Burundi. In that context, I hope that an
inclusive inter-Burundian dialogue can be undertaken,
in the spirit of unification and peaceful coexistence
established by the Arusha Agreement, with the support
of the mediation of the countries of the East African
Community so as to create the conditions necessary for
free, fair and transparent elections in 2020. In order to

succeed, such dialogue will require the efforts of all
parties and their unflagging determination to close
the gap separating divergent views. The facilitator,
Mr. Mkapa, is working courageously to that end with
France's full support. Through dialogue, all Burundians
will be able to unite and forge their common future in
full independence and respect for human rights and the
dignity of all.

I should like to tell the Permanent Representative
of Burundi that France, the European Union, his
country's other partners and neighbours in East Africa,
and the entire international community stand together
with him and his country to help them. France calls on
the Burundian authorities to grasp this extended hand
and renew peaceful relations with their international
partners, as the Council has encouraged them to do in
its most recent presidential statement (S/PRST/2018/7)
on the subject.

The signing of the headquarters agreement with
the Office of the Special Envoy and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR) would send a strong message, as would the
resumption of collaboration with the OHCHR team
of experts, pursuant to the Human Rights Council
resolution of which Burundi itself voted in favour.

