Ms. Colakovic' (Bosnia and Herzegovina): Let
me first thank the Secretary-General for his detailed
report on the latest developments in Afghanistan and
the United Nations activities in the country
(S/2010/318). I would like to welcome Special
Representative Mr. Staffan de Mistura and to express
our gratitude for his comprehensive briefing.
Furthermore, we would like to express our appreciation
to Mr. De Mistura and his team for having organized a
very successful visit of the Security Council's members
to Afghanistan.

Our thanks also go to Ambassador Apakan and
the Turkish Mission for their leadership during our
visit. Our gratitude also goes to the Afghan
Government and Ambassador Tanin personally. I would
like to take this opportunity, if I may, to thank the
Secretariat and its team, which was of great help
during our trip.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is fully aware that the
forthcoming September parliamentary elections led by
the Government of Afghanistan are of crucial
importance to the future political and security
development of the country. In that context, we
commend the leading and efficient role of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
in providing the coordination of international technical
and logistical support to the electoral process. We are
particularly encouraged by the successful work of the
Independent Electoral Commission in candidate
registration for the election and by the valuable
contribution of the Electoral Complaints Commission
to those efforts. These achievements give us hope that
Afghanistan will succeed in building up the necessary
State infrastructure to guarantee the development of a
democratic society based on the rule of law and human
rights, in particular women's and children's rights.

We commend the realization of the advanced
draft of the peace and reintegration programme and the
successful organization of the Consultative Peace Jirga
hosted by the Afghan Government. We also take
positive note of the preparations for the 20 July Kabul
Conference and we look forward to seeing concrete
outcomes, in particular the Afghan-led plan for
improving development, governance and security. We
believe that these steps can facilitate efforts towards
the adoption of the framework for an intra-Afghan
dialogue and give confidence in further discussions on
how to reach a sustainable peace process.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is deeply concerned by
the security situation in the country. During the
reporting period, the number of victims considerably
increased, particularly among civilians and children.
The sad number of 332 children killed or maimed
during the past three months is terrifying testimony to
the reality in which Afghan children live. We therefore
call upon all sides to the armed conflict in Afghanistan
to take all possible measures to preserve the lives of
children and civilians.

We recognize the important work of UNAMA in
providing advice on the drafting of the national threat
assessment, as well as its assistance in the development
of the Ministry of Interior's National Police Strategy
and the National Police Plan.

We also want to emphasize the importance of the
existing good cooperation between the International
Security Assistance Force, NATO and UNAMA. We
hope that practice will be continued in the future.

Bosnia and Herzegovina believes that regional
cooperation is indeed of critical importance to
achieving a climate of security in the country.
Therefore, we highly commend the efforts of the
Special Representative and the Afghan Government
aimed at promoting and developing relations between
Afghanistan and neighbouring countries, in particular
Pakistan and Iran. In addition, we believe that
Afghan-led reconciliation and reintegration processes
are also crucial for sustainable peace and stability in
the country. For that reason, we welcome UNAMA's
contribution in that area, in particular its technical
support to the preparations of the Consultative Peace
Jirga, as well as in providing advice on the design of
the Afghan Government's programme for peace and
reintegration.

In the area of governance and justice, we take
positive note of UNAMA's continuing work with
justice institutions and the donor community on reform
in the context of the National Justice Sector Strategy.
An efficient justice system is one of the preconditions
for lasting peace and security.

Afghanistan still has enormous humanitarian
needs. The remarkable efforts made by UNAMA to
respond to the difficult humanitarian situation of
thousands of displaced persons and families in
Helmand province deserve great commendation. More
generally, in our opinion, UNAMA's role in overall aid
coherence is also an important contribution to the long-
term development strategy for Afghanistan.

Assisting the Afghan Government in identifying
priorities and indicating to donors where gaps and aid
duplication exist are among the most essential elements
for the better effectiveness of the entire international
effort to provide aid support. In that context, we
welcome in particular the Afghan Government's
progress in establishing four development clusters
intended to support economic growth and job creation.

Bosnia and Herzegovina supports all efforts
aimed at the return of refugees. We are especially
encouraged by the return of 48,000 Afghan refugees
from Pakistan through the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees programme. We sincerely
hope that this trend will continue when it comes to the
2.7 million registered Afghans in Pakistan and Iran.
The international community should take the leading
role in creating conditions for their sustainable return.
In that regard, Bosnia and Herzegovina believes that
UNAMA can also contribute to that goal, in concert
with the Afghan Government.

Finally, Bosnia and Herzegovina is particularly
sensitive to the issue of mines in Afghanistan. As many
observers in the field have reported, children, and
especially young boys, are the most frequent victims of
mines in Afghanistan. Mine clearance is a long-term
process. Providing mine-risk education to the
population, with particular focus on children, is
essential to the prevention of mine incidents. We
therefore commend the United Nations support for the
Mine Action Coordination Centre of Afghanistan and
its activities in the field.

In conclusion, Bosnia and Herzegovina would
like to express its full support for UNAMA and its
entire staff for their efforts. We would also like to
express our support for their request for further
arrangements to enable UNAMA to address the
recruitment of badly needed staff to fulfil the Mission's
mandate.

I would also like to extend our condolences to the
family of the victim of yesterday's attack and to
UNAMA staff.
