Mr. Suescum (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): First,
I wish to congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the
presidency. Of course you can count on our support
throughout the month. We would also like to thank
Ambassador Kafando and all the delegation of Burkina
Faso for all their work last month during their
presidency. Above all, we would like to thank
Mr. Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, and Ambassador Viotti, Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission's country-specific
configuration for Guinea-Bissau, for their briefings.
We want to welcome the Permanent
Representative of Guinea-Bissau, Ambassador Cabral.
I should confess that my delegation feels somewhat
uncomfortable at having to thank Ambassador Cabral
for his statement before having heard it. We would
have preferred to react to his statement, on an equal
footing with the statements from the Under-Secretary-
General and the Chair of the country-specific
configuration for Guinea-Bissau.

My delegation agrees with the briefers and with
members who have already spoken about the need to
ensure that the 16 November legislative elections are
transparent, fair and peaceful. That will be possible only
with the consent of all sectors and interested parties in
Guinea-Bissau, and the elections will be an important
step - with many more to follow, of course - in
showing their commitment to institutionalizing a
democratic State where the rule of law prevails.

We have heard many positive statements today
with regard to the work of various people in Guinea-
Bissau, whom we sincerely congratulate and thank.
Nevertheless, there are many factors that if allowed to
continue to deteriorate could directly affect those
achievements. For example, we have evidence that
Guinea-Bissau has gone from being a hub of drug
trafficking to being also a major marketplace for drugs,
with an accompanying increase in organized crime.

Just as the problems of drug trafficking,
smuggling and organized crime have regional
components, an unstable Guinea-Bissau would also
have consequences for the region. While the nature of
many of those issues at first sight is one of policing,
their extent and specifics present security challenges at
the transnational level as well. More than ever, they
require unified, multidimensional and coordinated
responses. These will need to include attention to all
aspects of institution-building, the building of
democracy, social and development issues and issues
related to the security and protection of the population.
To begin with, we hope that concrete initiatives will be
undertaken at the regional meeting to be held in Cape
Verde and that careful consideration will be given to
the Secretary-General's recommendation to establish a
group of experts.

For all those reasons, it is clear that the Security
Council still has a role and an important responsibility
to fulfil in Guinea-Bissau and must continue actively to
concern itself with these issues. The Council, the
United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in
Guinea-Bissau, the United Nations Office for West
Africa and the Government of Guinea-Bissau must
continue also to cooperate closely with the
Peacebuilding Commission and other actors in the
region to ensure that Guinea-Bissau will become an
exporter of stability.

